THE BRAHMĀ’S NET SUTRA

dBET PDF Version
© 2017
All Rights Reserved

BDK English Tripiṭaka Series

THE BRAHMĀ’S
NET SUTRA

(Taishō Volume 24, Number 1484)

Translated by
A. Charles Muller
and

Kenneth K. Tanaka

BDK America, Inc.
2017

Copyright © 2017 by Bukkyo Dendo Kyokai and
BDK America, Inc.

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored
in a retrieval system, or transcribed in any form or by any means
—electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise—
without the prior written permission of the publisher.
First Printing, 2017
ISBN: 978-1-886439-65-8
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 2017949840
Published by
BDK America, Inc.
1675 School Street
Moraga, California 94556

Printed in the United States of America

A Message on the Publication of the
English Tripiṭaka
The Buddhist canon is said to contain eighty-four thousand different teachings.
I believe that this is because the Buddha’s basic approach was to prescribe a
different treatment for every spiritual ailment, much as a doctor prescribes a
different medicine for every medical ailment. Thus his teachings were always
appropriate for the particular suffering individual and for the time at which the
teaching was given, and over the ages not one of his prescriptions has failed to
relieve the suffering to which it was addressed.
Ever since the Buddha’s Great Demise over twenty-ﬁve hundred years ago,
his message of wisdom and compassion has spread throughout the world. Yet
no one has ever attempted to translate the entire Buddhist canon into English
throughout the history of Japan. It is my greatest wish to see this done and to
make the translations available to the many English-speaking people who have
never had the opportunity to learn about the Buddha’s teachings.
Of course, it would be impossible to translate all of the Buddha’s eighty-four
thousand teachings in a few years. I have, therefore, had one hundred thirty-nine
of the scriptural texts in the prodigious Taishō edition of the Chinese Buddhist
canon selected for inclusion in the First Series of this translation project.
It is in the nature of this undertaking that the results are bound to be criticized.
Nonetheless, I am convinced that unless someone takes it upon himself or herself
to initiate this project, it will never be done. At the same time, I hope that an
improved, revised edition will appear in the future.
It is most gratifying that, thanks to the efforts of more than a hundred Buddhist
scholars from the East and the West, this monumental project has ﬁnally gotten
off the ground. May the rays of the Wisdom of the Compassionate One reach
each and every person in the world.
NUMATA Yehan
Founder of the English
Tripiṭaka Project

August 7, 1991
v

Editorial Foreword
In the long history of Buddhist transmission throughout East Asia, translations
of Buddhist texts were often carried out as national projects supported and
funded by emperors and political leaders. The BDK English Tripiṭaka project,
on the other hand, began as a result of the dream and commitment of one man.
In January 1982 Dr. NUMATA Yehan, founder of Bukkyō Dendō Kyōkai (Society
for the Promotion of Buddhism), initiated the monumental task of translating
the complete Taishō shinshū daizōkyō edition of the Chinese Tripiṭaka (Buddhist
canon) into the English language. Under his leadership, a special preparatory
committee was organized in April 1982. By July of the same year the Translation
Committee of the English Tripiṭaka was officially convened.
The initial Committee included the following members: (late) HANAYAMA
Shōyū (Chairperson), (late) BANDŌ Shōjun, ISHIGAMI Zennō, (late) KAMATA
Shigeo, (late) KANAOKA Shūyū, MAYEDA Sengaku, NARA Yasuaki, (late)
SAYEKI Shinkō, (late) SHIOIRI Ryōtatsu, TAMARU Noriyoshi, (late) TAMURA
Kwansei, (late) URYŪZU Ryūshin, and YUYAMA Akira. Assistant members of
the Committee were as follows: KANAZAWA Atsushi, WATANABE Shōgo, Rolf
Giebel of New Zealand, and Rudy Smet of Belgium.
After holding planning meetings on a monthly basis, the Committee selected
one hundred and thirty-nine texts for the First Series of the project, estimated
to be one hundred printed volumes in all. The texts selected were not limited to
those originally written in India but also included works composed in China
and Japan. While the publication of the First Series proceeds, the texts for the
Second Series will be selected from among the remaining works; this process
will continue until all the texts, in Japanese as well as in Chinese, have been
published. Given the huge scope of this project, accomplishing the English translations of all the Chinese and Japanese texts in the Taishō canon may take as
long as one hundred years or more. Nevertheless, as Dr. NUMATA wished, it is
the sincere hope of the Committee that this project will continue until completion,
even after all the present members have passed away.

vii

Editorial Foreword

Dr. NUMATA passed away on May 5, 1994, at the age of ninety-seven. He
entrusted his son, Mr. NUMATA Toshihide with the continuation and completion
of the English Tripiṭaka project. Mr. Numata served for twenty-three years, leading
the project forward with enormous progress before his sudden passing on February
16, 2017, at the age of eighty-four. The Committee previously lost its able and
devoted first Chairperson, Professor HANAYAMA Shōyū, on June 16, 1995, at
the age of sixty-three. In October 1995 the Committee elected Professor MAYEDA
Sengaku (then Vice President of Musashino Women’s College) as Chairperson,
and upon the retirement of Professor Mayeda in July 2016, the torch was passed
to me to serve as the third Chairperson. Despite these losses and changes we, the
Editorial Committee members, have renewed our determination to carry out the
noble ideals set by Dr. NUMATA. Present members of the Committee are Kenneth
K. Tanaka (Chairperson), MAYEDA Sengaku, ICHISHIMA Shōshin, ISHIGAMI
Zennō, KATSURA Shōryū, NARA Yasuaki, SAITŌ Akira, SHIMODA Masahiro,
WATANABE Shōgo, and YONEZAWA Yoshiyasu.
The Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research was established
in November 1984, in Berkeley, California, U.S.A., to assist in the publication
of the translated texts. The Publication Committee was organized at the Numata
Center in December 1991. In 2010, the Numata Center’s operations were merged
with Bukkyō Dendō Kyōkai America, Inc. (BDK America), and BDK America
continues to oversee the publication side of the English Tripiṭaka project in close
cooperation with the Editorial Committee in Tokyo.
At the time of this writing, in February 2017, the project has completed about
sixty percent of the seven thousand one hundred and eighty-five Taishō pages
of texts selected for the First Series. Much work still lies ahead of us but we are
committed to the completion of the remaining texts in order to realize the grand
vision of Dr. Numata, shared by Mr. Numata and Professor Hanayama, to make
the Buddhist canon more readily accessible to the English-speaking world.
Kenneth K.Tanaka

Chairperson
Editorial Committee of
the BDK English Tripiṭaka

viii

Publisher’s Foreword
On behalf of the members of the Publication Committee, I am happy to present
this volume as the latest contribution to the BDK English Tripiṭaka Series. The
Publication Committee members have worked to ensure that this volume, as all
other volumes in the series, has gone through a rigorous process of editorial efforts.
The initial translation and editing of the Buddhist scriptures found in this
and other BDK English Tripiṭaka volumes are performed under the direction of
the Editorial Committee in Tokyo, Japan. Both the Editorial Committee in Tokyo
and the Publication Committee, headquartered in Moraga, California, are dedicated to the production of accurate and readable English translations of the
Buddhist canon. In doing so, the members of both committees and associated
staff work to honor the deep faith, spirit, and concern of the late Reverend Dr.
Yehan Numata, who founded the BDK English Tripiṭaka Series in order to disseminate the Buddhist teachings throughout the world.
The long-term goal of our project is the translation and publication of the
texts in the one hundred-volume Taishō edition of the Chinese Buddhist canon,
along with a number of influential extracanonical Japanese Buddhist texts. The
list of texts selected for the First Series of this translation project may be found
at the end of each volume in the series.
As Chair of the Publication Committee, I am deeply honored to serve as the
fifth person in a post previously held by leading figures in the field of Buddhist
studies, most recently by my predecessor, John R. McRae.
In conclusion, I wish to thank the members of the Publication Committee for
their dedicated and expert work undertaken in the course of preparing this volume
for publication: Managing Editor Marianne Dresser, Dr. Hudaya Kandahjaya, Dr.
Carl Bielefeldt, Dr. Robert Sharf, and Rev. Brian Kensho Nagata, Director of the
BDK English Tripiṭaka Project.
A. Charles Muller

Chairperson
Publication Committee

ix

Contents
A Message on the Publication of the English Tripiṭaka
NUMATA Yehan

Editorial Foreword

Kenneth K. Tanaka

Translators’ Introduction

A. Charles Muller and
Kenneth K. Tanaka

A. Charles Muller

Publisher’s Foreword

The Brahmā’s Net Sutra
Fascicle 1. Exposition of the Brahmā’s Net Sutra
[Preface]
Preface to the Brahmā’s Net Sutra by Śramaṇa Sengzhao
The Forty Stages
[Convocation]
Ten Departures for the Destination
Ten Nourishing Mental States
Ten Adamantine Mental States
Ten Grounds
The Ten Departures toward the Destination
1. The Mental State of Detachment
2. The Mental State of Morality
3. The Mental State of Patience
4. The Mental State of Zeal
5. The Mental State of Concentration
6. The Mental State of Insight
7. The Mental State of Making Vows
8. The Mental State of Guarding
9. The Mental State of Joy
10. The Summit Mental State

xi

v

vii
ix

xvii
3
3
4
4
6
6
6
7
8
8
8
9
9
10
10
11
11
12
12

Contents

The Ten Nourishing Mental States
1. The Mental State of Kindness
2. The Mental State of Pity
3. The Mental State of Joy
4. The Mental State of Nonattachment
5. The Mental State of Giving
6. The Mental State of Caring Speech
7. The Mental State of Beneﬁcence
8. The Mental State of Sameness
9. The Mental State of Concentration
10. The Mental State of Insight
The Ten Adamantine Mental States
1. The Mental State of Faith
2. The Mental State of Mindfulness
3. The Profound Mental State
4. The Mental State of Penetrating Illumination
5. The Direct Mental State
6. The Mental State of Nonretrogression
7. The Mental State of the Great Vehicle
8. The Markless Mental State
9. The Mental State of Wisdom
10. The Indestructible Mental State
The Ten Grounds
1. The Ground of the Equality of the Essence
2. The Ground of the Skillful Wisdom of the Essence
3. The Ground of the Luminosity of the Essence
4. The Ground of the Knowability of the Essence
5. The Ground of the Wisdom-illumination of the Essence
6. The Ground of the Floral Radiance of the Essence
7. The Ground of the Completion of the Essential Nature
8. The Ground of the Buddha’s Roar of the Essential Nature
9. The Ground of the Flower Ornamentation of the Essence
10. The Ground of Entry into the Buddha Realm
of the Essential Nature

xii

13
13
13
14
14
15
15
15
16
16
16
17
17
18
18
18
19
19
19
20
20
21
21
21
23
25
26
28
29
31
32
34
35

Contents

Fascicle 2. The Precepts
Preface to the Bodhisattva Precepts of the Brahmā’s Net Sutra
Invocation

The Teaching Transmitted to the Transformation-body Buddhas
Repayment of Kindness and a Separate Iteration of the Teaching
The Exhortation
The Bodhisattva Precepts
The Transmission and Remembrance of the Founding Teacher
Preface to the Formation of the Precepts
Interlocutor’s Preface
The Preface of the World-honored One
The Preface of the Preceptor
The Dharma Preface
The Preface for the Disciples
The Main Sermon
Introduction of the Exhortation to Uphold
The Ten Grave Precepts
1. Prohibition of Killing for Pleasure
2. Prohibition of Stealing Others’ Property
3. Prohibition of the Heartless Pursuit of Lust
4. Prohibition of Intentional Lying
5. Prohibition of the Sale of Alcohol
6. Prohibition of Speaking of the Faults of Others
7. Prohibition of Praising Oneself and Disparaging Others
8. Prohibition of Parsimony and Abuse of Others
9. Prohibition of Holding Resentments and Not Accepting Apologies
10. Prohibition of Denigration of the Three Treasures
Conclusion
The Minor Precepts
Division of Ten Precepts
Precepts Concerning the Guarding of One’s Own Thoughts
1. Do Not Show Disrespect to Senior Teachers
2. Do Not Drink Alcohol

37
38

38
39
40
41
41
42
42
42
42
43
43
43
43
44
44
44
44
45
45
45
46
46
46
47
47
48
48
48
48

xiii

Contents

Protecting Other’s Mental Functions
3. Do Not Eat Meat
4. Do Not Eat the Five Pungent Roots
5. Do Not Fail to Encourage Others to Repent
Reversing and Cultivating the Buddha-dharma
6. Do Not Fail to Request Instruction in the Dharma
from Visiting Teachers
7. Do Not Miss a Chance to Attend Dharma Lectures
8. Do Not Abandon the Great Vehicle and Regress to the
Lesser Vehicle
Saving and Protecting Sentient Beings
9. Do Not Fail to Care for the Ill
10. Do Not Amass Weapons
Division of Ten Precepts
Guarding One’s Own Virtue
11. Do Not Serve as a Negotiator for the Military
12. Do Not Get Involved in Trade and Business that
Causes Trouble for Others
13. Do Not Make Groundless Accusations
14. Do Not Harm Living Beings by Setting Fires
Bringing Others into the Fold and Protecting Them
15. Do Not Teach Non-Buddhist Doctrines
16. Do Not be Parsimonious with Offering Material
Wealth or the Dharma
17. Do Not Seek to Gain Political Inﬂuence
18. Do Not Pretend to Be An Accomplished Teacher
19. Do Not Get Involved in Treachery
20. Do Not Fail to Help Both the Living and the Deceased
Division of Ten Precepts
The Shared Cultivation of the Three Karmic Activities
21. Do Not Be Intolerant of Wrongs Done by Others
22. Do Not Arrogantly Despise Your Dharma Teacher
23. Do Not Despise Beginning Practitioners
Practicing with Those Who Hold the Same Vows
24. Do Not Fear the Superior and Follow the Inferior

xiv

49
49
49
50
50
50
51
51
51
52
52
52
52
53
53
54
54
54
55
55
56
56
57
58

Contents

Properly Maintaining the Sangha
25. Do Not Fail to Properly Fulﬁll Administrative Duties
26. Do Not Receive Guests Improperly
27. Do Not Accept Personal Invitations
28. Do Not Extend Personal Invitations to Monks
Harmonizing and Polishing the Precepts
29. Do Not Engage in Improper Livelihood
30. Do Not Hurt People While Feigning Intimacy with Them
Division of Nine Precepts
Making Proper Donations
31. Do Not Be Lax in Rescuing Vulnerable Articles and
People from Harm
Not Doing As One Pleases
32. Do Not Deviously Conﬁscate Others’ Property
Avoiding Harmful Inﬂuences
33. Do Not Pass Your Time in Idleness
Advancing in the True Vehicle
34. Do Not Abandon the Aspiration for Enlightenment
Not Avoiding Making Vows
35. Do Not Fail to Make Vows
Making Vows
36. Do Not Fail to Initiate Vows on Your Own
Avoiding Danger
37. Do Not Intentionally Go to Dangerous Places
Not Creating Confusion
38. Do Not Take Your Place Out of Order
Proﬁt and Happiness
39. Do Not Pursue Personal Gain
Division of Nine Precepts
Using Moral Discipline to Gather [Believers]
Gathering in People of Various Capacities
40. Do Not Err in Terms of Who Can Be Taught
Separating Out Wrong Situations
41. Do Not Seek Disciples for the Wrong Reasons

58
58
59
59
60
60
60
61
61
62
62
63
63
65
66
66
67
67
67
68

xv

Contents

Guarding the External
42. Do Not Give the Precepts to Unsuitable People
Guarding the Internal
43. Do Not Intenionally Break the Holy Precepts
Showing Respect
44. Do Not Fail to Revere the Sutras and Vinayas
Teaching By Means of Compassion
Being Proactive
45. Do Not Fail to Teach Sentient Beings
Teaching Others
46. Do Not Preach the Dharma Using Improper Protocol
Warding Off Evil
47. Do Not Establish Systems that Undermine the Dharma
Maintaining Orthodoxy
48. Do Not Undermine the Dharma from Within
General Conclusion
Dissemination Section
Concluding Exhortation for Faithful Practice

Notes

Glossary

Bibliography
Index

A List of the Volumes of the BDK English Tripiṭaka (First Series)

xvi

70
70
71
71
71
71
72
73
73
74
74
77
81
87
89

101

Translators’ Introduction
Origins of the Sutra: Its Structure
and Content

The Brahmā’s Net Sutra (Ch. Fanwang jing, Taishō 1484), a relatively short
work of only two fascicles, plays an important niche role in the development
of East Asian Mahayana Buddhism: it is the primary extant vinaya text that
articulates a set of precepts from a Mahayana perspective, which takes its main
audience to be “bodhisattva practitioners,” mainly householders who remain
engaged with society rather than becoming renunciant monks or nuns. Before
the appearance of this text the monastic rules and regulations in East Asian
Buddhism were deﬁned fully by the “Hinayana” vinaya, most importantly the
Four-part Vinaya (Sifen lü, Taishō 1428) associated with the Dharmaguptaka
school in India. Once the Brahmā’s Net Sutra made its appearance, the practices
of the precepts in many East Asian schools diversiﬁed and certain groups of
practitioners took up one or the other set of precepts, often utilizing both.
The study of vinaya materials is of great importance in Buddhist studies, and
not simply because these works deﬁne the code of behavior for monks, nuns,
and laypeople. They also provide, in a way seen in almost no other genre in the
Buddhist canon, a snapshot of the historical realities of society in given periods
of Buddhist history, especially revealing how Buddhist practitioners, both lay
and monastic, interacted with their societies. The vinayas, and especially the
discourse seen in this sutra, show monastic and lay Buddhist practitioners
engaged at every level of society, from top to bottom. Buddhist practitioners
were involved in military affairs, political intrigues, matchmaking, and every
other sort of “mundane” social activity. The vinaya texts reveal how the Buddhist
community in a certain age judged and dealt with such matters.
Presenting the Brahmā’s Net Sutra solely as a vinaya work, however, continues
an imbalanced view of the sutra that has been repeated since at least the Sui
dynasty (581–618 C.E.). In fact only the second half of the sutra is a vinaya text.

xvii

Translator’s Introduction

The Brahmā’s Net Sutra was written in two fascicles, each radically different in
structure, content, theme, grammar, etc., from the other. Because of the extent of
these differences many modern scholars consider that the two fascicles were originally two separate works.1 The ﬁrst fascicle discusses the forty Mahayana stages:
the ten departures toward the destination, the ten nourishing mental states, the ten
adamantine mental states, and the ten bodhisattva grounds. This fascicle is written
in a markedly rough, largely ungrammatical quality of classical Chinese prose
that is almost impenetrable in certain places. In fact, if not for the commentary
by Daehyeon, on which we relied extensively in the process of preparing this
translation, many sections may have been adjudged as being wholly unintelligible.
Regarding the signiﬁcance of the Brahmā’s Net Sutra among the apocryphal
texts that deal with the forty stages, other texts compiled during roughly the same
era, such as the Pusa yingluo benye jing (Taishō 1485), included better-organized
and more comprehensive discussions of these stages. We can assume that the
combination of the difﬁculty of the ﬁrst fascicle and the availability of better
articulations of the forty stages elsewhere, along with the fact that the Buddhist
sangha was mostly far more interested in the precepts section, led to the ﬁrst fascicle of the Brahmā’s Net Sutra being largely ignored by both classical commentators and modern scholars. The most important East Asian classical commentators,
including such major scholiasts as Zhiyi (538–597), in the Tiantai pusajie shu
(Taishō 1812) and the Pusajie yishu (Taishō 1811) coauthored with Zhanding;
Wonhyo (617–686), in the Beommanggyeong bosal gyebon sagi (Hanguk bulgyo
jeonseo [Collected Works of Korean Buddhism] 1.586–604); and Fazang (643–
712), in the Fanwangjing pusa jieben shu (Taishō 1813), ignored the ﬁrst fascicle
and commented only on the second. Modern translations and studies of the sutra
also invariably leave out the ﬁrst fascicle, usually not even mentioning its existence.
The lone notable exception is the full commentary on the text by the Silla scholiast
Daehyeon mentioned above, the Beommanggyeong gojeokgi (Taishō 1815).2
The second fascicle of the Brahmā’s Net Sutra explains the ten grave precepts
and the forty-eight minor precepts. These came to be referred to as the “bodhisattva precepts,” the “great Brahmā’s Net precepts,” the “buddha precepts,” and
so forth. The second fascicle has been especially esteemed, studied, and circulated
separately for more than a millennium as the scriptural authority for the Mahayana
bodhisattva precepts, under such titles as the Bodhisattva Vinaya Sutra, the
Bodhisattva Prātimokṣa, the Brahmā’s Net Prātimokṣa, and so forth. Circulated

xviii

Translator’s Introduction

as a separate text with these titles and commented on hundreds of times, it
became the major textual source for the Mahayana vinaya and was very popular
and inﬂuential in East Asia.
While the Brahmā’s Net Sutra is known by various titles, the one given in
the Taishō Shinshū Daizōkyō (derived from the title in the Goryeo Tripiṭaka) is
Brahmā’s Net Sutra: The Mind-ground Dharma Gate Taught by Vairocana
Buddha, Chapter Ten, in Two Fascicles. The canonical story behind this sutra
is that it was originally a massive work of one hundred and twenty fascicles, of
which the Trepiṭaka Kumārajīva at the very end separately translated only the
tenth chapter, the “Chapter on the Dharma Gate of the Bodhisattva’s Stages of
Practice.” According to modern research, however, this text is not considered
to be a translation by Kumārajīva of a chapter from a larger text but instead a
work composed in China around 420, based on various Mahayana and Hinayana
vinaya writings available at that time and including extensive discussion of
indigenous Chinese moral concepts such as ﬁlial piety, etc. Some scholars believe
that while traditional Chinese moral thought can be seen in the text, it is nonetheless originally an Indian text that was transmitted to China and further emended
there. Whatever positions one might hold in this debate, there is no doubt that
the text is based in the same matrix as the mainstream Mahayana thought of the
Flower Ornament Sutra (Huayan jing, Taishō 278), the Nirvana Sutra (Niepan
jing, Taishō 374), and the Sutra for Humane Kings (Renwang jing, Taishō 245).
In fact, the extent to which the Brahmā’s Net Sutra is in agreement with the
Huayan jing is so pronounced that it is even regarded as the “concluding sutra”
of the Flower Ornament Sutra.
The authority of the Mahayana precepts came to be widely accepted in China,
Korea, and Japan. Especially in Japan, Saichō (767–822) used the Brahmā’s
Net precepts to integrate the vinaya trends at the time when Mahayana and
Hinayana precepts were being used concurrently, and took these as the scriptural
basis for the notion of a person who would practice the perfect and sudden precepts as a way of becoming a “Mahayana bhikṣu.”
In China, de facto Tiantai founder Zhiyi wrote the two-fascicle Pusajie yishu
as a commentary on the Brahmā’s Net precepts, drawing much attention to the
text. Later Fazang, in composing his six-fascicle Fanwangjing pusa jieben shu,
led the way for a proliferation of commentaries on the text. From these kinds
of initial studies, this text did not merely eclipse the canonical vinayas that had

xix

Translator’s Introduction

preceded it but broadly embraced and reﬂected the conditions and demands of
the society and sangha of the age. The Brahmā’s Net Sutra thus became a ﬁnely
tuned canonical resource and the primary authority for the Mahayana moral code.
Based on this text’s far-reaching inﬂuence, research on the Hinayana canon
began to decline in importance from the time of the Tang dynasty (618–907) in
China; in Silla, from the time of uniﬁcation (668), interest in Hinayana texts
also began to fade. On the other hand, with the Brahmā’s Net precepts as a basis,
the Mahayana bodhisattva precepts took center stage as a subject of research
and foundation for practice. In addition, the Brahmā’s Net Sutra attracted considerable attention from scholars in Silla from schools other than the Vinaya
tradition, who conducted their own extensive studies and published various
commentaries, tables, indices, and extracts of the text.

The Development of the
Mahayana Vinaya

The Mahayana vinaya came to the fore as an alternative to the Hinayana vinaya,
most importantly the Four-part Vinaya of the Dharmaguptaka school, which
had served as the basic framework for the vinaya for most East Asian schools
up to that point. The emphasis in the Brahmā’s Net Sutra turns to the development
of a set of rules applicable for householders, providing guidelines for their modes
of interaction with society in a more realistic way, which the monastically
oriented set of rules in the old vinaya did not provide. The old vinaya had just
ﬁve principles for laypeople; the Mahayana vinaya provided ten grave precepts
and forty-eight minor precepts.
As compared with the ten basic Hinayana precepts for monks and nuns, the
ten grave Mahayana precepts tend to focus more on the intentionality of the act
(such as killing, stealing, lying, etc.), or the doer’s enjoyment of the act, rather
than the mere commission of the act itself. The precept regarding alcohol is concerned with its sale rather than its consumption. The precept against debauchery
is deﬁned to a great extent from the perspective of the degree to which one is
taking advantage of another person through holding a position of greater power
and so forth, rather than mere sexual indulgence. The precept regarding stealing
discusses complicated issues of ownership, since the precept deals not only with
monks but also with laypeople, who as part of everyday society must own and
handle various kinds of property in various ways.

xx

Translator’s Introduction

There is also a major new transition in regard to the reception of the precepts.
While the ordination ceremony for the Hinayana precepts is clearly set and
requires a speciﬁc number of ofﬁciants and witnesses, the Mahayana precepts,
in order to address a situation in which there may be no or limited access to a
qualiﬁed preceptor, can be obtained through the practitioner’s having a vision of
the Buddha in the process of extended periods of repentance. Various lengths of
time are allowed for a layperson to obtain this requisite vision, with optional
means provided in the event of a lack of success in obtaining it.3 The forty-eight
minor precepts have the ﬂavor of ad hoc determinations dealing with various situations in the relations between monks, laypeople/donors, and the ruling class.
In the sutra itself, neither the ten grave precepts nor the forty-eight precepts
have actual designatory labels attached. Thus, lists of labels or names for the
ten and forty-eight precepts have traditionally been adopted from one of the
major commentaries on the sutra. We have followed suit here and have adapted
the section labels prepared by Daehyeon in his commentary, since his system
of labels has been traditionally regarded as providing the most precise characterizations of the contents of each section.

xxi

THE BRAHMĀ’S NET SUTRA

Fascicle One

Exposition of the
Brahmā’s Net Sutra
[Preface]

The doctrinal roots of our tradition are profound and the principle is not easily
fathomed—therefore we subtly investigate the realm of the abstruse source.
The myriad practices arise from the abode of deep faith—therefore the Indian
Dharma master Kumārajīva recited and memorized this chapter, regarding
it as the apex of the mind. This scripture originally consisted of one-hundred
and twenty scrolls in sixty-one chapters. When Kumārajīva ﬁrst entered the
Great Method he harmonized the heterodoxy at Kapilavastu. In the third year
of Hong Shi (402) the genuine wind was fanned in the east, and the Qin ruler
Yao Xing enlightened all the kings to their profound mind of the great Dharma.
At Caotang Temple three thousand scholars worked together with Kumārajīva, translating more than ﬁfty Hinayana and Mahayana texts, leaving the
Brahmā’s Net Sutra to be recited last. At that time [Dao]rong and [Dao]ying,
along with three hundred others, simultaneously received the ten bodhisattva
precepts. How could such beneﬁts have been limited to that moment in time?
Instead they were transmitted for many eons to come. Therefore, together
with Daorong [Kumārajīva] separately published this mind-ground chapter.
At that time more than three hundred people chanted this single chapter, and
for this reason this book, arranged into eighty-one sections, was transmitted
to later generations for memorization, recitation, and mutual instruction. It
was entrusted to later scholars, noble people who loved the Way, with the
wish that the Brahmā’s Net Sutra would not disappear in future ages, when
people will share in the vision of the dragon-ﬂower.4

Preface to the Brahmā’s Net Sutra
by Śramaṇa Sengzhao

The Brahmā’s Net Sutra is truly the profound doctrinal source for the myriad
teachings, providing the essential points for all the sutras. It provides the true
3

997a

The Brahmā’s Net Sutra

997b

framework for the Great Sage to enlighten beings, the correct path for practitioners
to climb the stairway. Therefore, even though the expedient lessons of the Tathāgata are beyond measure, of the main themes [of Mahayana discourse] there
are none that do not take guidance from the instructions in this sutra. Therefore,
the Qin ruler, in order to enlighten all those within the kingdom, focused attention
on scattered superﬁcialities. Even though the text authoritatively discourses on
all matters within the four seas, its main theme is the deeply profound.
Even if a gale were to overwhelm the eight borders of the kingdom, one
may quiet one’s mind beyond the world. Therefore, in the third year of Hong
Shi, a strong wind fanned the East. At that time [the Qin emperor] invited the
Indian Dharma master Kumārajīva to stay at Caodong Temple in Chang’an.
Together with more than three thousand monks with proper academic training,
he held the Sanskrit texts in his hand, dictated his translation and explication,
and completed more than ﬁfty works. All that remained was the Brahmā’s
Net Sutra in one hundred and twenty rolls and sixty-one chapters. Among
these chapters, the tenth chapter, “On the Mind-ground of the Bodhisattvas,”
focused on articulating the stages of bodhisattva practice.
At that time, Daorong and Daoying, along with three hundred or so others,
received the bodhisattva precepts. Each of them recited this chapter, regarding
it as the apex of the mind. The purposes of teacher and students were uniﬁed;
[the monks] respectfully copied down this single chapter in eighty-one sections
and spread it throughout the world in the hope of causing people to treasure
bodhi. Since this is pursued by awakening to the principle, they wished for
those in later generations to hear [this sutra,] as they had.

The Forty Stages

[Convocation]
Śākyamuni Buddha, residing in the state of the fourth concentration
(dhyāna) in the royal palace of Mahêśvara, together with innumerable Brahmā
kings and inexplicable, untold multitudes of bodhisattvas, expounded the
chapter of the Dharma gate of the mind-ground as explained by Vairocana
Buddha in the world of the lotus ﬂower platform store.
At that time the body of Śākyamuni emitted the radiance of wisdom,
which illuminated from the heavenly palaces to the worlds of the lotus ﬂower
platform store. All the sentient beings in all of the worlds, seeing each other,

4

Fascicle One

were overcome with joy, but as they were unable to know the causes and
conditions of this illumination, they all had thoughts of doubt. Countless
celestial beings also gave rise to doubt.
Then, from within the assembly, the bodhisattva Mysterious Penetration
Flower Radiance King arose from the samādhi of great brilliant ﬂower radiance and, through the buddhas’ supernormal power, emitted an adamantine
white cloud-colored light that illuminated all the worlds. All the bodhisattvas
from these worlds gathered at the assembly, and with a single mind [but
speaking with] different mouths, they asked, “What are the characteristics
of these lights?”
Śākyamuni then lifted the great assembly from this world, returning to
the world of the lotus ﬂower platform store, where amid a palace with hundreds of billions of rays of red-tinged adamant they saw Vairocana Buddha.
A million lotus ﬂowers vividly shone from above his seat.
Then Śākyamuni and the members of the great assembly simultaneously
bowed in reverence at the feet of Vairocana Buddha. Śākyamuni said:
By what causes and conditions can all of the sentient beings who live
in the land and the air in this world achieve completion of the bodhisattva’s path of the ten grounds? What are the characteristics of the
attainment of buddhahood in the future?

This is as in the “Chapter on the Original Source of Buddha-nature,”
which extensively inquires about the seeds of all bodhisattvas.
At that time Vairocana Buddha, greatly elated, manifested the samādhi
of space-penetrating illumination of the eternally abiding Dharma body,
which is the essential nature and original source of becoming a buddha, displaying it to the great multitude.

Sons of the Buddha, listen carefully, think and practice well. I have
cultivated the mind-ground for the duration of one hundred incalculably
long eons (kalpas) in the past. With this as cause, I ﬁrst cast off mundane
folly and achieved perfect enlightenment under the name of Rocana.
I dwelled in the Lotus Flower Platform Store World Ocean, which was
surrounded by a thousand leaves, each leaf holding one world, which
became a thousand worlds. I transformed these into a thousand Śākyas

5

997c

The Brahmā’s Net Sutra

overseeing a thousand worlds. As a consequence, each leaf-world
further contained ten billion Mount Sumerus, ten billion suns and
moons, ten billion of the four continents, ten billion Jambudvīpas, and
ten billion bodhisattva Śākyas, sitting beneath ten billion bodhi trees,
each expounding the bodhisattva mind-ground about which you have
raised a question. The other nine hundred and ninety-nine Śākyas each
manifested ten trillion Śākyas in the same way. Each of these thousand
buddhas sitting atop the ﬂowers was one of my transformation bodies.
Each of the ten trillion Śākyas was one thousand Śākya transformation
bodies. I am the source of all of these, and my name is Rocana Buddha.

At this moment, while seated on the lotus-store platform, Vairocana
answered in detail the questions of the thousand Śākyas and ten trillion Śākyas
in the form of the “Chapter on the Mind-ground Dharma.”
Ten Departures toward the Destination

All buddhas should know that within the patience of ﬁrm faith there
are ten entries and fruitions of the departures toward the destination.
These are the mental states of (1) detachment, (2) morality, (3) tolerance,
(4) zeal, (5) concentration, (6) wisdom, (7) making vows to beneﬁt
others, (8) protection, (9) joy, and (10) the summit experience.

Ten Nourishing Mental States

All buddhas should know that from these ten departures toward the destination, one enters into the ﬁrm patience [based on cognition of the
nonarising] of dharmas, within which there are ten entries and fruitions
of nourishing mental states. These are the mental states of (1) kindness,
(2) pity, (3) joy, (4) detachment (5) generosity (giving), (6) good speech,
(7) beneﬁcence, (8) empathy, (9) concentration, and (10) wisdom.

Ten Adamantine Mental States

All buddhas should know that following upon these ten nourishing mental
states, one enters into the entries and fruitions of the adamantine mental
stages within ﬁrmly cultivated patience, the mental states of (1) faith,
(2) mindfulness, (3) dedication of merit, (4) penetration, (5) directness,

6

Fascicle One

(6) nonretrogression, (7) the Great Vehicle, (8) marklessness, (9) wisdom,
and (10) indestructibility.

Ten Grounds

All buddhas should know that following upon these ten adamantine
mental states, one enters into the entrances and fruitions of the ten
grounds, which are within the ﬁrm holy patience. These are (1) the
ground of equality of essential nature, (2) the ground of excellent wisdom of the essential nature, (3) the ground of the luminosity of the
essential nature, (4) the ground of the knowability (jñeya) of the essential nature, (5) the ground of the illumination from wisdom of the essential nature, (6) the ground of the lotus radiance of the essential nature,
(7) the ground of the consummation of the essential nature, (8) the
ground of the Buddha’s roar of the essential nature, (9) the ground of
the adornment of the essential nature, and (10) the ground of entering
the buddha realm of the essential nature.
As for this “Chapter on the Forty Dharmas,” in a former life, when
I was a bodhisattva, I practiced and entered into the source of buddha
fruitions. In the same way, all sentient beings enter into the departures
toward the destination, nourishing mental states, adamantine mental
states, and the ten grounds, ascending to perfection. Without conditioning, without marks, there is great consummation and continuous
abiding. The ten powers,5 the eighteen distinctive practices,6 the Dharma
body, and the wisdom body are perfectly completed.

At this time, in the lotus platform store world, with Rocana Buddha sitting
upon his evanescent great radiant throne, were the thousand buddhas on the
ﬂower petals, the ten trillion buddhas, the buddhas of all realms. Sitting in
their midst was a bodhisattva named Flower Radiance King Great Wisdom
Illumination. He rose from his seat and addressed Vairocana Buddha:
World-honored One, you have previously brieﬂy introduced the names
and characteristics of the ten stages of departure toward the destination,
the ten stages of nurturance, the ten adamantine mental states, and the
ten grounds. But we have not yet been able to fully understand the con-

7

998a

The Brahmā’s Net Sutra

tent of each. I entreat you to explain this. I wish only that you will
explain this.

The teaching of the omniscience of the perfectly exquisite adamantine
jewel store has already been explained in the “Chapter on the Tathāgata’s
Hundred Contemplations.”

The Ten Departures toward
the Destination

At this time, Vairocana Buddha said, “Thousand buddhas, please listen well.
You have just asked about the meaning of this.”
1. The Mental State of Detachment

Within [the ten] departures toward the destination, my disciples should
practice nonattachment from all things: states, cities, homes, gold and
silver, jewelry, sons and daughters, and their own selves—all conditioned things are to be abandoned, such that there is neither conditioning
nor appearances. The views of self and person are only provisional
combinations, subjectively constructing the view of self. The twelve
links of dependent arising (pratītyasamutpāda) neither combine nor
disperse. “No receiver” [of a donation] means that the twelve sense
ﬁelds (āyatanas), the eighteen elements (dhātus), the ﬁve aggregates
(skandhas)—all marks of conglomeration—lack the marks of self and
its objects. All provisionally formed dharmas, whether internal or external, are neither relinquished nor received. At this time, for the bodhisattvas the observation of names as being nothing more than provisional
combinations becomes self-evident, and therefore their detached minds
enter into the samādhi of emptiness.

2. The Mental State of Morality

My disciples, in the mental state of morality there are [neither precepts
nor] non-precepts, and [there is] no recipient of the precepts.7 In the
ten wholesome precepts there is no teacher who expounds the Dharma.
From the crimes of deception8 and stealing up to wrong views, there
is no one to accumulate and receive them. Kindness, virtue, purity,
straightforwardness, correctness, truth, correct views, detachment,

8

Fascicle One

bliss, and so forth, which are the essential nature of the ten precepts,
serve to restrain one from falling into the eight inverted views.9 Free
from all natures, the single way is puriﬁed.

3. The Mental State of Patience

My disciples, patience is the essence of the wisdom of the marks of
existence and nonexistence. This includes the patience of knowing the
emptiness of all emptiness and the patience exercised in all situations.
[The patience of all emptiness being empty] is called patience based
on the [awareness of] the nonarising of activity. The patience in all situations is called patience of the knowledge that all is suffering. Each
of these numberless acts is called patience. With no receiving and no
striking, without violent or angry thoughts, all is simply thus; there are
no separate existences, just the single mark of the truth, the mark of
the nonexistence of nonexistence, the mark of existence and nonexistence, the mark of no non-mind, and the mark of objects and no objects.
Whether one is standing, staying, going, or stopping (i.e., the four
modes of deportment), in binding and liberation from self and person
all dharmas are thus, and the marks of patience are unknowable.

4. The Mental State of Zeal

My disciples, if at all times in the four modes of deportment you quell
the empty and the nominal and realize the Dharma-nature, and ascend
the mountain of the unproduced, you see all existents and nonexistents
as seemingly existent and seemingly nonexistent. [You enter through]
the universal points of orientation for contemplation, such as the earth
[and the primary colors of] blue, yellow, red, and white, up to the wisdom of the Three Treasures (Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha). From all
paths of effort based on faith, and from the emptiness of nonarising,
nonproduction, and no wisdom, you stir yourself from emptiness and
enter the Dharma of the conventional truth. Indeed, there are not two
aspects [of conventional and ultimate], so the continuance of the empty
mind achieves penetration and you advance to the partial attainment
of wholesome roots.

9

998b

The Brahmā’s Net Sutra

5. The Mental State of Concentration

My disciples, you should be quiescent, markless, in the markless samādhi of immeasurable activity and immeasurable mind. Among worldly
beings and sages there are none who do not enter [this] samādhi. This
is because it is concomitant with their essential nature and all [practice]
using the power of concentration. Self, person, doer, experiencer, all
bonds, seeing essences—these are the causes and conditions of obstruction. Scattered as if by the wind, the mind is agitated and unsettled;
yet when extinguished by the emptying of emptiness the eight inverted
views have no place to which to link. With the meditations of calmness
(śamatha) and insight on the nominal (vipaśyanā), all temporary
agglomerations are extinguished from moment to moment. Experiencing
their culpability for the effects engendered in the three realms, all disciples rely on the concentration of cessation and produce all kinds of
wholesomeness.

6. The Mental State of Insight

My disciples, the wisdom of emptiness does not lack objects. The
essence of knowing is called mind, which discriminates all dharmas.
Provisionally designated as the subject, it passes through the same
course. Reaping fruits and cultivating causes, one enters the holy and
abandons the mundane. Destroying sins and giving rise to virtue,
becoming liberated from bonds—all are the functions of this essence.
All views of eternality, joy, self, purity, and afﬂictions occur because
the essence of wisdom is not clear. With wisdom leading the way, one
cultivates the inexplicable observing wisdom and enters into the single
truth of the Middle Way. This ignorance obstructs wisdom. Unmarked,
it does not come [from a speciﬁc place], it is not conditioned and is
not sinful; it is not the eight inversions and is without arising and ceasing. The light of wisdom burns brightly in order to shed light on the
vacuity of indulgence. Skillful means, transformation, and supernormal
powers are regarded as the functions of wisdom by means of the essence
of cognition.

10

Fascicle One

7. The Mental State of Making Vows

My disciples, you should vow, and vow with great yearning, with total
yearning. In order to have results you cultivate causes; therefore, the
thoughts of the vow are linked; the thoughts of the vow are linked continuously, and in one hundred kalpas one will attain buddhahood and
one’s sins will be extirpated. With wholehearted aspiration nonarising
and emptiness are united. Vowing to contemplate, you contemplate,
entering concentration and illumination. Because of this yearning mind,
one is released from countless bonds of views. Because of this yearning
mind, innumerable marvelous practices are brought to completion. The
innumerable merits of bodhi take yearning as their root. One ﬁrst
arouses a yearning mind, and in the middle one cultivates the way. As
your practices complete your vow you will directly attain buddhahood.
In contemplating the Middle Way of the one truth, there is no illumination, no delimitation, and no extinction. Giving rise to various views
is not liberating wisdom. This is the essence of the vow, the origin of
all practices.

8. The Mental State of Guarding

My disciples, you should guard the Three Treasures, guard the merit
of all practices, and prevent the eight inversions and the mistaken views
of non-Buddhists from disturbing true faith. When you extinguish the
bonds of self, the bonds of views do not come into being. Penetratingly
illuminating the two truths, one observes the mind directly. By guarding
the roots and through markless guarding, one guards emptiness, wishlessness, and signlessness. Using wisdom-based thoughts in a linked
chain, the linked wisdom-based thoughts lead one into the state of nonproduction; the path of emptiness and the path of cognition are each
brightly illuminated. Guarding contemplation and entering into emptiness, you nominally distinguish things, and that which is produced by
illusion after illusion is as if nonexistent, as if nonexistent. The aggregation and dispersal of dharmic essences cannot be guarded, and so it
is with the observation of dharmas.

11

998c

The Brahmā’s Net Sutra

9. The Mental State of Joy

My disciples, you should always take joy in the happiness of others.
Extending to all things, you quiescently illuminate through the nominal
and the empty, yet you do not enter into the conditioned and you experience no lack of quiescence. Greatly joyous without being attached
to anything, you experience sensation and are transformed; you possess
dharmas and see. The profound and the nominal are equal in the
Dharma-nature. With singular focus you observe the mind and its functions, and you hear much about the merits of all buddha practices.
Markless joyful wisdom is produced from each thought, yet it quiescently illuminates. The joyous mind connects to all dharmas.

10. The Summit Mental State

My disciples, the supreme wisdom of this person, which utterly extinguishes self and transmigration, views, doubts regarding entities, and
all forms of ill-will and so forth, is summit-like. Continual contemplation
is summit-like. Within the realm of cognitive experience, cause and
effect being the same one path is the most excellent summit-like [mental
state]. It is like the top of one’s head. Views that are not nonreifying,10
the sixty-two views, the arising and ceasing of the ﬁve aggregates; the
soul, the subject, are in continual motion, contracting and expanding,
without sensation and without karmic formation, without arresting and
binding. At this time, one enters into the direct path of emptiness. Sentient beings in each thought see neither conditions nor nonconditions.
Abiding in the summit samādhi of perfect cessation of thought, they
begin to practice and aim for the Way. When views of essence, self,
and permanence, as well as the eight inversions, appear, by connecting
to the approach of nonduality one does not experience the eight difﬁcult
circumstances,11 and ﬁnally does not experience the effects of illusion.
There is only one sentient being who, whether going, coming, sitting,
or standing, practices and extirpates sins, removes the ten evils, and
produces the ten kinds of wholesomeness. Entering the Way as a correct
person, with correct cognition, doing correct behavior, the bodhisattvas
penetratingly observe that which is before them and do not undergo

12

Fascicle One

rebirth in the six destinies as a karmic fruit. They will deﬁnitely not
fall away from the Buddha’s lineage and will enter the Buddha’s family
in every rebirth, never departing from correct faith. This is explained
in detail in the “Chapter on the Ten Celestial Illuminations” above.

The Ten Nourishing
Mental States

1. The Mental State of Kindness
Vairocana Buddha said:

Thousand buddhas, listen well! You previously inquired about the ten
nurturing mental states. My disciples, always maintain an attitude of
kindness. Having already produced the causes of joy in the state of the
insight into selﬂessness, you enter dharmas by contemplation associated
with joy. Such major dharmas as sensation, perception, karmic formation, consciousness, and form have no arising, no abiding, and no cessation—they are illusory, like phantasms. Since reality is not two, all
practices complete the wheel of the Dharma; you transform all [sentient
beings] such that they are able to give rise to correct faith and avoid
evil teachings. You are also able to cause all sentient beings to attain
the fruition of kindness and joy, which is neither substantial nor the
result of wholesome or unwholesome activities. [This is] the samādhi
that understands the emptiness of essences.

2. The Mental State of Pity

My disciples, take pity as empty—empty and without marks. With pity
as condition, practice the Way, automatically extinguishing all suffering.
Amid the innumerable sufferings of sentient beings you produce wisdom, not killing based on the [compassion of] the awareness of the
suffering of sentient beings, not killing based on the [compassion of]
the awareness of the true nature of phenomena, and not killing based
on the [compassion of] nonattachment to self. If one always abstains
from killing, stealing, and engaging in lust, all sentient being[s] will
be unafﬂicted. Giving rise to the determination for enlightenment, in
emptiness one sees the true characteristics of all dharmas. Amid the

13

999a

The Brahmā’s Net Sutra

practices at the [stage of] seed-nature one gives rise to the mental state
of awareness of the Way. Amid the six intimacies,12 the six negative
intimacies, and the three grades of evil, together with superior bliss
and wisdom, within the virulence of the evil conditions, there are the
nine grades of attaining bliss. When the emptiness of the effects becomes
clear one’s own self is equal to all other sentient beings, and in one
instant of bliss one gives rise to great pity.

3. The Mental State of Joy

My disciples, when you are enjoying the state of the nonproduction of
thoughts, the awareness of the path of the essence of the aspects of
basic proclivity [for buddhahood] is the joyous mind of emptied emptiness. Unattached to “I” and “mine,” one emerges and disappears in
the three divisions of time (past, present, and future) without accumulating causes and effects, and all existent things enter emptiness. The
practice of contemplation is complete and one gives joy equally to all
sentient beings. Giving rise to emptiness and entering the Way, one
abandons unwholesome comrades and seeks out wholesome ones.
Showing my favorite Way, I cause all sentient beings to enter the family
of the buddha-dharma. Within the Dharma one always gives rise to
joy, and within this Dharma stage, once again sentient beings enter
into correct faith and abandon mistaken views. They go against the
course of suffering in the six destinies, and therefore they are joyful.

4. The Mental State of Nonattachment

My disciples, you should always give rise to the mental state of nonattachment. Noncreation, marklessness, and the emptiness of dharmas
are like empty space. The pairs of good and evil, having views and not
having views, sinfulness and blessedness, are all equalized in a singular
illumination. The negation of the personality and the negation of “I” and
“mine,” coupled with the unobtainability of the self-natures of self and
other, result in great detachment, which extends to one’s own body, ﬂesh,
hands and feet, male and female, states and cities. Like phantoms, ﬂowing
rivers, and burning lamps, one lets go of [all such objects of attachment].
Without giving rise to thought, you constantly cultivate nonattachment.

14

Fascicle One

5. The Mental State of Giving

My disciples, in the mental state of giving you are able to provide
things to all sentient beings. Through giving in acts of body, speech,
and mind, giving possessions, and giving the Dharma, you guide all
sentient beings. Within one’s family and outside of it, [categories of]
states and cities, male and female, farmland and domiciles—all are
marked by thusness, up to non-awareness of the object that is given,
its recipient, or its donor. There is no gathering and scattering either
internally or externally, and no thought that you are teaching others.
Through penetrating the principle and penetratingly giving, all marks
are readily apparent.

6. The Mental State of Caring Speech

My disciples, you should enter into the samādhi of essential caring
speech—the meaning of the Dharma speech of the cardinal truth. All
true speech without exception accords with one spoken word, which
soothes the minds of all sentient beings so that they are free from both
anger and strife. The cognition of the emptiness of all dharmas, without
conditions, constantly gives rise to the mental state of gentle caring.
Your actions accord with the Buddha’s intention and you also accord
with all other beings. Using the speech of the holy Dharma, you teach
all sentient beings, continually applying the mind of thusness, giving
rise to wholesome roots.

7. The Mental State of Beneficence

My disciples, you should give rise to beneﬁcent states of mind, using
the essence of true cognition to broadly practice the path of wisdom,
gathering all brightly shining Dharma teachings, gathering the seven
[holy] assets13 for the practice of contemplation. Since those immediately
before you have received beneﬁt, you should also receive [this beneﬁt]
of body and life and enter the beneﬁcent samādhi, displaying all acts
of body, speech, and mind, thereby moving the great world into activity.
Through all your activities and functions, others who enter in the
Dharma seed, the emptiness seed, and the path seed will obtain beneﬁt

15

999b

The Brahmā’s Net Sutra

and the effects of bliss. Taking form in the six destinies, undergoing
immeasurable suffering—don’t take this as painful; instead, see it
simply as an opportunity to help others.

8. The Mental State of Sameness

My disciples, take the wisdom of the essence of the Way to be the same
as the emptiness of the nonarising of dharmas. Take the wisdom of noself to be the same as production without duality. Emptiness is the same
as the original object; dharmas are marked by thusness, always arising,
always abiding, always disappearing. Conventional dharmas continue
in innumerable evolutions, yet they are able to manifest the activities
of countless shaped bodies, form, and mind that enter into the six destinies, in all shared affairs. Emptiness is the same as nonarising, the self
is the same as nothingness; yet dividing your body and scattering your
form, you enter into the samādhi of the sameness of dharmas.

9. The Mental State of Concentration

My disciples, you should furthermore accord with the mental state of
concentration. Through contemplative wisdom you witness emptiness;
in each thought you calm conditions. The dharmas of “I” and “mine”
[operate within] the sphere of consciousness and the sphere of form,
yet remain unchanged. Through both resistance and acquiescence to
the ﬂow of samsara you continually enter the hundred samādhis and
the ten limbs of meditation. Using one moment of wisdom to construct
this view, all selves and individuals, whether internal or external, and
all the seeds of sentient beings neither combine nor disperse; they
gather, take form, and arise but they are unobtainable.

10. The Mental State of Insight

My disciples, you should create the mental state of insight and observe
that all fetters such as false views, active afﬂictions, latent afﬂictions,
and so forth lack deﬁnitive essence. Because patient endurance [based
on the realization of the birthlessness of phenomena] is the same as
emptiness, they are neither the dharmas of the aggregates, elements,

16

Fascicle One

sense ﬁelds, or sentient beings, nor are they a unitary self; they are not
cause and effect or the three times. The nature of insight produces crystal-clear illumination and a single light shines everywhere; one sees
voidness, without sensation. These skillful means of insight give rise
to the mental state of nurturance, and in this mental state one enters
into the production of the path of the emptiness of emptiness, giving
rise to the unarisen mind. The gateway to the knowledge of all dharmas
has already been explained earlier in the chapter on the “Luminous
King of the Thousand Seas.”

The Ten Adamantine
Mental States

1. The Mental State of Faith
Vairocana Buddha said:

Thousand buddhas, listen well! You previously said that the adamantine
seed has ten mental states. My disciples, as for faith, all practices take
faith as their point of departure; it is the root of myriad virtues; it does
not give rise to the mental states of the mistaken views of non-Buddhists.
[In the state of faith] all views are called attachments, and [in the state
of faith] one deﬁnitely does not undergo the production of karma that
binds one to existence; thus you enter into the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena. The three marks are nonexistent; there is no nonarising—nonarising is nonexistent; abiding and abode do not exist,
extinction and extinguished do not exist. Because there is [such a thing
as] the emptiness of all dharmas, there is cognition based on conventional truth and ultimate truth; total extinction is different from emptiness; form is empty; each of the subtle aspects of mind (i.e., the other
four aggregates) are empty; since the subtle aspects of mind imply the
emptiness of mind, in each instance of faith they are extinguished;
bereft of essence they merge together, and they are also without basis.
Nonetheless, while the subject is called “self”and “person,” the nominal
selves of the three realms do not appropriate the marks of combination;
hence, it is called “markless faith.”

17

999c

The Brahmā’s Net Sutra

2. The Mental State of Mindfulness

My disciples, pay attention to the six kinds of mindfulness, from constant
awareness up to constant bestowing, and the ultimate truth of emptiness,
which has neither attachment nor liberation. The marks of arising, abiding, and extinction do not start, do not arrive, nor do they go or come.
Yet [if] all those who undergo the effects of karma turn away from the
habit of reiﬁcation and enter the cognition of the Dharma realm, then
wisdom multiplies, and as it multiplies it disappears. Each blaze is
impermanent; each illumination, nothing; each production, unarisen.
Change is the path of emptiness, altering the former and turning into the
latter, changing, changing, turning, transforming; transforming, transforming, turning, turning; changing simultaneously in the same abode.
All blazes have a single mark, arising and cessation are simultaneous.
Already changed, not yet changed; changing, changing, transforming;
yet incurring one reception [of karma] is also like this.

3. The Profound Mental State

My disciples, the profound mental state refers to the cardinal principle
of emptiness. In the accurate cognition of the emptiness of dharmas
you illuminate true existence. The continuation of the course of karma
and the Middle Way of cause and effect is called real truth. The nominal
designation of dharmas as subjective self and person is called conventional truth. Within these two truths of existence, one enters ever more
deeply into emptiness, yet without going or coming. One illusorily
experiences karmic effects, yet nothing is undergone. Therefore one
experiences extremely profound mental liberation.

4. The Mental State of Penetrating Illumination

My disciples, those who penetratingly illuminate [the truth] patiently
accord with all real natures. Each nature is without binding, without
liberation, and without obstruction. The Dharma penetrates, the meaning
penetrates, the words penetrate, and the teaching penetrates. The causes
and effects of the three times and the capacities and practices of sentient
beings are simply thus: they are neither united nor dispersed; they have
no true function, no provisional function, no nominal function—every

18

Fascicle One

kind of function is totally empty. Emptied of emptiness, one penetratingly illuminates emptiness, and this is called “penetrating the emptiness
of all dharmas.” Since each is empty and simply thus, their marks are
unobtainable.

5. The Direct Mental State

My disciples, “direct” means direct illumination. The soul that is gathered
from conditions enters into the cognition of nonarising. The ignorant
souls are each empty of emptiness; the mind of the principle of emptiness
within emptiness resides in existence and resides in nonexistence, yet
it does not damage the seeds of the Way. The uncontaminated Middle
Way has just one contemplation, yet it teaches and transforms all sentient
beings in the ten directions, transmitting to them all the full knowledge
of the direct, true nature of emptiness. Directly practicing [the contemplation of] emptiness, those [who abide] in the three realms are conjoined
[to cyclic existence] but are not subject to it.

6. The Mental State of Nonretrogression

My disciples, in the mental state of nonretrogression you do not enter
into any worldly stages; you do not give rise to and nurture new views;
neither do you also not habituate the causes of the semblances of self
and personhood. Entering into the activities of the three realms, you
cultivate the stage of emptiness without falling back, and are liberated
within the supreme Middle Way. Since your practices are uniﬁed [with
the supreme Middle Way], you do not retrogress in your practice. Since
the original essence of all things is nondual, you do not retrogress in
your mindfulness. The cognition produced from the contemplation of
production from emptiness continues just as it is, and the intensiﬁed
mind enters into nonduality. In the mind produced from emptiness,
with one path and one purity, you never retrogress from the one path
and the one illumination.

7. The Mental State of the Great Vehicle

My disciples, holding exclusively to the mind of the Great Vehicle
means that because of the double understanding of the single emptiness,14

19

1000a

The Brahmā’s Net Sutra

all mental states of practice are called the One Vehicle. Based in the
wisdom of the one emptiness, the wisdom vehicle and the practice
vehicle carry this wisdom with every thought and adaptively respond
to it. They carry and adaptively respond to all sentient beings, ferrying
them across the river of the three realms, across the river of bondage,
across the river of arising and ceasing. The travelers are transported
by the vehicle, and the wisdom mind that functions to bear and accept
enters into the buddha sea. Therefore, all sentient beings who have not
yet attained acceptance of the wisdom of emptiness are not called [practitioners of] the Great Vehicle; they are merely said to be in the sea of
suffering, over which the vehicle is able to cross.

8. The Markless Mental State

My disciples, the markless mental state is that in which you are liberated
through forgetting the marks and illuminating the nonduality of the
perfection of wisdom. All bonds, karma, and the dharmas of the three
times are simply thus in the one truth—yet one practices within the
emptiness of nonarising. When you know for yourself the attainment
of buddhahood, [you can then say that] all buddhas are the same as
oneself; all worthies and sages are engaged in the same discipline as
oneself. All are the same in the emptiness of nonarising, so it is called
the markless mental state.

9. The Mental State of Wisdom

My disciples, “wisdom of thusness” means that in innumerable Dharma
realms there is no arising, no undergoing of birth. You continuously
produce afﬂictions but are not bound by them. All the teachings, all
the paths followed by the worthies, all the dharmas contemplated by
the holy ones—all of these are also just like this. All of the Buddha’s
skillful teaching methods are gathered in one’s own mind. All the theories of non-Buddhists, the functions of mistaken meditation, illusory
and mistaken explanations—the Buddha calls all these “discriminations.” Entering into the bases of the two truths, they are neither one
nor two and there are no aggregates, elements of cognitive activity, or

20

Fascicle One

perceptual ﬁelds. This wisdom radiates brightly and its bright radiance
enters into all dharmas.

10. The Indestructible Mental State

My disciples, the stage of the indestructible mind is the entry into the
wisdom of the grounds of the holy ones and the approach to the stage
of liberation. However, on attaining the correct entry to the Way you
illuminate the bodhi-mind (bodhicitta) and the patient forbearance that
accords with emptiness, and cannot be damaged by the eight māras.
When the sages lay their hands upon your head, and you have received
the buddhas’empowerment, you enter the peak samādhi; your body
emits beams of light that illuminate the buddha lands in the ten directions. Entering into the Buddha’s deportment and spirit, you come and
go [in and out of this world] freely, quaking a billion worlds. It is neither
different nor distinguished from the mind at the ground of equality, but
this is not yet the path of the wisdom of the Middle Way. Based on the
power of samādhi, illuminating within, you see the Buddha’s innumerable lands, which manifest as sermons. At that time, you attain the
peak samādhi and ascend to the ground of empty equality—the practice
of total retention, the completion of the holy practices. In each thought
you contemplate emptiness, and since there is illumination of marklessness in the Middle Way of the wisdom of the two kinds of emptiness,
all marks are extinguished. You gain access to the adamantine samādhi
and enter the gate of all practices, which is entering into the stage of
equality in emptiness. This is all explained in detail in the Buddha
Flower Sutra.

The Ten Grounds

1. The Ground of the Equality of the Essence
Vairocana Buddha said:

Thousand buddhas, listen well! You previously asked, “What is the
meaning of ‘ground’?” My disciples, when bodhisattvas enter into the
ground of the essence of the wisdom of equality, they teach the true
Dharma. All practices reach fruition in the ﬂower illumination that

21

1000b

The Brahmā’s Net Sutra

completely ﬁlls the four heavens; it is the teaching that relies on the
vehicle, the teaching that relies on the nondelimited principle. The ten
supernatural powers, the ten epithets, the eighteen distinctive characteristics, abiding in the Buddha’s Pure Land, innumerable great vows,
fearless rhetorical skill, all the sciences, all practices—I attain and
enter all of these, having been born in the family of the Buddha and
established on the ground of buddha-nature. In the end, neither experiencing any obstacles nor the causes and effects of ordinary people,
I am ﬁlled with great bliss. From one buddha land I enter innumerable
buddha lands; from one kalpa I enter innumerable kalpas; the inexplicable teachings become explicable. In reﬂection I see all dharmas and
in resisting and complying I see all dharmas; while always entering
the two truths I remain in the ultimate truth.
Through a single awareness I know the sequence of the ten grounds;
in every affair I act as a sentient being, yet my mind remains in the
Middle Way in each thought. Through a single awareness I know the
distinctive qualities of all buddha lands, as well as the teaching
expounded by these buddhas, yet my body and mind remain unchanged.
Through a single awareness I know the twelve limbs of dependent arising and the seed natures of the ten unwholesome actions, yet I always
maintain wholesome activity. Through a single awareness I see the
aspects of both existence and nonexistence; through a single awareness
I know the entry into the ten limbs of meditation and the practice of
the thirty-seven factors of enlightenment, yet I manifest form bodies
throughout the six destinies. Through a single awareness I know every
single form in the ten directions, each fully arising separately; entering
into the retribution of the reception of form, yet never tethered in any
single thought. My radiance illuminates everything; hence, there is no
birth. Firm belief 15 and the wisdom of emptiness are always present
before me; from the ﬁrst ground and the second ground up to the realm
of the Buddha, all the Dharma approaches in between are practiced
concurrently. In summary, the practices and vows of the ocean-store
of merits of the ground of equality are like the tip of a hair on a bubble
in the ocean.

22

Fascicle One

2. The Ground of the Skillful Wisdom of the Essence

My disciples, bodhisattvas at the ground of the skillful wisdom of the
essence purify and fully illuminate all wholesome roots. Kindness,
pity, joy, nonattachment [to one’s own possessions], and wisdom are
the roots of all merit.
Starting from the ﬁrst contemplation, one enters into the cognition
of the path of skillful means of the wisdom of great emptiness and sees
that there are no sentient beings not subject to the truth of suffering. All
possess a conscious mind and feel all of the suffering and distress of
the swords and staves of the three evil destinies. Within these conditions
they produce consciousness; this is called the truth of suffering. As for
the characteristics of the three kinds of suffering, the ﬁrst is the initial
bodily awareness [arising] from [experiencing] the swords and staves
and the aggregate of bodily form; within these two conditions awareness
arises, serving as the condition for suffering due to the compounded
nature of existence. Next, since that which is conditioned by awareness
in conscious thought and awareness of the conditioned body appropriates
the swords and staves as well as bodily sores and ulcers and so forth,
you are aware of the conditions of compounded suffering.16 Since suffering is doubled, it is called compounded suffering. Next, being aware
of sensation and karmic ﬂux these two mental conditions support each
other, and within the deterioration and sores experienced in the aggregate
of bodily form one gives rise to an awareness of suffering; therefore,
this is called the condition of suffering of deterioration. Based on these
three awarenesses, one produces three mental states in this sequence,
So it is called “suffering on top of compounded suffering.”
Because all sentient beings that possess a mind who see these three
kinds of suffering give rise to the causes and conditions for immeasurable suffering and distress, I enter into the samādhi of the path of
teaching and conversion. I manifest form bodies throughout the six
destinies and elucidate the approaches to the Dharma with the ten kinds
of rhetorical skill. This means that in “awareness of suffering” and
“conditions for suffering,” the conditions of [the physical pain caused
by] swords and staves are included. In awareness of suffering in the

23

1000c

The Brahmā’s Net Sutra

conditioned bodily sores and decay impinge internally and externally;
sometimes they are included and sometimes not. Within the inclusion
of these two conditions, consciousness is produced and consciousness
creates; consciousness senses, impinging on consciousness—this is
called the consciousness of suffering. Since it karmically forms two
conditions, each thought conditions form; the mind impinges; impingement brings distress. At the moment one feels this pain and distress it
is called “compounded suffering.” Mind, conditions, and consciousness
ﬁrst abide in faculties being aware of conditions; this is called “awareness of suffering.” The mind creates and the mind feels, it impinges
on consciousness and awareness of it [further] impinges; when one
has not yet felt this pain and distress (i.e., compounded suffering) it is
called “suffering induced by karmic ﬂux.”
Impingement produces awareness, just as hewing a stone produces
sparks. In the moment-to-moment arising and cessation in body and
mind, the body disintegrates, changes, and transforms, while consciousness is subjected to the disintegration of conditions. Conditions gather
and scatter, and after mental pain and mental anxiety are felt and noted,
they subsequently condition so as to pollute and attach, never being
relinquished for even a single thought-moment. This is the suffering
of decay. The three realms are nothing but the truth of suffering. If we
further analyze ignorance, one accumulates innumerable thoughts, creating all kinds of karma that continue without interruption, habituating
causes and gathering causes. This is called the truth of arising. Liberation
through right view, the path of discernment of both kinds of emptiness
in each thought, is called the truth of the Way by means of the path of
discernment. All karmic retribution and all causal purity that exist are
illuminated at once in their essential natures; this is the one truth of
extinction by subtle discernment. Being fully endowed with the qualities
of wisdom is called the “root.” The essence of all wisdom, giving rise
to emptiness, enters contemplation. This is the ﬁrst wholesome root.
In the second, one contemplates the relinquishment of all kinds of
craving and attachment, practicing all forms of relinquishment based
on [awareness of] the equality of emptiness. Without conditions one
sees all dharmas to have the single aspect of the state of emptiness:

24

Fascicle One

I see all lands in the ten directions to be the former lands that I
enjoyed in previous lives. The waters of the four great seas are all
my former waters; all age-ending conﬂagrations are the conﬂagrations I formerly applied in my previous lives. All whirlwinds
are the ethers I formerly employed. I now enter into this world
with my Dharma body complete, relinquishing my former body.
In the end I will not take on my former impure limited body composed of the four elements.

This is the consummation of the faculty of relinquishment.
The third is the contemplation of all sentient beings that are transformed, in conjunction with the joy of human and celestial existence,
the joy of the ten grounds, the joy of freedom of fear of the ten evil
forms of behavior, and the joy of attainment of the marvelous ﬂower
samādhi, up to the joy of buddhahood. This kind of contemplation is
the consummation of the faculty of compassion. At this time bodhisattvas
abiding in this ground have neither delusion, nor craving, nor ill-will,
and they enter into the cognition of the single truth of equality—the
root of all practices. Buddhas traverse throughout all worlds, manifesting
innumerable Dharma bodies.
This is as explained in the “Chapter on the Heavenly Flower of All
Sentient Beings.”

3. The Ground of the Luminosity of the Essence

My disciples, bodhisattvas at the ground of the luminosity of the essence
use samādhi and complete understanding to know all the Buddha’s
teachings of the three times, the words, meanings, and phrases of the
twelve divisions of the canon: repeating verses, predictions, straight
narrative, pure verse, uninvited sermons, rules and disciplines, parables,
buddha realms, ancient matters, corrective, never before seen, and conversations. This is the essence of the Dharma, with words specifying
all meanings.
All conditioned dharmas are explained within these words, meanings,
and phrases. They are born bit by bit, starting with the entry of consciousness into the womb and the four elements that enliven the material

25

1001a

The Brahmā’s Net Sutra

and mental [factors]. Names and the six [sense] bases within the faculties
produce raw awareness, which, having not yet discriminated suffering
and pleasure, is called “contact consciousness.” Furthermore, the consciousness of suffering, pleasure, and consciousness is called the “three
sensations”; one is continually aware of and endlessly attached to sensation. Through grasping desire, self, views, and precepts, good and
evil come into existence. The advent of consciousness is called birth;
the end of consciousness is called death. These ten items are the contemplation of the causes, conditions, and effects of present suffering.
[In this] mode of appearance [of contemplation of dependent arising],
by means of the Middle Way I have been free for a long time and have
no sense of own-nature. Entering into luminous supernatural powers,
total retention, and eloquence, I contemplate emptiness in all thoughts,
and in the present kalpa in the buddha lands of the ten directions I teach
others, enlightening others for a hundred kalpas, a thousand kalpas. In
these lands I nourished supernatural abilities, paying obeisance before
the Buddha and requesting to hear words of Dharma. I furthermore
appear in bodies throughout the six destinies and in a single voice explain
countless aspects of the Dharma. Yet each sentient being, according to
his or her particular spiritual proclivities, hears the Dharma he or she
wants to hear. Suffering, emptiness, impermanence, and no-self are the
sounds of the one truth [of suffering]. Their lands are not the same, their
bodies and minds are transformed in distinctive ways.
What is explained here in this ground of illumination of the marvelous ﬂower is nothing more than a summary that is like [a single
strand] of hair. Its full elaboration is like that explained in the “Dharma
Chapter” and in the “Liberation Contemplation Dharma Gate Thousand
Samādhi Chapter.”

4. The Ground of the Knowability of the Essence

My disciples, bodhisattvas in the stage of essence accord with the real
and illuminate the conventional, without annihilating or holding to
eternalism; at the same time arising, abiding, and extinguishing; each
lifetime, each moment, and each existence are differentiated. Since
they appear differently, the middle way of causes and conditions is

26

Fascicle One

neither one nor two, neither good nor bad. Since they are neither
worldlings nor buddhas, the realms of the buddhas and the realms of
worldlings are distinguished, one by one. This is called conventional
truth. In this view of the way of discernment there is neither one nor
two; the profound Way and the category of concentration. The mental
functions of the buddhas are, at ﬁrst, the awareness of concentration
as cause; then faith awareness, thought awareness, still awareness,
upward awareness, remembrance awareness, wisdom awareness, contemplation awareness, pliant awareness, comfortable awareness, and
indifferent awareness. These various categories of the path of skillful
means enter in each thought into the concentration result; these people,
abiding in concentration, vividly see the emptiness of the activity of
dharmas. If they give rise to mindful concentration they enter into the
production of thought concentration, produce loving accordance with
the Way, and following the Dharma they teach people. This is called
tolerance of joy in the Dharma, tolerance of abiding, tolerance of realization, and tolerance of extinction.
Therefore the buddhas, entering the radiant ﬂower samādhi, manifest
innumerable buddhas who, placing their hands on the heads of the listeners, expound the Dharma with a single voice. In a hundred thousand
stirrings they do not depart from concentration. They abide in concentration, enjoy the ﬂavor of concentration, are addicted to concentration,
and crave concentration. Abiding in concentration in one kalpa or a
thousand kalpas, these people see buddhas on lotus thrones expounding
a hundred approaches to the Dharma. These people make offerings
and listen to the Dharma, abiding in concentration for a single kalpa.
At this time, within the buddhas’ luminosity they receive the laying
on of the buddhas’ hands on their heads and give rise to the state of
concentration, the aspect of transcendence, the aspect of advancement,
and the aspect of tending toward. So they do not sink down and do not
retreat; they do not fall and they do not linger. In the Dharma of the
peak samādhi there is tolerance of superior bliss, permanent extinction
without remainder. Thereupon, entering into all buddha lands they cultivate themselves in the category of innumerable merits, each practice
luminously shining. Entering into the application of skillful means,

27

1001b

The Brahmā’s Net Sutra

they enlighten all sentient beings, enabling them to gain a vision of
the constancy, bliss, self, and purity of buddha-nature. These people
who are born in and abide in this land carry out the Dharma teachings
of conversion, which become gradually more profound. With knowledge
of the contemplation of sky-ﬂowers they enter the Middle Way of the
essence, and the “Chapter on all the Approaches to the Dharma” is fulﬁlled. It is just like the adamant mentioned in the previous “Chapter
on the Course of the Sun and Moon,” in which this point has already
been explained.

5. The Ground of the Wisdom-illumination of the Essence

My disciples, for bodhisattvas at the ground of the essence of wisdom
illumination, the Dharma has qualities produced from ten kinds of
powers, which give rise to all meritorious activities. By one activity
of the skillful means of wisdom, one knows the distinction of good
and evil activities; this is the category of the power of [knowing] what
is appropriate. [Knowledge of] the karma from good and evil activities
is called the category of knowledge power. [Knowledge of] all the
desires and aspirations of all beings in the six destinies is called the
category of the power of [knowledge of] the fruits desired. [Knowledge
of] the distinction of the natures of beings in the six destinies is the
category of the power of [knowledge of] the natures. [Knowledge of]
the distinction of faculties as being wholesome or unwholesome is the
category of the power of the [knowledge of] the faculties. [Knowledge
of] the wrongly determined, correctly determined, and undetermined
is called the category of [knowledge of] determination. [Knowing that]
in all the causes and effects [in the path] the vehicle is the cause and
the vehicle is the effect, and that reaching the effect is based in the
vehicle that is the cause of the path—this is the category of the power
of the [knowledge of] the path. The ﬁve eyes know all dharmas and
see the undergoing of all rebirths; hence the category of the power of
the [knowledge of the] divine eye. Every single matter of a thousand
kalpas is known; this is the category of the power of [knowledge of]
previous lives. [Knowledge of] the extinction of all active afﬂictions
and the extinction of all received ignorance—this is the category of

28

Fascicle One

the power of [the knowledge of] liberation. The knowledge of these
ten categories of powers is to know one’s own cultivation of causes
and fruition, as well as to know the distinction in the causes and fruitions
of all sentient beings.
Yet the distinct functions of body, speech, and mind take the Pure
Land as an evil land and take evil lands as paradise. They are able to
turn the wholesome into the unwholesome, and the unwholesome into
the wholesome. They take form as nonform and nonform as form;
males are taken as female, females are taken as male. The six destinies
are taken as being other than the six destinies, and that which is other
than the six destinies is taken as the six destinies. And so forth, up to
earth, water, ﬁre, and wind not being earth, water, ﬁre, and wind. At
this time, this person takes the power of great skillful means and goes
along with all sentient beings. Yet he sees the inconceivable, that which
is unknowable to those at lower stages, the awareness of all the mundane
affairs of life.
This person’s great bright wisdom gradually advances; discriminating
cognition illuminates again and again, immeasurably and immeasurably.
Inexplicable, ineffable approaches to the Dharma are right before him.

6. The Ground of the Floral Radiance of the Essence

My disciples, bodhisattvas at the ground of the ﬂoral radiance of the
essence are able, in all realms, to avail themselves of the ten kinds of
supernatural cognitive powers in order to manifest various forms for
all sentient beings. (1) Through knowledge of the divine eye, one knows
all the lands in the three divisions of time; one knows all the inﬁnitesimal
bits of form that combine bit by bit to constitute the bodies of the sentient beings within the six destinies; every single body’s inﬁnitesimal
subtle forms that materialize great form are known bit by bit. (2)
Through knowledge of the divine ear, one knows the sounds and the
cries of suffering and pleasure coming from the sentient beings in the
six destinies in the ten directions and three divisions of time; one knows
not non-sounds and not non-voices—all Dharma voices. (3) Through
knowledge of the divine body, one knows all forms, forms and nonforms, neither male nor female forms; in one thought-moment, one

29

1001c

The Brahmā’s Net Sutra

functions in innumerable bodies in lands and eons throughout the ten
directions and the three divisions of time, in great and small lands.
(4) Through the divine knowledge of the minds of others, one knows
the activities within the minds of sentient beings in the three divisions
of time; one knows the content of each thought of all sentient beings
in the six destinies of the ten directions—all matters of pain and pleasure, good and evil. (5) Through divine knowledge of humans, one
knows the past lives, the pain and pleasure, and the future rebirths of
all sentient beings in all the lands in the ten directions and the three
divisions of time; one knows every single life continuing for a hundred
kalpas. (6) Through divine knowledge of liberation, one knows the
liberation of sentient beings in the ten directions and the three divisions
of time; the removal of all afﬂictions, whether numerous or few; from
the ﬁrst ground up to the tenth ground all are completely extinguished,
one after another.
(7) Through divine knowledge of meditative states one knows the
meditative and nonmeditative states of the minds of all sentient beings
in the lands of the ten directions and in the three divisions of time; one
also knows the nonmeditative as well as the not-nonmeditative states,
the methods of producing meditative states along with all included
states of samādhi, the one hundred kinds of samādhi. (8) Through
divine knowledge of enlightenment one knows the attainment of enlightenment and the nonattainment of enlightenment by all sentient beings,
up to knowing the minds of every person in the six destinies, and also
knowing the Dharma that is expounded in the minds of the buddhas
of the ten directions. (9) Through divine knowledge of recollection,
one knows the lives of sentient beings throughout a hundred kalpas,
a thousand kalpas, and within greater and lesser kalpas, whether these
lives are long or short. (10) Through divine knowledge of aspirations,
one knows every single aspiration and resolve of the sages of the ten
grounds and the adepts of the thirty stages; whether seeking pain or
pleasure, the Dharma or non-Dharma—all kinds of seeking—completely, including the ten vows and the hundred thousand great vows.
This person, abiding in the grounds, with access to the ten supernormal
abilities manifests countless distinct functions of action, speech, and

1002a

30

Fascicle One

thought, which are called the merits of the grounds and which cannot
be exhausted in ten billion kalpas. Yet it is precisely these upon which
Śākyamuni has expounded in a concise manner in the “Chapter on
Supernormal Abilities.” This is the same as that which is explained in
the “Chapter on the Contemplation of the Twelve Limbs of Dependent
Arising.”

7. The Ground of the Completion of the Essential Nature

My disciples, when bodhisattvas [arrive at] the ground of the essence
of completion, they enter into this dharma of the category of the cognition of the eighteen noble ones, which is not shared with practitioners
of the lower grounds. This means that in bodily activity there is no
taint or error, in verbal activity there is no fault in speech, and in thought
there is no loss of mindfulness. Free from the eight [difﬁcult] circumstances one is dispassionate in all circumstances, always remaining in
samādhi. On entering this ground there are six kinds of endowment
and, furthermore, from this your cognition produces awareness of six
kinds of completion. Since you are ﬁnally not subjected to the afﬂictive
habit energies of the three realms, your wishes are fulﬁlled. Since all
of the merits and all of the Dharma teachings that you seek are fulﬁlled,
effort is fulﬁlled. Since all Dharma matters, matters of the epoch, and
the affairs of sentient beings are known in one instant, in one thought,
mindfulness is fulﬁlled. Since the characteristics of the two truths
include all the dharmas of the sentient beings in the six destinies, wisdom is fulﬁlled. Since you know that the people in the ten stages of
opening up a clear destination, as well as all buddhas, are neither bound
nor habituated, liberation is fulﬁlled. Since you see that all sentient
beings know other sentient beings as their own disciples, and since
you lack contamination and are without afﬂicted habituation, and since
with your acumen you know other persons, liberation is fulﬁlled.
This person enters into these six kinds of completion of supernormal
cognition and directly gives rise to the cognition wherein his body
accords with the mental functioning of the sentient beings in the six
destinies. Since with his mouth he skillfully elucidates the “Chapter
on Innumerable Dharma Gates,” teaching all sentient beings, he accords

31

The Brahmā’s Net Sutra

1002b

with the mental function of all sentient beings. He always enters samādhi
while the great earth quakes in the ten directions. Since empty space
becomes [adorned with] ﬂowers, he is able, using the endowment of
great illumination, to cause the mental functioning of sentient beings
to see the appearance of buddhas in the world in all past kalpas. Here,
using unattached cognition, he also reveals the minds of all sentient
beings, showing them the minds and mental functions of all buddhas
and sentient beings in all the lands in the ten directions of the present.
Using supernormal cognition and knowledge of the path, he sees the
appearance in the world of all buddhas in all future kalpas. All sentient
beings accept the Way and hear the Dharma from this buddha.
Abiding in this level of the eighteen noble ones, one is in samādhi
in every mental moment, observing the atoms of the three realms to
be the causes of your own body and seeing all sentient beings as your
father and mother. This is because even though I am entering into this
ground, I have already entered all merits, all divine illuminations, all
teachings carried out by the buddhas, up to the category of all the
Dharma teachings in the eighth and ninth grounds. In all buddha lands
one demonstrates the Buddha’s attainment of enlightenment, his turning
of the wheel of the Dharma, his entry into extinction, and his transformation of [beings] in all other lands in the past, present, and future.

8. The Ground of the Buddha’s Roar of the Essential Nature

My disciples, when bodhisattvas [enter] the ground of the Buddha’s roar
of the essential nature, they enter into the samādhi of the stage of the
Dharma King; their accurate cognition is like that of the Buddha, since
it is the Buddha’s roar samādhi. The ten kinds of eminently clear
approaches of concentration are always directly accessible; with the
sound of the ﬂower radiance one enters the mental state of samādhi.
The term “wisdom of emptiness” refers to the approach of the wisdom of internal emptiness, the approach of the wisdom of external
emptiness, the approach of the wisdom of the emptiness of the conditioned, the approach of the wisdom of the emptiness of the unconditioned, the approach of the wisdom of emptiness in nature, the approach
of the wisdom of beginningless emptiness, the approach of the wisdom

32

Fascicle One

of emptiness as the ultimate truth, the approach of the wisdom of the
emptiness of emptiness, the approach of the wisdom that the emptiness
of emptiness is again empty, and the approach of the wisdom that the
emptiness of emptiness is again empty of emptiness. These ten
approaches to emptiness are not known in the lower grounds. The
ground of space-like equality is inexplicable, inexplicable.
The cognition of the Way through supernormal power means that
with one moment of cognition one is able to know and discriminate
all dharmas; entering into innumerable buddha lands, one requests elucidation of the Dharma directly before each buddha. One activates the
Dharma to save all sentient beings and, in applying the medicine of
the Dharma to all sentient beings, one serves as a great Dharma preacher
and great spiritual guide, obliterating the four māras. With one’s Dharma
body complete, you continually manifest physically, entering into
buddha realms. Those in the category of Buddha and those in the category of the ninth and tenth grounds nourish their Dharma bodies. One
hundred thousand dhāraṇī entrances, one hundred thousand samādhi
entrances, one hundred thousand adamantine entrances, one hundred
thousand entrances through supernormal powers, one hundred thousand
liberation entrances—these are the same as these one hundred thousand
entrances of space-like equality. The great unimpededness is exercised
in one thought, in one instant.
Kalpas are explained as non-kalpas, non-kalpas are explained as
kalpas. The non-Way is explained as the Way, the Way is explained as
the non-Way. What are not the six destinies of sentient beings are
explained as the six destinies of sentient beings; the six destinies of
sentient beings are explained as not being the six destinies of sentient
beings. Non-buddhas are explained as buddhas, buddhas are explained
as non-buddhas.
Yet entering and leaving the reﬂection within the samādhi of all
buddha essences, there is illumination of sequence and illumination
of reversal; there is illumination of the prior and illumination of the
latter, illumination of causes and illumination of effects, illumination
of emptiness and illumination of existence, and illumination of the cardinal truth of the Middle Way. This kind of cognition is only realized

33

The Brahmā’s Net Sutra

at the level of the eighth ground—it is not something that is attained
at lower stages. One neither moves nor stops, neither leaves nor enters,
is neither born nor extinguished. The qualities of the Dharma entrances
at this ground are numberless, numberless; inexplicable, inexplicable.
Now, this brief opening up of the contents of this ground is as as rare
as one strand of hair among of a hundred thousand strands of hair on
the head. This has already been explained in the “Chapter on Arhats.”

9. The Ground of the Flower Ornamentation of the Essence

My disciples, when bodhisattvas reach the ground of ﬂower ornamentation of the essence, they use the buddhas’ deportment and the Tathāgata’s royal concentration—where they have complete control over
samādhi, entering and leaving regardless of the time.
In the trichiliocosms of the ten directions, ten billion suns and moons,
ten billion continents beneath the four heavens, in one instant they attain
enlightenment, turn the wheel of the Dharma [and pass through the
other eight major junctures of the Buddha’s career,] up to entering into
nirvana. All buddha works are manifested for all sentient beings through
this one instant within one mind. All of their form bodies [exhibit] the
eighty minor and thirty-two major marks; they experience unimpeded
enjoyment, the same as empty space, brightly shining their immeasurable
great compassion, adorned by their distinguishing and ﬁne marks. They
are neither celestial nor human, nor any of the other types of beings of
the six destinies; they are beyond all dharmas yet always coursing
through the six destinies, manifesting innumerable bodily [activities],
innumerable verbal [activities], and innumerable [activities] of thought
in order to explain innumerable approaches to the Dharma.
Yet they are able to make the transition from māra realms into
buddha realms, from buddha realms into māra realms. They are to
make the transition from all views to enter into the buddha view, and
from the buddha view to enter into all views. From buddha-nature they
enter into the natures of sentient beings, and from the natures of sentient
beings they enter buddha-nature. This ground is lustrously illuminated,
with wisdom after wisdom shining; brightly burning, brightly burning,
they are without fear and without limitation. The stage includes the

1002c

34

Fascicle One

ten powers, the eighteen distinctive abilities, liberation, nirvana, and
the purity of the unconditioned single path. And to all sentient beings
they appear as father, mother, and elder and younger siblings and
expound the Dharma for them, exhausting all kalpas to attain realization
of the path. They furthermore materialize in all lands and cause all
sentient beings to see each other as their fathers and mothers, and to
cause all māras and non-Buddhists to see each other as their fathers and
mothers. Abiding in this ground they start off from the state of birth and
death, arriving at the adamantine state. In the space of a single thought
they manifests this kind of activity and are able to transition themselves
to enter the innumerable realms of sentient beings. This brief recapitulation of this kind of immeasurable activity is like a drop in the ocean.

10. The Ground of Entry into the Buddha Realm of the Essential Nature

My disciples, when bodhisattvas enter the ground of the buddha realm
of the essential nature, their great wisdom is emptied; it is emptied and
further emptied of emptiness, and again emptied, like the nature of
space. With the cognition of equality in nature and the possession of
tathāgata-nature, they are fully equipped with the ten kinds of merit.
Since emptiness has the same single mark, the essential nature is unconditioned and spiritual transparency embodies oneness. Since the Dharma
is the same as the Dharma-nature he is called the Thus Come One (tathāgata). One should accord with the Four Noble Truths and the two truths,
exhausting the state of cyclic existence. Dharma nourishing and the
Dharma body are not two: thus he is called Worthy of Offerings (arhat).
Pervasively covering all phenomena within all realms, correct cognition
and holy liberative cognition know the existence or not of all dharmas,
as well as the religious faculties of all sentient beings; thus he is called
Correctly and Peerlessly Enlightened (samyak-saṃbuddha). Luminous
wisdom and practices are perfected at the stage of buddhahood; thus
he is called Perfected in Wisdom and Practice (vidyā-caraṇa-saṃpanna).
Well gone in the buddha-dharma of the three times, his Dharma is the
same as that of past buddhas. At the time of the past buddhas’ departure
they did so well, did so well, and when they came, they did so well, did
so well—thus the name Well Gone (sugata).

35

The Brahmā’s Net Sutra

His actions are the most virtuous, and entering into society he teaches
sentient beings, leading them to liberation from all bonds; thus he is
called Liberator of the World. This person, above all dharmas, enters
into the Buddha’s comportment with the appearance of a buddha. The
deﬁning activity of a great person is that of liberating people from the
world. Thus he is called Unsurpassed Personage (anuttara). He soothes
all sentient beings, who are called “souls”; [thus he is called Tamer of
Souls (puruṣadamya-sārathi)]. Amid gods and humans he teaches all
sentient beings so that they listen to the words of the Dharma; thus he
is called Teacher of Humans and Gods (śāstā devamanuṣyānām). The
mystery and the source are not two; buddha-nature and profound awakening are always constantly greatly fulﬁlled; all sentient beings worship
and respect him; thus he is called World-honored One. Since all the
people of the world listen to and memorize the teaching, this is the
buddha stage. It is within this buddha stage that all sages enter their
spheres of activity; thus it is called the stage of the buddha realm.

1003a

At this time, sitting on jeweled lotuses, all [those in attendance] received
assurance [of their future enlightenment] and were overjoyed. As the Dharmabody Buddha stroked their heads, bodhisattvas of the same views and learning,
with different mouths yet in the same voice praised He Who is Without Equal.
Furthermore, all the buddhas and bodhisattvas in the ten trillion worlds gathered
like clouds, requesting the turning of the ineffable wheel of the Dharma, the
Dharma approach with the guidance of Ākāśagarbha. This ground was that
of the category of the inexplicable marvelous Dharma approach, the marvelous
samādhi approach of the three kinds of supranormal cognition, and the dhāraṇī
approach, all of which are unknowable to the minds of ordinary people in the
lower stages. Only the Buddha’s immeasurable deeds, speech, and thought
can fathom its source. As is explained in the “Chapter on the Heaven of Radiant
Sound,” the ten forms of fearlessness and the buddha path are the same.

36

Fascicle Two

The Precepts
Preface to the Bodhisattva Precepts
of the Brahmā’s Net Sutra

All you disciples of the Buddha, join your palms in reverence and listen wholeheartedly. I would now like to articulate the preface to the great precepts of
the buddhas. If the members of the assembly will quietly listen, and they know
that they have sinned, they will repent. If they repent, then they will be at ease.
If they do not repent, their crimes will grow more grievous. The sinless are
silent, and because of their silence you should know that they are all puriﬁed.
Worthy monks, laymen, laywomen, and all the rest, listen well! In the age
of the semblance Dharma after the Buddha’s passing into nirvana, you should
revere the Prātimokṣa. The Prātimokṣa is none other than these precepts.
When you observe these precepts, it is like darkness meeting with light; it
is like a poor man becoming rich; it is like someone who is ill being healed;
it is like a prisoner being released from his chains; it is like a traveler who
is able to return home. You should know that these rules (i.e., the Prātimokṣa)
are the great teacher for this assembly of people, and even if the Buddha
were still in the world it would be no different. Thoughts of fear are difﬁcult
to produce; wholesome thoughts are difﬁcult to give rise to.
Therefore a sutra says, “Do not trivialize minor misdeeds as if they are
not problematic. Drops of water, although tiny, will gradually ﬁll a large
basin.” A single instant of sin can lead you to fall into the hell of uninterrupted
suffering. Once you lose your human body you won’t get another one for
ten thousand kalpas. Just as a galloping horse [passes by swiftly], one’s physical strength will not remain—the transience of human life goes beyond the
mountains and seas. Even if something remains for the duration of one day,
it will be quite difﬁcult to hold onto it tomorrow.
Members of the assembly should each energetically advance their own
minds. Be careful not to be lazy, negligent, drowsy, or arbitrary. In the evening

37

The Brahmā’s Net Sutra
1003b

you must gather your thoughts and focus them ﬁrmly on the Three Treasures.
Don’t take as being a waste of time the effort to deepen your repentance for
those of later generations. Members of the assembly, each of you in your
own minds should carefully rely on these precepts. Discipline yourselves in
the practices that accord with the Buddha’s teachings.

Invocation

At this time for the members of this great assembly, Vairocana Buddha
revealed in abbreviated form the mind-ground within the ineffable Dharma
gates equal in number to the grains of sand in a hundred thousand Ganges
Rivers, as if making them ﬁt on the tip of a single strand of hair.
[Vairocana said:]

This is what all buddhas of the past have taught, what the buddhas of
the future will teach, and what the buddha of the present is now teaching.
It is what the bodhisattvas of the three divisions of time have already
learned, what they will learn, and what they are learning. I have already
cultivated this mind-ground for a hundred kalpas, thus receiving the
name of Rocana.17 O buddhas, transmit what I have taught and open
up the path of the mind-ground for all sentient beings.

At that time, on the brightly blazing, divinely illuminated lion’s throne
of the world of the lotus ﬂower platform store, Vairocana emitted effulgent
light. He addressed the thousand buddhas who were seated on the lotus petals:

Hold on to the “Chapter on the Dharma Approach” of my mind-ground
and depart. Again, you will become ten trillion Śākyas, extending this
teaching to sentient beings, gradually explaining this “Chapter on the
Dharma Approach of the Mental Stages.” You should all memorize
and recite it and, with one mind, put it into practice.

The Teaching Transmitted to the
Transformation-body Buddhas

At this time the thousand buddhas sitting on lotus petals and the ten trillion
Śākyas got up from the blazing lion thrones in the lotus ﬂower store world and
each returned [to his original place]. Their entire bodies emitted inconceivably
numerous rays of light, and in each of these there appeared innumerable
38

Fascicle Two

buddhas. At once, they took innumerable blue, yellow, red, and white lotuses
and offered these to Vairocana Buddha. Having ﬁnished receiving and memorizing the above-taught “Chapter on the Dharma Access of the Mind-ground,”
each took his leave and departed from this lotus ﬂower store world.

Repayment of Kindness
and a Separate Iteration
of the Teaching

On their departure they entered the essential nature space lotus-radiance
samādhi and returned to their original worlds, beneath the bodhi tree in
Jambudvīpa. They then emerged from the space lotus-radiance samādhi of
the essential nature. Having emerged, they sat on the throne illuminated by
the adamantine thousand rays of light in the hall of marvelous radiance, and
expounded the ten world-oceans. Rising from their seats again, they went to
Indra’s palace to expound the ten abodes. They again rose from their seats
and proceeded to Yama Heaven, where they expounded the ten practices.
Rising from their seats again, they proceeded to the fourth heaven, where
they expounded the ten dedications of merit. Rising from their seats again,
they proceeded to Nirmāṇarati (Creation of Enjoyment) Heaven, where they
expounded the ten meditations. Rising from their seats again, they proceeded
to Paranirmitavaśavartin (Partaking of Pleasures Created in Other Heavens)
Heaven, where they expounded the ten grounds. They further proceeded to
the ﬁrst meditation, where they expounded the ten indestructible [states of
mind]. They further proceeded to the second meditation, where they
expounded the ten forms of tolerance. They further proceeded to the third
meditation, where they expounded the ten vows. They further proceeded to
the royal palace of Mahêśvara within the fourth meditation, where they
expounded the “Chapter on the Dharma Approach of the Mind-ground” that
was explained by Vairocana Buddha in our place of origin, the lotus treasury
world. The remaining ten trillion Śākyas followed suit without duality or
distinction, as is explained in the “Bhadrakalpa Chapter.”
Then Śākyamuni Buddha, after ﬁrst appearing in the lotus treasury world,
entered the palace of the deva kings from the East. After expounding the
Sutra of Māra’s Conversion, he descended to be born in the state of Kapilavastu in the southern continent of Jambudvīpa. His mother was named Māyā,

39

1003c

The Brahmā’s Net Sutra

his father Śuddhodana, and he himself was named Siddhārtha. He left home
at the age of seven;18 he attained enlightenment at thirty and came to be called
Śākyamuni Buddha. At the site of his enlightenment he sat on the adamantine
splendorous royal throne, and from that time until his ascent to the palace
of the Heaven of Mahêśvara, he expounded his teachings in ten places, one
after the other. At this time the Buddha observed the net of Indra, the king
of Brahmā Heaven, and was motivated to say:

Innumerable worlds are just like the eyelets in this net. Each and every
world is different from the other and the differences are innumerable.
It is the same with the Buddha’s teachings. Up to now I have returned
to this world eight thousand times.
For the sentient beings in this sahā world I have sat upon the adamantine splendorous throne [and all the other ten stations], up to the palace
of King Mahêśvara. I have completed the succinct disclosure of the
“Chapter on the Dharma Gate of the Mind-ground.” Thereafter, I
descended from the heavenly palace to the place below the bodhi tree
in Jambudvīpa, and for all the sentient beings and benighted worldlings
of this world I explained the single admonishment that was always
recited by our original teacher, Vairocana Buddha, when he gave rise
to his original intention for enlightenment within the original mindground.

The Exhortation

The radiant adamantine precepts are the source of all buddhas, the origin
of all bodhisattvas, the seed of buddha-nature. All sentient beings without
exception possess buddha-nature. All [those who have] mentation, consciousness, form, and mind—who have these feelings and these minds—
are all encompassed by these buddha-nature precepts. It is precisely because
of these ever-present causes [in the form of the precepts] that there is, without
fail, always an abiding Dharma body. In this way, these ten Prātimokṣas19
appear in the world, and these Dharma rules are received and upheld with
reverence by all sentient beings of the three times. I will now once again
recite the “Chapter on the Ten Inexhaustible Precepts Treasury” for this
great assembly. These are the precepts for all sentient beings, whose original
self-nature is pure.
40

Fascicle Two

The Bodhisattva Precepts

The Transmission and Remembrance of the Founding Teacher

Now I, Vairocana, sitting on the lotus ﬂower platform,
On the thousand petals that surround me a thousand Śākyamunis
again appear.
Each ﬂower has ten billion lands, and in each land a Śākyamuni.
Each sits under a bodhi tree, and simultaneously they all attain full
enlightenment.
These hundreds of thousands of millions of buddhas are all the
original body of Vairocana.
To each of these hundreds of thousands of millions of Śākyamunis
is attached a vast number of followers,
Who all together come to my place and listen to me recite the
Buddha’s precepts.
The nectar gate is then opened, and at this time hundreds of thousands
of millions [of Śākyamunis]
Return to their original site of enlightenment, each sitting under a
bodhi tree.
Reciting the precepts of my original teacher—the ten grave and the
forty-eight [minor.]
The precepts radiate like the sun and moon; they are like jewels in a
necklace.
Vast numbers of bodhisattvas achieve perfect enlightenment based
on them.
What Vairocana recites, I also recite.
You newly initiated bodhisattvas should receive and observe the
moral discipline with great reverence.
Once you have received and observed this moral discipline, you
should impart it to all sentient beings.
Listen well, as I precisely recite the store of the moral discipline
within the Buddha’s teachings—the Prātimokṣa.
All of you in the great assembly should believe truly in your hearts
That you will, in the future, become buddhas; I have already
become a buddha.

41

1004a

The Brahmā’s Net Sutra

Once you have generated this kind of faith, then the category of
moral discipline is already complete.
All those possessed of mind should embrace the Buddha’s precepts;
Sentient beings who receive the Buddha’s precepts directly enter
into the buddha stages,
The stage that is identical to great enlightenment is complete—
these are truly my disciples.
All those in the great assembly should be reverent and listen with
all their hearts to my recitation.

Preface to the Formation
of the Precepts

Interlocutor’s Preface
At this time Śākyamuni Buddha ﬁrst sat beneath the bodhi tree and
achieved peerless enlightenment. [After this] his ﬁrst act was to establish the
Prātimokṣa, [encouraging his followers] to piously obey their fathers and
mothers, honored monks, and the Three Treasures. Pious obedience is the
principle of the ultimate path. “Piety” is synonymous with “moral discipline,”
and also means “restraint.” The Buddha then emitted immeasurable rays of
light from his mouth, and at that time a great crowd of millions of billions
of bodhisattvas, beings from the eighteen Brahmā heavens, beings from the
six heavens of the desire realm, and the kings of the sixteen major states, all
clasped their hands together in utmost reverence and listened to the Buddha
recite the Great Vehicle precepts of all buddhas.

The Preface of the World-honored One

The Preface of the Preceptor
The Buddha addressed the bodhisattvas:

I will henceforth recite the Dharma precepts of the Buddha once every
half-month. All of you bodhisattvas who have given rise to the aspiration
[for enlightenment] should also recite them, as well as the bodhisattvas
in the ten stages of departure for the destination, the ten stages of nurturance, the ten adamantine stages, and the ten grounds—all of these
bodhisattvas should also recite them. Therefore, the light of the precepts

1004b

42

Fascicle Two

shines forth from my mouth, so that those with afﬁnity have no lack
of cause.

The Dharma Preface

Each ray of light is neither blue, yellow, red, white, nor black. They
are neither form nor mind, neither existent nor nonexistent; they are
dharmas of neither cause nor effect. They are the original source of
the buddhas, the basis of the bodhisattvas, the basis for the disciples
of the Buddha who ﬁll the great assembly. Therefore the disciples of
the Buddha in the great assembly should receive and maintain, read
and recite, and study [the precepts] well.

The Preface for the Disciples

Disciples of the Buddha, listen well! If you receive the Buddha’s precepts,
whether you are a king or a prince, a major ofﬁcial or a minister, a bhikṣu
or a bhikṣuṇī, if you are beings in the eighteen Brahmā heavens, or deva
children in the six heavens of the desire realm, or common people or
eunuchs, debauched men, prostitutes, or menials, or one of the eight
kinds of spiritual beings, vajra spirits, animals, or magically conjured
persons—by simply understanding the words of the Dharma teacher,
fully accepting the precepts, all of you are called “the most pure.”

The Main Sermon

The Buddha addressed his disciples:

There are ten grave Prātimokṣas. If you receive the bodhisattva precepts
but do not recite them, you are not a bodhisattva, nor do you have the
seed of the Buddha. I also recite them.

Introduction of the Exhortation to Uphold

All [past] bodhisattvas have already studied these precepts, all [future]
bodhisattvas will study these precepts, and all bodhisattvas [of the
present] are now studying these precepts. I have already explained the
features of the bodhisattva Prātimokṣa. You should study and, with a
reverent mind, uphold and observe them.

43

The Brahmā’s Net Sutra

The Ten Grave Precepts

1. Prohibition of Killing for Pleasure
The Buddha said:

My disciples, if you yourself kill, or you incite someone else to kill,
or you participate in the planning of a killing, or praise killing, or enjoy
seeing someone kill, or kill by magical spells, then you have the causes
of killing, the conditions of killing, the method of killing, the act of
killing; this holds true even for the accidental killing20 of any form of
life. Bodhisattvas should give rise to an enduring attitude of compassion,
an attitude of reverence and obedience, and devise skillful means to
save and protect all sentient beings. On the other hand, if a bodhisattva
kills a living creature and takes pleasure in the act, this constitutes a
bodhisattva pārājika offense.

2. Prohibition of Stealing Others’ Property

My disciples, you should not yourself steal, incite others to steal, or
steal through deception; if you engage in the causes of stealing, the
conditions of stealing, the planning of stealing, the act of stealing, or
stealing through magical spells, and so on, up to stealing the property
of spiritual beings or the property of thieves—no matter what object
is stolen, whether a single needle or blade of grass, or even if you have
stolen by accident. A bodhisattva generates the buddha-nature mind
of reverence and compassion, always assisting all people to bring about
well-being and happiness. If instead you steal others’ wealth and possessions, this is a pārājika offense for bodhisattvas.

3. Prohibition of the Heartless Pursuit of Lust

My disciples, you should not engage in lustful behavior, incite someone
to engage in lustful behavior, or even indulge in unplanned lustful behavior
with any woman; you should avoid the causes of debauchery, the conditions of lustful behavior, the planning of lustful behavior, and the consummated act of lustful behavior. This includes everything up to sexual
gratiﬁcation with female animals, female celestials, or female spirits, as
well as deviant forms of sexual conduct.21 Moreover, bodhisattvas should

44

Fascicle Two

give rise to an attitude of piety; they should save all sentient beings by
providing them with the pure teaching. If instead they repeatedly indulge
in lustful behavior with anyone, engaging in sexual acts with animals,
or one’s mother, daughter, sister, or another close relative,22 then this
is cruelty and constitutes a bodhisattva pārājika offense.

4. Prohibition of Intentional Lying

My disciples, if you engage in lying on your own, encourage others to
lie, or lie through deception, then you are involved in the causes of
lying, the conditions of lying, the method of lying, and the act of lying.
This also includes saying that one has seen what one has not seen, saying
you have not seen something that you have seen, or lying [implicitly]
through bodily actions or within one’s own mind. Bodhisattvas always
give rise to right speech and right views, and also lead all sentient
beings to practice right speech and right views. If, on the other hand,
you lead sentient beings to wrong speech, wrong views, and wrong
activities, this constitutes a bodhisattva pārājika offense.

5. Prohibition of the Sale of Alcohol

My disciples, if you yourself sell alcohol, or you encourage others to
do so, then herein are the causes of selling alcohol, the conditions for
selling alcohol, the method of selling alcohol, and the act of selling
alcohol. All kinds of alcohol should not be sold, as [consumption of
alcohol] leads to the commission of [other] crimes. Instead, bodhisattvas
should give rise to penetrating wisdom in all sentient beings. If, on the
other hand, they lead sentient beings into distorted states of mind [by
selling them alcohol], this is a bodhisattva pārājika offense.

6. Prohibition of Speaking of the Faults of Others

My disciples, if you yoursef speak about the faults of renunciant bodhisattvas, lay bodhisattvas, bhikṣus, bhikṣuṇīs, or you encourage someone
else to speak of their faults, then you have enacted the causes of faultﬁnding, the conditions of fault-ﬁnding, the method of fault-ﬁnding,
and the act of fault-ﬁnding. When bodhisattvas hear about nonBuddhists or evil adherents of the two vehicles who talk about that

45

1004c

The Brahmā’s Net Sutra

within the buddha-dharma which is not the Dharma and not the Vinaya,
they should always be compassionate. They should teach these unwholesome adherents and cause them to give rise to wholesome faith in the
Great Vehicle. If instead bodhisattvas discuss the faults of those within
the fold of the buddha-dharma, this is a bodhisattva pārājika offense.

7. Prohibition of Praising Oneself and Disparaging Others

My disciples, if with your own mouth you praise yourself and disparage
others, or if you encourage people to praise themselves and disparage
others, then you have the causes of disparagement of others, the conditions of disparagement of others, the method of disparagement of
others, and the act of disparagement of others. On behalf of sentient
beings, bodhisattvas should receive their blame and reﬂect on their
own wrongdoings, and attribute good works to others. If you proclaim
your own merits and cover up other people’s good works, causing them
to be disparaged, this constitutes a bodhisattva pārājika offense.

8. Prohibition of Parsimony and Abuse of Others

My disciples, if you yourself are stingy, or you encourage others to be
stingy, then you have carried out the causes of parsimony, the conditions
of parsimony, the methods of parsimony, and the act of parsimony.
When seeing any destitute person begging for help, a bodhisattva should
offer whatever that person needs. But if a bodhisattva in a wicked and
hateful state of mind does not offer so much as a single coin, a single
needle, or a single blade of grass [to someone in need], or does not
teach one phrase, one verse—not even a tiny grain of the Dharma for
seekers of the Dharma—and instead humiliates that person, this constitutes a bodhisattva pārājika offense.

1005a

9. Prohibition of Holding Resentments and Not Accepting Apologies

My disciples, if you are hateful or encourage others to be hateful, then
you have the causes of hatred, the conditions of hatred, the framework
of hatred, and the activity of hatred. Instead, a bodhisattva should
encourage the growth of wholesome roots in all sentient beings, and
without quarreling always generate compassion. If instead you insult

46

Fascicle Two

and revile sentient and non-sentient beings, or pummel them with your
ﬁsts, or attack them with knives or sticks, and do not let up in your
anger even when this person seeks reconciliation; if he or she approaches
with sincere words of apology and you still do not release your anger,
this constitutes a bodhisattva pārājika offense.

10. Prohibition of Denigration of the Three Treasures

If, my disciples, you denigrate the Three Treasures or encourage others
to denigrate them, then you have the causes of denigration, the conditions
of denigration, the form of denigration, and the action of denigration.
Instead, if a bodhisattva hears a non-Buddhist or an evil person uttering
even a single word of denigration of the Buddha, it should feel to that
bodhisattva as if three hundred sharp spears were piercing his heart.
How, then, could he himself slander [the Buddha] and not give rise to
the mind of faith and a complaisant attitude? If instead he assists such
evil people and those with mistaken views in slandering [the Three
Treasures], then this constitutes a bodhisattva pārājika offense.

Conclusion

All good students: this is the ten-part Prātimokṣa of the bodhisattvas,
which you should study. You should not break even one of these precepts, as if [violating] just one is not such a big issue—much less should
you break all ten! If someone violates [the precepts] in this way, he
will not attain the awakening of the mind of enlightenment in this lifetime; he will fail at kingship, he will fail at wheel-turning kingship;
he or she will fail as a bhikṣu or bhikṣuṇī; he will fail at the practice
of the ten stages of departure toward the destination, at the ten stages
of nurturance, at the ten adamantine stages, at the ten grounds, and at
the stage of the marvelous fruit of the ever-abiding buddha-nature.
[Someone who violates these precepts] will fail at all of these and fall
into the three evil destinies, and for a duration as long as two or three
kalpas he or she will not hear the name of his father or mother, or the
Three Treasures. Therefore, you should avoid breaking any one of
these precepts. All of you bodhisattvas who are now studying, who
will study, and who have already studied these ten precepts should

47

The Brahmā’s Net Sutra

study them with an attitude of reverence and uphold them. They are
explained in detail in the “Chapter on the Eighty Thousand Rules of
Conduct.”

The Minor Precepts

The Buddha addressed the bodhisattvas, “Now that I have fully explained
the ten-part Prātimokṣa I will now explain the forty-eight minor precepts.”

Division of Ten Precepts

Precepts Concerning the Guarding
of One’s Own Thoughts

1. Do Not Show Disrespect to Senior Teachers

My disciples, if you want to become the king of a country, or a wheelturning king, or a government ofﬁcial, you should ﬁrst accept the bodhisattva precepts. All the spirits will protect the bodies of kings and ofﬁcials, and the buddhas will be pleased. Once you have received the
precepts you should give rise to a pious and reverent attitude. When
you see the head monk, your teacher, an ācārya,23 or one who excels
in the same kind of learning, or one with the same views, or one carrying
out the same practice, you should rise to respectfully greet them, bow
deeply, and show obeisance to them. If, on the other hand, haughty,
proud, or foolish bodhisattvas do not rise up to greet and bow in reverence, every single offering is wrong, from the perspective of the
Dharma. [In this case,] you should sell your own body, countries, cities,
men, women, the seven precious metals, and all kinds of possessions
and offer these [to respected monks]. If you don’t do this, then you
commit a minor transgression of the precepts.

1005b

2. Do Not Drink Alcohol

My disciples, if you intentionally drink alcohol, there is no limit to the
mistakes and violations you will make. If with your own hand you pass
the wine bottle to another, you will be born without hands for ﬁve hundred lifetimes—how much worse if you drink the wine yourself? You

48

Fascicle One

should not encourage any person to drink, nor any sentient being to
do so; how much worse if you yourself drink alcohol yourself? If you
intentionally drink, or encourage someone else to do so, you have committed a minor transgression of the precepts.

3. Do Not Eat Meat

Protecting Others’ Mental
Functions

My disciples, you should not intentionally eat meat. The consumption
of meat is entirely unacceptable, as doing so will cut you off from the
seed-lineage of great compassion. Whenever sentient beings see you
they will avoid you. Therefore, bodhisattvas cannot eat the ﬂesh of
sentient beings. To eat meat is to invite countless sins. Eating meat
constitutes a minor transgression of the precepts.

4. Do Not Eat the Five Pungent Roots

My disciples, you should not eat the ﬁve pungent roots: garlic, scallion,
leek, onion, and asafoetida. Food that contains any of these ﬁve aromatics should not be eaten. If you intentionally eat any of these, you
have committed a minor transgression of the precepts.

5. Do Not Fail to Encourage Others to Repent

My disciples, if you see any sentient beings violating the eight precepts,24 the ﬁve precepts,25 or the ten precepts,26 or who are defying the
prohibitions by way of the seven heinous acts27 or the eight difﬁcult
circumstances,28 or any other kind of violation of the precepts, you
should encourage them to repent. If a bodhisattva does not encourage
[a transgressor] to repent and continues to live together with them in
the same beneﬁcial circumstances of the sangha, or participate in the
same repentance sessions, or the whole group recites the precepts
together yet they fail to reveal their sins and they do not encourage
[the transgressor] to repent their crimes in some part, this is a minor
transgression of the precepts.

49

The Brahmā’s Net Sutra

Revering and Cultivating
the Buddha-dharma

6. Do Not Fail to Request Instruction in the Dharma from Visiting
Teachers

If, my disciples, you see a Dharma teacher of the Great Vehicle, or a
fellow student who has the same views and does the same Great Vehicle
practices, and he enters the monastery, a house, or the city—whether
he has come from a distance of one hundred or one thousand li,29 you
should rise up to greet him and to send him off, bowing deeply and
making offerings. You should make offerings three times a day, every
day, providing daily food equal in value to three liang of gold. You
should offer tasty food and drink, as well as bedding and medicine.
You should serve this Dharma teacher with whatever he needs and provide anything that he requires. You should always request that he lecture
on the Dharma three times a day, and you should pay obeisance to him
three times every day, without any anger or anxiety. You should offer
yourself fully for the Dharma, seeking it without laziness. If you do
not do this you have committed a minor transgression of the precepts.
These ten precepts should be studied with reverence and upheld.
They are explained in detail in the following six chapters.

7. Do Not Miss a Chance to Attend Dharma Lectures

My disciples, the Vinaya scripture is lectured on everywhere. When a
large house is the venue for a Dharma lecture, newly awakened bodhisattvas should bring their sutra and vinaya scrolls and go to the place
of that Dharma teacher to listen and ask questions. Whether the venue
is under the trees in the forest, or in a room owned by the sangha, or
any other place, you should listen to the best of your ability. If you fail
to attend such a lecture, this constitutes a minor transgression of the
precepts.

1005c

8. Do Not Abandon the Great Vehicle and Regress to the Lesser Vehicle

My disciples, if you turn away from the eternally abiding scriptures
and the moral code of the Great Vehicle, declaring that these are not

50

Fascicle Two

the Buddhist teachings, and instead you accept and maintain the wrong
views of adherents of the two vehicles or non-Buddhists, along with
all of their prohibitions and scriptures and moral discipline based on
mistaken views, then you have committed a minor transgression of the
precepts.
Saving and Protecting
Sentient beings

9. Do Not Fail to Care for the Ill

My disciples, if you see someone who is ill, you should always make
offerings to them, no differently than you would for the Buddha. Among
the eight ﬁelds of merit, that of caring for the ill is foremost. If your
father or mother, teacher, fellow monk, or disciple is ill, handicapped,
or suffering from any kind of ailment, he or she should be cared for
until their illness is removed. If, however, bodhisattvas with a sense of
malice see an ill person in the conﬁnes of the monastery, in the city, in
an open ﬁeld, or on a forest pathway and they do not help that ailing
person, this is a minor transgression of the precepts.

10. Do Not Amass Weapons

My disciples, you should not amass weapons such as knives, clubs,
bows and arrows, halberds, or axes; all evil instruments that are used
to ensnare and kill living beings should not be collected. Since bodhisattvas cannot take revenge even for the killing of their father or mother,
how could they possibly take the life of any sentient being? If one
intentionally stores knives and clubs, this constitutes a minor transgression of the precepts.

Division of Ten Precepts

[The following ten precepts are divided into two groups. The ﬁrst four deal
with protecting one’s own virtue. The latter six deal with protecting and gathering in others.]

51

The Brahmā’s Net Sutra

Guarding One’s Own Virtue

11. Do Not Serve as a Negotiator for the Military
The Buddha said:

My disciples, you should not serve as an emissary to a foreign state
for self-gain or with evil intentions when it involves raising armies to
engage in battle and kill countless sentient beings. Bodhisattvas should
not be involved in military matters at all—how much worse it would
be to turn traitor to one’s own country! If you intentionally do such a
thing, this constitutes a minor transgression of the precepts.

12. Do Not Get Involved in Trade and Business that Causes Trouble
for Others

My disciples, you should not intentionally engage in buying and selling
people, slaves, or the six kinds of animals. Nor should you engage in
the trade of wood for constructing cofﬁns for the dead. Since you should
not engage in such activities yourself, how much more so should you
not encourage others to engage in such activities. If you intentionally
engage in these activities or encourage others to do so, this constitutes
a minor transgression of the precepts.

1006a

13. Do Not Make Groundless Accusations

My disciples, you should not maliciously and groundlessly accuse
upright people, wholesome people, Dharma teachers, revered monks,
kings, or nobles, saying that they have committed one of the seven
heinous acts or one of the ten grave transgressions. You should have
ﬁlial piety and compassion toward your parents, siblings, and the rest
of the six kinds of relatives. If instead you cause them extreme harm,
or accuse them of having committed a pārājika offense, this constitutes
a minor violation of the precepts.

14. Do Not Harm Living Beings by Setting Fires

My disciples, you should not out of evil intent set large ﬁres in the forests
and ﬁelds, or set ﬁres from the fourth through the ninth months; nor
should you set ﬁre to others’ homes, towns, monastic quarters, gardens

52

Fascicle Two

and groves, nor should you burn up spiritual implements or public property. No one’s property should be set aﬁre. If you intentionally set ﬁres
in this way, this constitutes a minor transgression of the precepts.
Bringing Others into the Fold
and Protecting Them

15. Do Not Teach Non-Buddhist Doctrines

My disciples, toward other disciples, non-Buddhists, evil persons, all
your relatives, all your good comrades—in each case you should always
teach them to follow and uphold the scriptures and rules of discipline
of the Great Vehicle. You should teach them so that they understand
the meaning, and cause them to give rise to the aspiration for enlightenment, the ten departures toward the destination, the ten kinds of
nourishing mental states, the ten adamantine mental states, and, within
each of these thirty mental states, to understand the order and application
of the teachings. If instead a bodhisattva, out of wickedness or ill-will,
wrongly teaches the sutras and vinaya of the two vehicles or of śrāvakas,
or the mistaken theories of non-Buddhists, then this constitutes a minor
transgression of the precepts.

16. Do Not be Parsimonious with Offering Material Wealth or the
Dharma

My disciples, you should, with a proper attitude, ﬁrst study the Great
Vehicle protocols of behavior, scriptures, and moral code, and broadly
clarify their meanings. Later, if you encounter a newly initiated bodhisattva who has come from as far away as a hundred or a thousand li
seeking the Great Vehicle scriptures or vinaya, you should explain
according to Buddhist doctrine all the arduous practices, such as burning
the body, the arm, or the ﬁngers. If the newly initiated bodhisattva
refuses to burn his body, arms, or ﬁngers as offerings to the buddhas,
he is not a renunciant bodhisattva. You should fully offer your body
to hungry tigers, wolves, and lions, as well as to all hungry ghosts,
including the ﬂesh from your arms and legs. After you have done this,
you should expound the correct Dharma for them in an orderly way,

53

The Brahmā’s Net Sutra

allowing their minds to open so that they may understand the meaning.
If a bodhisattva, focused on their personal own gain, does not answer
what should be answered, or if he or she elucidates the sutras and
vinaya in a confused way, citing passages in no particular order, or if
they offer a teaching that denigrates the Three Treasures, this constitutes
a minor transgression of the precepts.

17. Do Not Seek to Gain Political Influence

My disciples, do not seek to be intimate with kings, princes, high ministers, or government ofﬁcials in order to secure food and drink, money,
proﬁt, or fame for yourself. Nor should a bodhisattva expect to gain
attention, beg for alms, strike or beat anyone, drag matters in unfair
directions, or grab for money and possessions. All kinds of proﬁt-seeking are called wrong hankering, voracious hankering, and inducing
others to seek personal gain. A bodhisattva who does such acts, completely lacking compassion or piety, commits a minor transgression of
the precepts.

1006b

18. Do Not Pretend to Be An Accomplished Teacher

My disciples, you should deeply study and recite the moral code and
memorize the bodhisattva precepts throughout the six divisions of the
day and night, in order to understand their inner principle, which is
the essence of buddha-nature. If a bodhisattva does not understand the
causes and conditions of a single passage or a single verse of the moral
code yet falsely claims that he does, he is [guilty of] deceiving himself
as well as others. If you understand nothing of the Dharma, yet play
the role of preceptor and impart the precepts, this amounts to a minor
transgression of the precepts.

19. Do Not Get Involved in Treachery

My disciples, when you see monks who are observing the precepts,
holding censers, and engaged in bodhisattva practices, you should not
maliciously initiate disputes between them. If you disparage and deceive
worthy people there is no evil you will not do. This is considered a
minor transgression of the precepts.

54

Fascicle Two

20. Do Not Fail to Help Both the Living and the Deceased

My disciples, you should compassionately engage in the practice of
releasing captive animals into the wild. All men have been our fathers,
and all women our mothers. In our numerous past lives there is no one
who has not been our mother or father. Therefore, sentient beings in
all six destinies have all been our fathers and mothers. If we were to
slaughter and eat them, it would be the same as slaughtering and eating
our own parents, as well as slaughtering [and eating] my own former
body. All lands and waters are my former body; all ﬁre and wind are
my original essence. Therefore you should always carry out freeing
captive animals so that living beings can continue to be reborn and
undergo rebirth. The eternally abiding Dharma encourages people to
free living beings. When you see someone in society killing animals,
you should try to come up with a way to protect the creatures and
release them from their predicament. Always teaching through lecturing
on the bodhisattva’s moral code, you save sentient beings.
On the day of the death of your father, mother, or elder or younger
siblings you should request a Dharma teacher to deliver a lecture from
the Bodhisattva Vinaya Sutra in order to convey blessings on the
deceased that they may attain a vision of the buddhas and be reborn
as a human being or as a celestial. If you fail to do this, you are committing a minor transgression of the precepts.
You should study the above ten precepts (i.e., items 11–20), and
uphold them with reverence. Each is explained in detail in the “Chapter
on Expiating Sins.”

[Conclusion of the second set of ten precepts]

Division of Ten Precepts

[The below ten precepts give form to the six ways that allow Buddhist practitioners to live in harmony. They are divided up according to theme into
groups of three, one, four, and two, respectively. These categories are based
on common activities, beneﬁts, and precepts. Since the ﬁrst three have in
common the three karmic activities, they give form to the six ways that allow
practitioners to live in harmony.]

55

The Brahmā’s Net Sutra

The Shared Cultivation of the
Three Karmic Activities

21. Do Not Be Intolerant of Wrongs Done by Others
The Buddha said:

My disciples, you should not repay anger with anger or violence with
violence. Even if someone were to murder your parents, siblings, or
other family members, you should not take revenge. Nor should you
seek vengeance if the ruler or king of your country is murdered. Taking
life and exacting retribution for the taking of life are not the way of
respectful piety. One should not even keep servants, or abuse and revile
others. Among the three karmic activities (i.e., acts of body, speech,
and mind) that are carried out daily, verbal crimes are countless. How
could you deliberately carry out the seven heinous acts? Yet if a renunciant bodhisattva retaliates without compassion—even for harm done
to a member of their family—such intentional retaliation constitutes
a minor transgression of the precepts.

22. Do Not Arrogantly Despise Your Dharma Teacher

My disciples, suppose that when you have ﬁrst renounced the world
but have not yet attained any realization you feel proud of your intelligence and knowledge, or perhaps you presume upon your high social
status or seniority, or perhaps you presume upon on your family’s inﬂuence or wealth, your great advantage and merit, your possession of
wealth and the seven precious metals. You should not, out of pride
based on these things, fail to openly receive instruction on the scriptures
and vinayas from learned Dharma teachers. A Dharma teacher may be
from a minor family, or younger, or from a humble background, or
extremely poor, or even handicapped, yet he may truly possess virtue
and have fully digested all the scriptures and vinayas. Newly initiated
bodhisattvas should not concern themselves with a Dharma teacher’s
family background. If you do not openly receive the cardinal truth
taught by [a qualiﬁed] Dharma teacher, you have committed a minor
transgression of the precepts.

1006c

56

Fascicle Two

23. Do Not Despise Beginning Practitioners

My disciples, if after my passing you wish with a sincere mind to receive
the bodhisattva precepts, you should take the vows on your own before
an image of a buddha or bodhisattva. You should practice repentance in
front of the buddha image for a week, and once you have experienced
an auspicious vision you will receive the precepts. If you are unable
to obtain a vision of the buddha’s or bodhisattva’s marks, you should
continue this practice for two weeks, three weeks, even up to a whole
year, until you obtain a vision of the marks. Once you have obtained
the vision you can immediately accept the precepts in front of the image
of the buddha or bodhisattva. If you do not have this vision, even if
you have accepted the precepts in front of the image you have not actually attained them. In any case, when you accept the precepts in the
presence of a Dharma teacher, it is not necessary to have a vision of
an auspicious sign. Why? Because the Dharma teachers have passed
the precepts down to one another, teacher to teacher, and for this reason
an auspicious vision [of the marks] is not necessary. Therefore, when
you accept the precepts in the presence of a Dharma teacher, all you
need in order to properly attain them is an attitude of deep sincerity.
If there is no qualiﬁed preceptor within a thousand li you can take the
vows on your own before an image of a buddha or bodhisattva, but
you must subsequently receive [a vision of] an auspicious sign.
Suppose there is a Dharma teacher who is well versed in the sutras
and vinayas and has disciplined himself in the Great Vehicle, and
who has come to be regarded as a spiritual counselor by kings, princes,
and government officials. If such a Dharma teacher, when approached
with a question regarding the interpretation of the scriptures or vinayas
by a beginner bodhisattva, adopts an attitude of disdain, meanness,
or arrogance and does not sincerely answer the questions put to him,
one at a time, then he has committed a minor transgression of the
precepts.

57

The Brahmā’s Net Sutra

Practicing with Those Who
Hold the Same Views

24. Do Not Fear the Superior and Follow the Inferior

My disciples, if you are in possession of the Buddha’s scriptures and
vinaya and the Dharma of the Great Vehicle, and as well possess the
correct view, the true nature, and the true Dharma body, yet you do
not apply yourself in practice, this is like owning the seven precious
metals but tossing them away. Furthermore, if you apply yourself to
mistaken views, the practices of the two vehicles or of non-Buddhists,
secular classics, the various Abhidharma treatises, or works of literature,
such practices will cut off buddha-nature and obstruct the causes and
conditions of the path. This is not the practice of the bodhisattva path.
If you intentionally do these things, this counts as a minor transgression
of the precepts.
Properly Maintaining
the Sangha

25. Do Not Fail to Properly Fulfill Administrative Duties

My disciples, if after my demise you are put in charge of Dharma lectures, or of administering the Dharma, or of the monastic quarters, or
of instruction, or of meditation sessions, or of the monks’ travels, you
should compassionately and skillfully resolve any squabbles that may
arise. You should skillfully handle the property of the Three Treasures,
making sure that there is nothing that is not used in its proper capacity,
as if these items were your own possessions. If instead you disrupt the
sangha, engage in conﬂict with others, or selﬁshly use the property of
the Three Treasures, you have committed a minor transgression of the
precepts.

1007a

26. Do Not Receive Guests Improperly

My disciples, if as a resident of a monastery you encounter a visiting
bodhisattva monk who has come to stay in the monastery quarters or
the guest quarters established by the king, or who has joined the summer

58

Fascicle Two

meditation retreat or the large assembly, a resident monk should go to
welcome him when he arrives and see him off when he leaves. You
should provide him with food and drink, shelter, bedding, furniture,
and various other necessities. If you have no material goods to offer
you should put yourself and others out for hire [for jobs] in order to
provide all that is necessary. If there is a donor who invites sangha
members [to his home for a meal], the guest monk should also be given
a fair share and the rector should distribute the invitation to the guest
monk within the framework of standard protocol. If a former resident
monk keeps such an invitation to himself and does not pass it on to
the guest monk, that rector invites numberless sins. He is no different
from an animal; he is not a monk and is not of Śākyamuni’s lineage.
If one deliberately acts in this way, this constitutes a minor transgression
of the precepts.

27. Do Not Accept Personal Invitations

My disciples, none of you should accept personal invitations, or take
offerings for yourselves. These kinds of offerings belong to the entire
sangha, so when you accept a personal invitation it means that you are
appropriating the property of all the monks in the entire sangha and
taking it as your own. To use the eight ﬁelds of merit, including buddhas,
sages, the various kinds of monks and preceptors, one’s father and
mother, and those who are ill, for one’s own purposes constitutes a
minor transgression of the precepts.

28. Do Not Extend Personal Invitations to Monks

My disciples, if there is a renunciant bodhisattva, a householder bodhisattva, or a patron who wishes to invite a monk in order to gain merit,
then at the time of making the invitation he should go to the monastery
and speak to a monastery ofﬁcer, saying, “I now wish [to make a request
to invite a monk,” to which the ofﬁcer should respond,] “Invitations
are distributed in order of seniority, which means that you will be gaining
access to all enlightened monks in the monastery.” Even though, [as
recounted in some scriptures,] secular people gave private invitations
to the ﬁve hundred arhats and bodhisattva monks, this is not as good

59

The Brahmā’s Net Sutra

as following the protocol of seniority and you may end up with an
unenlightened monk. Giving personal invitations to monks is a custom
of non-Buddhists. In the tradition of the Seven Buddhas there is no
such custom as giving personal invitations, and it does not accord with
the way of ﬁlial piety. If you intentionally make an invitation to a monk,
this constitutes a minor transgression of the precepts.
Harmonizing and Polishing
the Precepts

29. Do Not Engage in Improper Livelihood

My disciples, you should not, with evil intent or in order to make proﬁt,
engage in selling sexual favors to men or women; you should not prepare food directly, touching it with your own hands, nor should you
engage in grinding and milling [grain]. You should not practice divination to determine the compatibility of couples for marriage. You
should not interpret dreams, practice fortune-telling, or predict the gender of an unborn child. You should not engage in sorcery, hired labor,
or falconry; you should not concoct any of the hundred medicinal and
poisonous herbs or the thousand kinds of venomous poisons and their
antidotes; you should not engage in the production of gold and silver,
or of bane. All [these acts] are conducive to cruelty, so if you deliberately
do any of these sorts of things, this constitutes a minor transgression
of the precepts.

30. Do Not Hurt People While Feigning Intimacy with Them

My disciples, if with bad intentions you denigrate the Three Treasures
on your own, draw close to powerful people through pretense, glibly
speak of emptiness while clinging to existence in your actions; serve
as a go-between among secular people, or even as a matchmaker for
couples, while you yourself are addicted to lust; and on the six days of
puriﬁcation or during the three long periods of puriﬁcation you break
the precepts by killing, stealing, and eating whenever you wish, then
you have committed a minor transgression of the precepts.
You should study the above ten precepts (i.e., items 21–30) and

1007b

60

Fascicle Two

uphold them with reverence. Their detailed exegesis is contained in
the “Chapter on Regulations and Precepts.”

Division of Nine Precepts

[The following nine precepts deal with initiating correct activities (giving),
suppressing distractions, avoiding harmful inﬂuences, keeping oriented
toward the correct vehicle, establishing and wearing vows, avoiding danger
and disorder, always bringing beneﬁt and joy.]
Making Proper Donations

31. Do Not Be Lax in Rescuing Vulnerable Articles and People from
Danger
The Buddha said:

My disciples, in the evil world after my demise you may see nonBuddhists, evil people, or thieves selling images of buddhas and bodhisattvas, or of one’s parents; or they may buy and sell sutras and vinayas,
or buy and sell religious practitioners, including monks, nuns, and
bodhisattvas who have given rise to the aspiration for enlightenment.
Some venerable ones may be forced into government service, or
become slaves to serve people. If a bodhisattva sees these kinds of
goings-on he should compassionately endeavor to devise ways to rescue those [who are caught up in them]. He should teach people everywhere to retrieve things and restore images, and to redeem monks,
nuns, and bodhisattvas who have given rise to the aspiration [for
enlightenment] and preserve all vinayas and scriptures. If you do not
rescue these [people and things], you have committed a minor transgression of the precepts.
Not Doing As One Pleases

32. Do Not Deviously Confiscate Others’ Property

My disciples, you should not build up a store of swords, staves, or bows
and arrows. You should not buy and sell goods using rigged scales and
other means of measurement; you should not conﬁscate people’s property
using ofﬁcial authority, or maliciously tie people up, or sabotage their

61

The Brahmā’s Net Sutra

accomplishments. You should not raise cats, badgers, swine, or dogs.
To intentionally do so constitutes a minor transgression of the precepts.
Avoiding Harmful Influences

33. Do Not Pass Your Time in Idleness

My disciples, you should not, with wrong intentions, be a spectator of
quarrels between men and women, military battles, or brawls among
gangsters. You should also not listen to the blowing of the conch, the
beating of drums, or the horns [sounded when armies go into battle],
nor [should you listen to] the music of guitars, harps, ﬂutes, or lutes,
nor to the singing and musical accompaniment in theatrical performances. You should not gamble with dice, nor play [such games as]
checkers, chess, danqi,30 Parcheesi, or cone-tossing, rock-tossing, or
jar-tossing, or the game of “eight roads to the capital.” You should not
practice fortune-telling using the ﬁngernail mirror, grass, willow twigs,
bowls, or phrenology. You should also not serve as an accomplice for
thieves. You should not do any of these things. If you do so intentionally,
this counts as a minor transgression of the precepts.
Advancing in the
True Vehicle

34. Do Not Abandon the Aspiration for Enlightenment

My disciples, you should uphold the precepts when walking, standing,
sitting, or lying down. You should chant these precepts throughout the
six periods of the day and night. You should be as ﬁrm as adamant; as
fervent as someone carrying a life raft who intends to cross the ocean;
as morally upright as the monk tied up by the grass.31 Always produce
wholesome faith in the Great Vehicle and know yourself to be an incomplete buddha, while the buddhas are complete buddhas. Give rise to
the aspiration for enlightenment and never abandon this aspiration,
even for a moment. If you give rise to even one thought of following
the practices of the two vehicles or of non-Buddhists, this constitutes
a minor transgression of the precepts.

62

Fascicle Two

Not Avoiding Making
Vows

35. Do Not Fail to Make Vows

My disciples, you should always make vows to be ﬁlial and complaisant
toward parents, teachers, monks, and the Three Treasures. You should
vow to meet good teachers, fellow students, and other reliable Buddhist
friends. You should vow to always teach my Great Vehicle scriptures
and vinayas, the ten departures toward the destination, the ten kinds of
nourishing [mental states], the ten adamantine mental states, and the ten
grounds, making my teachings clear for others. You should vow to practice
according to the Buddha’s teachings, to ﬁrmly maintain the Buddha’s
moral code, even to the point of sacriﬁcing your body and life, and never
forget your vows for even a moment. If a bodhisattva does not give rise
to these vows, this constitutes a minor transgression of the precepts.
Making Vows

36. Do Not Fail to Initiate Vows on Your Own

My disciples, once you have committed yourself to the ten great vows
you will uphold the Buddha’s precepts. You should vow, “I would rather
throw my body into a raging ﬁre or a great pit, or on top of a pile of
swords than violate the buddhas’ vinaya scripture throughout the three
periods of time; I vow to never commit an immoral act with any woman.”
You should also vow, “I would rather wrap myself in a net of burning
steel of a thousand layers than with a body that has broken precepts
regarding bodily actions ever accept any offerings of clothing from
faithful donors.”
You should also vow, “I would rather with my own mouth swallow
hot iron balls, or even a great molten ﬂow for a hundred thousand
kalpas, than with a mouth that has broken the precepts verbally partake
of any of the range of offerings of food and drink offered by faithful
donors.”
You should also vow, “I would rather, with my own body, lie down
on ground that is covered with a great ﬁery net and red-hot swords,

63

1007c

The Brahmā’s Net Sutra

than with a body that has broken the precepts regarding bodily actions
accept any of the wide varieties of seats or stools offered by faithful
donors.”
You should also vow, “I would rather have my own body be impaled
by three hundred spears for one or two kalpas, than with a body that
has broken the precepts regarding bodily actions receive any of the
wide varieties of medicine offered by faithful donors.”
You should also vow, “I would rather my own body be thrown into
a scorching iron cauldron and boiled for a hundred thousand kalpas,
than with a body that has broken the precepts regarding bodily actions
receive any of the wide varieties of dormitory rooms, homes, groves,
or farmland offered by faithful donors.”
You should also vow, “I would rather have my body pulverized into
dust by being beaten with iron mallets from head to toe, than with a
body that has broken the precepts regarding bodily actions accept any
forms of demonstration of reverence offered by faithful donors.”
You should also vow, “I would rather have my own eyes gouged
out by a hundred thousand red-hot iron swords, than with a mind that
has broken the precepts regarding thoughts look upon the attractive
form of another person [with desire].”
You should also vow, “I would rather have my ears pierced through
with needles driven by a hundred thousand iron hammers for one or
two kalpas, than with a mind that has broken the precepts regarding
thoughts listen to enjoyable music.”
You should also vow, “I would rather have my nose cut off by a hundred thousand knives and swords, than with a mind that has broken the
precepts regarding thoughts desire to savor various [pleasing] aromas.”
You should also vow, “I would rather have my tongue cut off by a
hundred thousand knives and swords, than with a mind that has broken
the precepts regarding thoughts partake in the variety of delicious pure
foods prepared by [donors].”
You should also vow, “I would rather have my body chopped up
by sharp axes, than with a mind that has broken the precepts regarding
thoughts desire to touch things to receive pleasant sensations.”

1008a

64

Fascicle Two

You should also vow, “I vow to help all sentient beings, without
exception, to attain enlightenment.”
If bodhisattvas do not undertake these vows, this constitutes a minor
transgression of the precepts.
Avoiding Danger

37. Do Not Intentionally Go to Dangerous Places

My disciples, you should always practice austerities (dhūta) at the two
designated times, in the winter and summer intensive meditation training
periods. When you go to the summer retreat you should bring your
monastic requisites: willow twigs (for use as a toothbrush), soap, the
three garments (robes), a water container, a bowl, a meditation mat, a
walking staff, a censer, a water ﬁlter, a hand towel, a knife, a ﬂintstone,
tweezers, a folding seat, sutras, vinayas, a buddha image, and a bodhisattva image. When bodhisattvas practice austerities or when they
travel, whether for a hundred or a thousand li, they should always have
these eighteen articles with them. Dhūta should be practiced from the
ﬁfteenth of the ﬁrst month up to the ﬁfteenth of the third month, and
from the ﬁfteenth of the eighth month up to the ﬁfteenth of the tenth
month. A monk should always have these eighteen articles on his person
during both of these periods, just as a bird always has its two wings.
On the days of poṣadha (precepts confession), the newly initiated
bodhisattva monks will do poṣadha in biweekly installments. When
they chant the ten grave and forty-eight minor precepts, they should
offer their confession before images of the buddhas and bodhisattvas.
If there is only one person doing poṣadha, there should be one person
chanting. If there are two, three, or even a hundred thousand people
doing poṣadha, there should also be one person chanting. The reciter
should sit on the high seat with the listeners sitting below, each dressed
in either a nine-panel, seven-panel, or ﬁve-panel robe. At the commencement of the summer retreat, each item of protocol should be followed according to the rules. When intensive discipline is being practiced, you should not enter dangerous places. You should not go into
countries that are in political turmoil or ruled by evil kings. You should

65

The Brahmā’s Net Sutra

not enter precipitous areas, dense forests, or places where there are
lions, tigers, or wolves. You should not enter places where there are
ﬂoods, ﬁres, or typhoons, or where there are brigands, nor should you
walk on snake-infested paths. You should not enter such places in any
case, but even more so should you not enter such places during a period
of intensive discipline or a meditation retreat. If you are aware that a
place is dangerous and yet you still deliberately go there, this constitutes
a minor transgression of the precepts.
Not Creating Confusion

1008b

38. Do Not Take Your Place Out of Order

My disciples, you should sit in the proper order. Those who received
the precepts earlier should sit up front, and those who received the precepts later should sit at the back. This is not a question of one’s physical
age. Whether you are a monk, nun, aristocrat, king, prince, eunuch, or
slave, all of you should follow the order of ordination seniority, with
those who received the precepts earlier sitting at the front, and those
who received the precepts later sitting at the back. You should not act
like non-Buddhist fools who have no order in their seating arrangements,
whether they are older or younger or began practice sooner or later.
That is the way of soldiers and slaves. In our Buddhist protocol the
seniors sit at the front and the juniors sit at the back. If bodhisattvas
do not take their places in the proper order, this constitutes a minor
transgression of the precepts.
Profit and Happiness

39. Do Not Pursue Personal Gain

My disciples, you should always teach all sentient beings to construct
monastic dwellings and to erect buddha stupas in the forests and ﬁelds.
For the winter and summer meditation retreats they should set up places
for meditation and all kinds of facilities for the cultivation of the Way.
Bodhisattvas should lecture on the Great Vehicle vinayas and sutras
for all sentient beings, even when they are ill, or when there is national
instability, or when beset by brigands. On funeral days and on the

66

Fascicle Two

twenty-ﬁrst and forty-ninth days after the passing of parents, siblings,
teachers, or preceptors, you should also chant and lecture on the Great
Vehicle vinayas and sutras, praying for the merit [of those who have
recently departed] at these assemblies. For the well-being of those who
are traveling, those who are threatened by wildﬁres, those who are adrift
at sea, those whose ships are tossed about in violent storms, those for
whom the great rivers and seas are plagued by ogres—you should also
chant and lecture on the vinayas and sutras. Also, for those who are
incurring the three kinds of retribution for their past misdeeds, such as
the seven heinous acts or the eight difﬁcult circumstances; whose bodies
are bound with cuffs, shackles, pillories, and waist chains; who have
much lust, anger, and stupidity, and who suffer from disease—you
should chant and lecture on the vinayas and sutras for all of them. If
a newly initiated bodhisattva does not do this, it constitutes a minor
transgression of the precepts.

Division of Nine Precepts

The following nine precepts should be studied earnestly and maintained reverently. They are explained in detail in the “Chapter on Brahmadaṇda.”
[Among the following nine precepts, the ﬁrst ﬁve deal with using moral
discipline to gather believers, and the ﬁnal four deal with the compassionate
instruction offered to others. The ﬁrst ﬁve are the container for reception,
selecting and rejecting, guarding the external, guarding the internal, and
being respectful. The ﬁnal four are preaching to people and leading them,
teaching and converting, suppressing evil, and protecting the correct.]
Using Moral Discipline
to Gather [Believers]

Gathering in People of Various Capacities

40. Do Not Err in Terms of Who Can Be Taught
The Buddha said:

My disciples, you should not discriminate when conferring the precepts
on people. Whether they are kings, princes, senior ministers, or government ofﬁcials; monks, nuns, male and female lay believers; libertines

67

The Brahmā’s Net Sutra

or prostitutes; whether they are the celestials of the eighteen Brahmā
heavens, or the celestial children of the six heavens of desire; whether
they are sexless or hermaphrodites, eunuchs or slaves, or disembodied
spirits—all should be able to receive the precepts. Those who would
confer the precepts should wear monastic garb, which should be of
muted colors, appropriate for the religious path. [The monastic robes]
should be dyed blue, yellow, red, black, or purple. All dyed garments,
as well as all bedding, should be of muted color. Whatever garments
are worn should be of muted dyed color. In whatever land you may be
teaching in, there should be a difference between the clothes worn by
monks and nuns and those of the secular people of that place.
When someone wishes to receive the precepts, the preceptor should
inquire, “In this life, have you ever committed one of the seven heinous
acts?” A bodhisattva preceptor should not confer the precepts on anyone
who has committed one of the seven heinous acts in this life. The seven
heinous acts are wounding a buddha, killing one’s father or mother,
killing one’s teacher, killing one’s preceptor, disrupting the sangha,
and killing an arhat. If someone has committed any one of these seven
heinous acts, he or she cannot receive the precepts in this lifetime.
Anyone else can receive the precepts. Those who have renounced the
world should not pay homage to kings or pay obeisance to their parents;
they should not show special respect to any of their close relatives,
and they should not sacriﬁce to departed spirits. Anyone who can understand a Dharma teacher’s words, whether they come from as far as a
hundred or a thousand li to seek the Dharma, may receive the precepts.
If a bodhisattva Dharma teacher, with malice or anger, does not confer
the precepts upon any [suitable] sentient being, this constitutes a minor
transgression of the precepts.

1008c

Separating Out Wrong
Situations

41. Do Not Seek Disciples for the Wrong Reasons

My disciples, when those whom you teach give rise to faith, you, bodhisattvas, and someone else should work together to instruct them in the

68

Fascicle Two

precepts. If you see someone who wishes to receive the precepts, you
should encourage him to engage two teachers, a senior teacher and a
preceptor. These two teachers should ask him or her, “Have you ever
committed any of the seven heinous acts?” If the person has committed
any one of the seven heinous acts in this lifetime, the teachers should
not confer the precepts; if he or she hasn’t, then they can receive them.
If [the one requesting precepts] has broken one of the ten precepts, you
should teach him or her how to repent: they should go before an image
of a buddha or bodhisattva and recite the ten grave and forty-eight
minor precepts throughout the six periods of the day and night. They
should then prostrate to the thousand buddhas of the three periods of
time, seeking to receive an auspicious sign. If necessary, they can repeat
this for one, two, or three weeks, up to an entire year, seeking an auspicious sign. An auspicious sign would be something like a buddha
coming and touching their head, seeing halos, or other various types
of marvelous signs. As soon as the sign is witnessed the sin is erased.
If no auspicious sign is forthcoming, no matter how much someone
repents it is in vain. Such a person cannot in this life receive the bodhisattva precepts; but if he or she obtains and auspicious sign they can
receive the precepts [in the future].32 If one has transgressed one of the
forty-eight minor precepts, they should make a face-to-face confession
to their preceptors and the sin will be erased. This is different from the
case of the seven heinous acts.
As a preceptor you must understand well every part of this process.
You must understand the vinayas and sutras of the Great Vehicle, know
what offenses are light and heavy, and what constitutes an offense and
what does not; you must understand the cardinal truth, and the greater
and lesser among these, entering and leaving the practice of clear observation and the ten limbs of meditation. If a bodhisattva does not grasp
the inner point of every single type of practice but for personal proﬁt
or fame seeks to acquire students, either wrongly or excessively; or if
in order to gain proﬁt and disciples he or she misrepresents their grasp
of vinaya scriptures in order to receive offerings, such a person only
deceive themselves and others. If with such motivations a bodhisattva

69

1009a

The Brahmā’s Net Sutra

confers the precepts on someone, this constitutes a minor transgression
of the precepts.
Guarding the External

42. Do Not Give the Precepts to Unsuitable People

My disciples, you should not, with the intent of gaining some kind of
personal advantage, discuss the Mahayana precepts of the thousand
buddhas before those who have not yet received them, nor in front of
evil non-Buddhists. You should also not discuss them before people
who hold mistaken views. Except for kings, you should not discuss
them with any other people. The evil people who do not receive the
Buddhist precepts are called animals; lifetime after lifetime they never
recognize the Three Treasures. Being bereft of thought, like a piece of
wood or a stone, they are called “non-Buddhists.” People with mistaken
views are no different from blocks of wood. If a bodhisattva discusses
the moral code of the Seven Buddhas before these types of people, this
constitutes a minor transgression of the precepts.
Guarding the Internal

43. Do Not Intentionally Break the Holy Precepts

My disciples, if someone has thoughts of faith and enters the order,
receiving the Buddha’s true precepts, but then intentionally violates the
holy precepts, he or she should not receive any offerings from temple
supporters, nor should they walk on the king’s lands, nor should they
drink the king’s water. The ﬁve thousand great spirits will always block
their way, calling them a great thief. If such a person enters monastery
buildings, or goes into towns or homes, the demons will sweep up his
footprints, returning things to the way they were before. All the people
of the world will curse him, “You are a thief in the midst of the buddhadharma!” Sentient beings will avert their eyes, not wishing to even look
at him. A disciple who violates the precepts is no different from an animal or a block of wood. If a bodhisattva intentionally violates the true
precepts, this constitutes a minor transgression of the precepts.

70

Fascicle Two

Showing Respect

44. Do Not Fail to Revere the Sutras and Vinayas

My disciples, with one-pointedness [of mind] you should always maintain and recite the sutras and vinayas of the Great Vehicle, even if you
must use your own skin as paper, your own blood as ink, your own
marrow to mix the ink, or split apart your own bones to make brushes
in order to copy the Buddha’s Vinaya.33 Tree bark, rice paper, undyed
silk, and bamboo slats can also serve as media for writing. You should
always use the seven precious metals, priceless incense and ﬂowers, and
all kinds of other jewels to adorn the containers for the sutra and vinaya
scrolls. If a bodhisattva does not make offerings according to this kind
of protocol, this constitutes a minor transgression of the precepts.
Teaching by Means of Compassion
Being Proactive

45. Do Not Fail to Teach Sentient Beings

My disciples, you should always give rise to an attitude of great compassion. When you go into into various towns and homes and encounter
sentient beings you should exhort them, “You must all take refuge in
the Three Treasures and accept the ten precepts.” When you see any
kind of animal, such as cattle, horses, swine, or sheep, you should think
in your mind and say to them, “You animals should awaken the aspiration for enlightenment.” When a bodhisattva goes out into the mountains, rivers, forests, and ﬁelds he or she should enable all sentient
beings to awaken the aspiration for enlightenment. If a bodhisattva
does not stimulate the minds of sentient beings and teach them, this
constitutes a minor transgression of the precepts.
Teaching Others

46. Do Not Preach the Dharma Using Improper Protocol

My disciples, you should always teach people with a greatly compassionate attitude. Whether you are visiting aristocratic patrons or among

71

1009b

The Brahmā’s Net Sutra

a general crowd of people, you should not expound the Dharma for
laypeople while standing but only while seated on a raised seat in front
of them. Bhikṣu Dharma teachers should not stand on the ground while
expounding the Dharma for the four groups of Buddhist believers.
During the Dharma lecture a master’s raised seat should be decorated
with offerings of incense and ﬂowers, and the four groups [of followers]
should listen from their seats below. One should respect the teacher in
the same way one shows ﬁlial piety to one’s parents, or as the ﬁre-worshiping brahmans do. If a Dharma lecture is not conducted in the proper
way, this constitutes a minor transgression of the precepts.
Warding off Evil

47. Do Not Establish Systems that Undermine the Dharma

My disciples, you should all receive my precepts with an attitude of
faith. There may be kings, princes, government ofﬁcials, or members
of the four groups of disciples who take pride in their high positions
and seek to undermine my moral code and my Dharma. They may
seek to revise the laws to restrict entry into the four groups of disciples,
or attempt to prevent them from listening to the teachings of renunciant
monks, or from listening to or printing the sutras and precepts, or from
creating buddha images and building stupas. [They might also seek
to establish government policies to regulate the sangha and establish
an agency to oversee and register the monks. They would require
bodhisattva monks to stand on the ground before their secular masters
who sit on high seats, and to carry out widespread policies that are
antithetical to Buddhist principles, forcing monks to serve them the
way soldiers and slaves must serve their masters. Bodhisattvas should
receive offerings from the people. If instead they are made to serve
as errand boys for ofﬁcials, this is contrary to the Dharma and the
moral code. Kings and high ofﬁcials should sincerely receive my precepts and not commit the offense of 34 despoiling the Three Treasures.
If they deliberately undermine the Dharma, this constitutes a minor
transgression of the precepts.

72

Fascicle Two

Maintaining Orthodoxy

48. Do Not Undermine the Dharma from Within

My disciples, you should enter the monastic order with utmost sincerity.
You should not lecture on the precepts of the Seven Buddhas before
kings and high ofﬁcials merely for fame and proﬁt, nor should you
deviously initiate events that entangle bhikṣus, bhikṣuṇīs, and [lay]
disciples who have received the bodhisattva precepts. This is like parasites that consume the ﬂesh of a lion from within—[they may succeed
in despoiling the Dharma] in a way that non-Buddhists and Devamāra
could not. If a bodhisattva receives the Buddha’s precepts, he or she
should protect the Buddha’s precepts, in just the same way a parent
thinks of his only child, or as a child serves his parents. When a bodhisattva hears evil non-Buddhists denigrating the Buddha’s precepts
with foul language, it is just like three hundred spears piercing his
heart, like a thousand swords and ten thousand clubs striking his body.
“I would rather pass a hundred kalpas in hell than hear just once the
sound of someone denigrating the Buddha’s precepts in foul language.”
How much worse it is for someone to denigrate the precepts on his
own, or try to create a situation in which someone else is encouraged
to denigrate the Dharma? There is, indeed, no piety to be seen here.
If a bodhisattva deliberately does this, it constitutes a minor transgression of the precepts.
You should study these nine precepts and uphold them with reverence. My disciples, you should memorize these forty-eight minor precepts. All bodhisattvas of the past have recited them, all bodhisattvas
of the future will recite them, and all bodhisattvas of the present now
recite them.

General Conclusion

My disciples, listen well! These ten grave and forty-eight minor precepts have been recited, will be recited, and are now being recited by
the buddhas of the three periods of time; I also now recite them. All
of those in the great assembly, whether you are kings, princes, high

73

The Brahmā’s Net Sutra

ofﬁcials, monks, nuns, laymen, or laywomen, you who receive these
bodhisattva precepts should memorize and recite them. You should
explicate them, and copy them to make scrolls of the precepts of the
ever-abiding buddha-nature, which should be transmitted through the
three periods of time so that all sentient beings can be continually
taught without interruption. Having gained a vision of the thousand
buddhas, each buddha proffers his hand to you so that from lifetime
to lifetime you will never fall into an evil rebirth or into the eight circumstances where it is difﬁcult to encounter the Dharma. You will
always be born as a human or celestial being.
I now sit beneath the bodhi tree and reveal in brief the teaching of
the moral code of the Seven Buddhas. You should now, with full concentration, study the Prātimokṣa and practice it with joy and reverence.
These [precepts] are all explained in detail, one by one, in the “Chapter
on the Markless Heavenly King.”

1009c

At that time, the three thousand monks who were sitting in the audience
heard the Buddha recite the precepts himself. Their minds were ﬁlled with
faith and, dancing with joy, they memorized these precepts.

Dissemination Section
Concluding Exhortation
for Faithful Practice

At that moment Śākyamuni Buddha ﬁnished his discourse on the “Chapter
on the Dharma of the Ten Inexhaustible Precepts” from within the “Chapter
on the Dharma Gate of the Mind-ground of Vairocana Buddha” in the world
of the lotus ﬂower platform store, as did millions of billions of Śākyamunis.
They taught this in the ten locations, from the heavenly palace of Mahêśvara
down to beneath the bodhi tree, for inexpressibly vast numbers of great
assemblies of bodhisattvas, who have memorized, recited, and in turn
explained the meaning of the content, just like this. In millions of billions
of worlds, lotus store worlds, inﬁnite numbers of worlds, all buddhas taught
fully about all the stores of the buddha-mind, ground stores, precept stores,
stores of immeasurable practices and vows, stores of the causes and effects

74

Fascicle Two

of the eternally present buddha-nature, and the immeasurable store of all
teachings. Within millions and billions of worlds, all sentient beings preserve
these precepts, and joyfully receive and practice them. If we were to explain
each aspect of the mind-ground in detail, it would be like that found in the
“Chapter on Flower Radiance King Buddha.”
Bright people, whose tolerance and wisdom are strong
Are able to uphold this Dharma.
During the time when one has not [yet] attained enlightenment,
One stably holds to ﬁve kinds of beneﬁt.
The ﬁrst is the buddhas of the ten directions
Who, with pity, always protect;
The second is the direct vision of the mind of joy
At the moment of death;
Third is making friends with bodhisattvas
In every rebirth;
Fourth is that all merits,
Such as the precepts and perfections, are complete;
Fifth is that in present and future existences
One’s observance of natural law, merit, and wisdom is done to
its fullest.
This sphere of activity of the buddhas
Is something that the wise well consider.
If you imagine a self and attach to marks,
You cannot have faith in this teaching.
Those who extinguish afﬂiction and seize realization
Are also not of an inferior type.
Wishing to grow sprouts of bodhi,
Your luminosity shines out upon the world.
You should quietly contemplate
The true character of dharmas,
Which neither arise nor cease,
Are neither eternal nor temporary,
Neither the same nor different,
Neither coming nor going.

75

The Brahmā’s Net Sutra

Within this One Mind
There is the adornment by the application of skillful means.
The works of the bodhisattvas
Should be put into practice in order,
And you should not create thoughts of distinction
Between discipline and being beyond discipline.
This is called the Supreme Way—
It is all called the Mahayana.
All bases of intellectual play
Are fully extinguished from this point.
The omniscience of the buddhas
Is fully produced from this point.
Therefore, all Buddhist disciples
Should give rise to great courage.
They should guard the Buddha’s pure precepts
Just as they would guard a bright gem.
The bodhisattvas of the past
Have already applied themselves at this.
Those of the future will also apply themselves,
And those of the present are now applying themselves [thus].
This ﬁeld of buddha activities
Is extolled by the Holy Bhagavan.
Now, having explained accordingly,
The immeasurable heap of merit,
I return to sentient beings,
Together with the offering of omniscience.
Those who wish to hear this teaching
Will quickly attain the Buddha Way.

76

Notes
1

2

3

4
5

6

For a detailed discussion of this issue, see Tōru Funayama, “Bonmōkyō no shohon
no ni keitō,” Toho gakuho Kyoto Daigaku Jinbun kagaku kenkyūsho 80 (2010):
178–211, and “Bonmōkyō geken sengyo no sai kentō,” in Kunio Mugitani, ed.,
Sankyō kōshō ron zokuhen (Kyoto: Kyōto Daigaku Jinbun Kagaku Kenkyūjo,
2011), pp. 127–156.
Charles Muller has published a full translation of this sutra along with Daehyeon’s
commentary, The Collected Works of Korean Buddhism, Volume XI: Exposition
of the Sutra of Brahmā’s Net (Seoul: Compilation Committee of Korean Buddhist
Thought, Jogye Order of Korean Buddhism, 2012).

See Nobuyoshi Yamabe, “Visionary Repentance and Visionary Ordination In the
Brahmā Net Sūtra,” in William M. Bodiford, ed., Going Forth: Visions of Buddhist
Vinaya. Essays Presented in Honor of Professor Stanley Weinstein (Honolulu:
University of Hawai‘i Press, 2005), pp. 17–39.

It is said that when Maitreya becomes a buddha 5.67 billion years hence, he will
sit under the dragon-ﬂower tree and preach at the dragon-ﬂower assembly.

The ten powers (Skt. daśa-balāni) are kinds of powers of awareness specially
possessed by the Buddha, which constitute perfect knowledge of (1) distinguishing
right and wrong; (2) one’s own karma, as well as the karma of every being in the
past, present, and future; (3) all stages of dhyāna liberation and samādhi; (4) the
relative capacities of sentient beings; (5) the desires or moral direction of every
being; (6) the varieties of causal factors; (7) the range of courses and paths pursued
by sentient beings; (8) remembrance of past lives; (9) where people will die and
be reborn; and (10) the methods of destroying all evil afﬂictions.

The eighteen distinctive practices refers to the eighteen distinctive characteristics
of the Buddha, which belong only to a buddha and not to śrāvakas, pratyekabuddhas, or bodhisattvas. In East Asian Buddhism these are (1) unmistaken action,
(2) unmistaken word, (3) unmistaken mindfulness, (4) a mind of equality toward
all beings, (5) a stable mind in meditation, (6) an all-embracing mind that rejects
nothing, (7) the power of nonretrogression in terms of aspiration, (8) the power
of nonretrogression in terms of diligence, (9) the power of nonretrogression in
terms of mindfulness, (10) the power of nonretrogression in terms of wisdom
toward the salvation of all beings, (11) the power of nonretrogression from freedom
into bondage, (12) nonretrogression from the vision attained in liberation, (13)
the manifestation of wisdom power in thought, (14) the manifestation of wisdom

77

Notes

7

8

9

10
11

12
13

14
15
16

78

power in word, (15) the manifestation of wisdom power in deed, (16) immediate total
knowledge of all present affairs, (17) immediate total knowledge of all past affairs,
and (18) immediate total knowledge of all future affairs. In Indian Buddhism these
are the ten powers, the four kinds of fearlessness, the three bases of mindfulness, and
great compassion.

This line seems to be an abbreviation of one found in the Mahayana Yoga of the
Adamantine Ocean, Mañjuśrī with a Thousand Arms and Thousand Bowls: Great
King of Tantras: “For bodhisattvas who are in the state of mind of observing the precepts, the precepts are neither precepts nor non-precepts, lacking a recipient. In the
ten wholesome precepts there is no teacher to expound the Dharma of the precepts,
nor ‘deception’ and stealing, the same up to craving, ill-will, and wrong views”
(T.1177a.20:760b28–c2).

By context, as well as from the following commentary (where it is said to be the
greatest harm that can be inﬂicted on a human being), it seems that the “crime of
deception” is a scribal error for “killing.” The only place the binome appears in scriptural sources in the entire Taishō canon is in the text cited in note 7, above, and in
this text (and also in commentaries on these two works, through repeated citation).
Lists of the objects of the ten precepts usually start with killing and stealing and
proceed to wrong views.
The eight inverted views are non-Buddhists’ mistaken beliefs in permanence, happiness,
self, and purity. The Hinayana asserts the opposite: impermanence, non-happiness,
non-self, and impurity. The Mahayana denies these now but asserts them in nirvana.
Thus, satkāya-dṛṣṭi.

The eight difﬁculties or circumstances in which it is difﬁcult to encounter a buddha
or hear his teaching are: (1) the condition of a hell being, (2) of a hungry ghost, (3)
or of an animal; (4) existence in the long-life heavens, where life is long and free of
difﬁculty; (5) in Uttarakuru, the northern continent where all is pleasant; (6) as a deaf,
blind, or mute person; (7) as a worldly philosopher; or (8) in the intermediate period
between the passing of a buddha and the appearance of his successor.

There are various deﬁnitions for the six kinds of familial relations. One representative
set is comprised of one’s parents, older and younger siblings, wife, and children.

Lists of the seven holy assets (Skt. saptāryadhāna) vary slightly, according to the
source. A representative list includes (1) faith, (2) moral discipline, (3) conscience,
(4) shame, (5) hearing instruction or learning, (6) charity (used interchangeably with
detachment), and (7) wisdom.
I.e., understanding the emptiness of self and dharmas.
This is also a name for the ﬁrst of the mind-grounds.

As a rendering of duḥkha-duḥkha, this is usually translated as “ordinary suffering,”
but in his commentary Daehyeon plays on the Chinese rendering of “suffering on top

Notes

17

18

19

20
21

22
23

24

of suffering.” This means concrete suffering, physical suffering; the direct suffering
that one experiences from illness, exhaustion, hunger, pain, etc. One of the three kinds
of suffering.

In many cases the name Rocana is equivalent to Vairocana, but in some texts a distinction is made between Vairocana representing the Dharma body of the Buddha,
and Rocana representing the enjoyment body or transformation body (nirmāṇakāya).
See the entry “Ten Buddha Names” in the Digital Dictionary of Buddhism (http://www.
buddhism-dict.net/ddb).

According to a better-known tradition, Gautama left home somewhat later, after being
married. Thus other English translations render this as “after seven years as a worldrenunciant” or something of that nature. That is not what this text has, however, and
since Daehyeon makes note of this in his commentary, I render it as is.

Prātimokṣa literally means “liberation from all afﬂictions.” In traditional vinaya discourse it usually refers to the body of precepts to be kept by monks and nuns, speciﬁcally a part of the Vinaya that contains the two hundred and twenty-seven disciplinary
rules for monks and the three hundred and forty-eight rules for nuns that is recited
at every upoṣatha (precepts confession) ceremony. In China the Prātimokṣa most
often used was one associated with the vinaya of the Dharmaguptakas, which was
rendered into Chinese as the Four-part Vinaya (Sifen lü, T. 1428). Over time, however,
there were efforts in China to replace the “Hinayana” Prātimokṣa with a “Mahayana”
one that could be used in rites of confession. This resulted in the development of the
so-called bodhisattva precepts, which are the ten grave precepts of the Brahmā’s Net
Sutra.
Literally, killing “with unobtained reason,” which Fazang glosses as “without harmful
intention” (T.1813.40:613a29).

“Deviant sexual practices” means using bodily oriﬁces other than the genitals, such
as the mouth or anus, for sexual gratiﬁcation. According to another explanation, this
refers not only to using inappropriate bodily parts such as the mouth or anus, but also
to having sexual relations at an inappropriate time, such as before and after a woman
gives birth; in an inappropriate location, such as a cemetery or in view of people; to
an inappropriate degree, such as excessive engagement in intercourse; and with inappropriate principles, such as going against societal values or mores.
See note 12 for the six familial relations.

A preceptor; originally, a master who taught Vedic rituals to disciples. In Indian
Buddhism, the Sanskrit term ācārya means a teacher, master, or preceptor; an established monk who guides his students in conduct and sets an example; a spiritual
teacher or master; one of correct conduct who is an examplar for others.

The eight precepts are the ﬁrst eight of one interpretation of the ten precepts: (1) not
to kill, not to take that which is not given, (3) not to engage in ignoble (i.e., sexual)
conduct, (4) not to speak falsehoods, (5) not to ingest intoxicants, (6) not to indulge

79

Notes

25

26

27
28
29
30
31

32
33

34

80

in cosmetics, personal adornments, dancing, or music, (7) not to sleep on a high or
luxurious bed (only on a mat on the ground), and (8) not to take food outside of the
regulation hours, i.e., after noon. These are the eight precepts undertaken by laypeople
six times per month, on the eighth, fourteenth, ﬁfteenth, twenty-third, twenty-ninth,
and thirtieth days according to the lunar calendar.
The ﬁve precepts (Skt. pañca-śīla) are the basic code of moral behavior to be observed
by lay Buddhist householder-practitioners: (1) not killing, (2) not stealing, (3) not
engaging in lustful behavior, (3) not using false speech, and (5) not ingesting intoxicants. These are binding on the laity, both male and female, as well as on monks and
nuns. The observance of these ﬁve precepts ensures rebirth in the human realm.

The ten precepts are also the ten basic precepts for bhikkhus (Skt. bhikṣu) and
bhikkhunīs (Skt. bhikṣuṇī) in Theravāda and Nikāya Buddhism. The ﬁrst ﬁve of these
are the same ﬁve precepts observed by lay practitioners (see note 25), and additionally
include proscriptions against eating after noon, attending performances of dancing,
singing, and theater, adorning oneself with garlands, perfumes, and ointments, using
a high bed, and receiving gold and silver (Skt. śrāmaṇera-saṃvara).

The seven heinous acts are shedding the blood of a buddha, killing one’s father or
mother, killing a monk or teacher, disrupting the sangha, and killing an arhat.
See note 11 for the eight difﬁculties.

A thousand li is approximately three hundred and ﬁfty miles.

Danqi is an ancient Chinese wooden board game using small pieces; players compete
to ﬂick their pieces the greatest distance.

Skt. kuśa-vandhana. In ancient India a monk was mugged by a thief, who restrained
him by tying him up in tall live grass. The monk, not wanting to break the precept
against taking life, remained lying tied up in the grass rather than ripping it out. A
king who passed by and found the monk was so moved by this scene that he converted
to Buddhism. This story is originally told in the Kalpanā maṇḍitikā (T.201.4:268c10)
and is repeated in many East Asian Buddhist texts.
See Fazang, T.1813.40:653a1.

In one of Śākyamuni’s previous incarnations he is said to have written a certain gāthā
(four-line verse) containing the essence of the Dharma on a piece of his own ﬂayed
skin, using one of his own bones split into the shape of a pen and for ink his own
blood.

This inline note is found in Uijeok’s commentary, Bosal gyebon so (T.1814.40:688a21–
23), as part of the main text of the sutra but it is in neither the Taishō edition nor the
Hanguk bulgyo jeonseo (Collected Works of Korean Buddhism). It is not clear from
his commentary whether Fazang had this text available to him. This precept certainly
makes much more sense with the additional text.

Glossary
afﬂictions (Skt. kleśa): Affective disorders, deﬁlement(s); mental disturbances; emotional
negativity. All of the thoughts, words, actions, and emotions that arise and cease
based on nescience and desire that keep human beings trapped in the cycle of birth
and death, and which result in suffering. Buddhism teaches methods for attaining
nirvana/enlightenment as a means of eliminating the afﬂictions.
bodhi: Awakening; enlightenment.
bodhicitta: The awakened mind; the mind that perceives the real behind the seeming,
believes in moral consequences, and that all sentient beings possess buddha-nature,
and which aims at buddhahood. The aspiration to realize bodhi-wisdom, i.e., perfect
enlightenment.
bodhisattva: A Buddhist practitioner intent on the attainment of enlightenment based on
profoundly altruistic motivations (bodhicitta). The model practitioner in the Mahayana
tradition, a bodhisattva dedicates his or her efforts to the salvation of other beings.
This concept is used in Mahayana texts to distinguish from the earlier Indian spiritual
ideal of the arhat, who also attains a form of enlightenment but whose realization
is considered to be inferior due to the individual orientation of the practices pursued
in its attainment. See also bodhicitta; Mahayana.
brahmā: A god (Skt. deva) regarded as the creator of the universe in the Vedic tradition,
but relegated to a lesser role in Buddhism; capitalized, it is the proper name for the
king of the devas, as well as a descriptive term for a group of higher celestial devas.
buddha-nature: The innate buddha-mind, indicating the potential to actualize buddhahood,
possessed by sentient beings. Buddha-nature is understood as being not fully actualized prior to the full attainment of buddhahood; thus sentient beings are required
to purify themselves through practice to achieve its realization.
dependent arising (Skt. pratītyasamutpāda): The fundamental Buddhist teaching that all
things arise due to particular conditions; nothing arises out of nothing and nothing
arises of itself; things do not come into existence through the power of an external
creator. Therefore there is nothing that is self-contained, independent, or that has
its own separate and independent nature. Dependent arising is the condition of
things arising or being produced only in relationship to their causes and conditions.
Dharma: The term has a wide range of meanings in Buddhism but its foremost meaning
is the teaching delivered by the Buddha that is fully accordant with reality, and connotes Buddhism as the perfect religion; truth, reality, true principle, law. It is also
used as a common noun (lower-case), in the sense of “all things,” anything small

81

Glossary
or great, visible or invisible, real or unreal, affairs, truth, principle, method, concrete
things, abstract ideas, etc.
dharmakāya (“Dharma body”): Translated as reality body, truth body, etc. In general
Mahayana teaching the Dharma body is a name for absolute existence, the manifestation of all existences; the true body of reality, or the Buddha as eternal principle;
the body of essence that is pure, possesses no marks of distinction, and is the same
as emptiness. One of the three bodies of a buddha. See also three bodies.
dhūta: Austerities. The original Indic term means literally “to cast off,” shake off, cleanse,
etc. Used in this text, it indicates casting off afﬂicted attachments through ascetic
practices designed to eliminate the practitioner’s attachment to food, clothing,
shelter, etc. There are twelve categories of dhūta practices.
Four-part Vinaya (Skt. *Dharmaguptaka-vinaya; Ch. Sifen lu; T. 1428): An inﬂuential
vinaya (collection of monastic codes) text transmitted from the Dharmaguptaka
school, translated by Buddhayaśas (408–413 C.E.) and Fonian (412–413 C.E.). One
of four major Indian vinaya works transmitted to East Asia, it remained popular
among monastics after the appearance of the Brahmā’s Net Sutra. See also Vinaya.
Flower Ornament Sutra (Skt. Avataṃsaka-sūtra; Ch. Huayan jing): One of the most
inﬂuential sutras in East Asian Buddhism, of which three Chinese translations, all
entitled Dafangguang fo huayan jing, were made. The text describes a cosmos of
inﬁnite realms that mutually contain and interpenetrate each other. The vision
expressed in this work was the foundation for the creation of the Huayan school of
Buddhism, which was characterized by a philosophy of interpenetration.
four groups of practitioners (catuṣpariṣad): The four categories of Buddhist followers,
consisting of monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen.
humaneness (ren): Consideration for others; altruism; goodness, kindness, compassion,
benevolence. In the thought of Confucius and Mencius, it is the basic quality of
unselﬁshness contained to one degree or another in the minds of all human beings,
which is the basis for the appearance of all proper forms of human interaction such
as justice, ﬁlial piety, trustworthiness, propriety, and so forth.
Hinayana (“Lesser Vehicle”): As opposed to the term Mahayana (“Great Vehicle”), the
term refers in general to Buddhist practices centered on individual salvation, which
are not based on the true experience of emptiness. Used in a historical interpretive
sense, Hinayana refers to the early Indian groups typiﬁed by Theravādins and
Sarvāstivādins that held to a monastically centered approach to Buddhist practice.
In Mahayana texts, the Hinayana practices of śrāvakas (disciples) and pratyekabuddhas
(self-enlightened ones) are held to be ﬂawed in that they lack the penetrating view
of emptiness and the universally functioning compassion possessed by bodhisattvas
in the Mahayana path. See also Mahayana; pratyekabuddha; śrāvaka.
kalpa: An eon, a world-period; in Indian cosmology, the longest period of time; an age
consisting of the span of time between the creation, destruction, and recreation of
a world or universe.
Kumārajīva (344–413 C.E.): A renowned translator of Indian Buddhist texts into Chinese.
He was born into a noble family of Kucha; his father was Indian and his mother

82

Glossary
was a princess of Karashahr. Kumārajīva was well learned in Mahayana Buddhism
but developed a special interest in the Madhyamaka doctrine of Nāgārjuna. In 401
he was brought to the capital of Chang’an by the ruler Fujian, and with the aid of
numerous collaborators and assistants he became one of the most proliﬁc translators
of Buddhist texts in history, rendering some seventy-two texts into Chinese. The
translation of the Brahmā’s Net Sutra is apocryphally attributed to Kumārajīva. See
also Madhyamaka; Mahayana; Nāgārjuna.
liang: An ancient Chinese unit of weight, which varied between fourteen and thirty-eight
grams during different historical periods.
Madhyamaka: One of the major streams of Indian Mahayana Buddhism, which exerted
a profound impact on all subsequent forms of Buddhism that arose in East Asia and
Tibet. Based chieﬂy in the “middle way” philosophy of Nāgārjuna, Mādhyamika
thinkers sought to investigate a middle ground between the two extremes of existence
and nonexistence of things. The Mādhyamaka claims that the dependent arising of
all things amounts to their lack of, or being “empty of,” any independent essence.
See also Nāgārjuna.
Mahayana (“Great Vehicle”): The name of a late Indian sectarian movement that became
the main form of Buddhism in East Asia. The term was created along with and in
opposition to the disparaging term Hinayana, used by the former to distinguish the
two. In the polemical sense, the concept of a “great vehicle” refers to the fact that
the Mahayana considered their doctrines to be more open and universal, advocating
that enlightenment was attainable by all sentient beings, including lay followers
and householders, rather than only available to monastics who practiced in the pure
environment of a monastery. This movement produced a large body of new sutras,
in which its new model practitioner, the bodhisattva, preached the doctrine of the
emptiness of all things. See also bodhisattva; Hinayana.
Nāgārjuna (second–third centuries C.E.): One of the most esteemed ﬁgures in Buddhist
history, considered by many Mahayanists as second in insight and importance only
to the Buddha himself. He was a master of Sanskrit grammar and linguistics as well
as a devastating debater and critical thinker, and his masterwork, the Mūlamadhyamaka-kārikā (Fundamental Verses on the Middle Way), sharply critiqued with elegant,
sophisticated verse many treasured concepts and theories held by Buddhists and nonBuddhists, from causality and time to karma and nirvana. See also Madhyamaka;
Mahayana.
nescience (Skt. avidyā): Ignorance, delusion, folly. The fundamental misunderstanding
of reality that underlies all the suffering of unenlightened people; the ﬁrst of the
twelve links of dependent arising. Nescience is not the mere lack of factual knowledge
but a basic error in one’s mode of perception that prevents people from seeing things
as they really are; for example, being unaware of the fact that all things are ultimately
impermanent or that there is in reality no such thing as an inherent self. See also
dependent arising.
pārājika: Grave offenses or transgressions of the precepts; the original connotation of
the Sanskrit word is thought to mean something like “overcome by another”; thus,

83

Glossary
to engage in unwholesome acts while overcome by afﬂiction. The commission of
pārājika offenses are grounds for the excommunication of a monk or nun (expulsion
from the sangha and the loss of clerical status), and a guaranteed fall into hell.
Hinayana vinaya texts list four pārājikas, known as the four grave offenses. In the
Brahmā’s Net Sutra the consequences of the commission of a “bodhisattva pārājika
offense” are not so clearly deﬁned, so the term is used mainly to indicate the extreme
severity of the ramiﬁcations of any transgression of the ten grave precepts.
poṣadha: A precepts meeting that occurs six days each month, on the eighth, fourteenth,
ﬁfteenth, twenty-third, twenty-ninth, and thirtieth days, according to the lunar calendar. During a poṣadha gathering the Prātimokṣa-sūtra is recited, monastics confess
their transgressions, and laypeople take vows to follow a set of either eight or ten
precepts. See also Prātimokṣa.
Prātimokṣa: Literally, “liberation from all afﬂictions”; a code of Vinaya precepts. In the
traditional Indian vinaya texts it refers to the sets of precepts to be upheld by monks
and nuns, speciﬁcally, a set of two hundred and twenty-seven disciplinary rules for
monks and three hundred and forty-eight for nuns, which is recited at every poṣadha
ceremony, during which all monastics must confess any violation of the precepts.
In China, the Prātimokṣa text used most often was that associated with the Fourpart Vinaya. Over time, however, there were efforts in China to replace the “Hinayana” Prātimokṣa with a “Mahayana” version that could be used in rites of confession, which resulted in the development of the ten grave precepts, a speciﬁc set of
bodhisattva precepts as given in the Brahmāʼs Net Sutra. See also Four-part Vinaya;
poṣadha; Vinaya.
pratyekabuddha: Solitary realizer, self-enlightened one, individual illuminate, etc. One
who lives apart from others and attains enlightenment through direct realization of
dependent arising, and who does not teach others,. Along with śrāvakas, one of the
two “lower” vehicles of the Hinayana, in contrast to the altruistic ideal of the bodhisattva. See also bodhisattva; Hinayana; śrāvaka.
samādhi: A state of deep meditative concentration or absorption. One of the three basic
elements of Buddhist practice, together with morality (sīla) and wisdom (prajñā).
See also sīla.
seven heinous acts: Shedding a Buddhaʼs blood, killing oneʼs father or mother, killing
a monk or teacher, disrupting the sangha, or killing an arhat.
sīla: Morality, moral conduct; one of the three pillars of Buddhist practice, together with
meditation (samādhi) and wisdom (prajñā).
six destinies: Six levels of rebirth in samsara undergone by sentient beings in accord
with their good or evil actions carried out in previous lifetimes. They are the realms
of (1) hell (Skt. naraka-gati), (2) of hungry ghosts (preta-gati), (3) of animals
(tiryagyoni-gati), (4) of angry titans (asura-gati), (5) of human beings (manuṣyagati), and (6) of gods (deva-gati).
śrāvaka (“voice-hearer”): Originally, a direct disciple of the Buddha, one who heard him
teach; the term later came to refer generally to a Buddhist disciple. In Mahayana

84

Glossary
texts it is used as a technical term with somewhat negative connotations. While śrāvakas are disciplined monk-practitioners who contemplate the principle of the fundamental Buddhist teaching of the Four Noble Truths in order to attain arhatship,
and thus eventually nirvana, they are also considered, along with pratyekabuddhas,
to be followers of the two “lower” vehicles, inferior in insight and compassion to
the Mahayana path of the bodhisattva. See also bodhisattva; Mahayana; pratyekabuddha; two vehicles.
ten unwholesome activities (Skt. daśâkuśala-karma-patha): Ten unwholesome activities
carried out through the three modes of action of body, speech, and mind (thought):
(1) killing, (2) stealing, (3) engaging in debauchery, (4) lying, (5) ﬂattery, (6) insulting
speech, (7) treachery, (8) covetousness, (9) anger, and (10) holding false views.
three bodies (Skt. trikāya): The three bodies of a buddha, consisting of dharmakāya,
saṃbhogakāya, and nirmāṇakāya. The dharmakāya refers to the transcendence of
form and realization of true thusness. The saṃbhogakāya is the “reward body” or
“body of enjoyment” of a buddha resulting from merits attained as a bodhisattva.
The nirmāṇakāya, “transformation body,” is manifested by a buddha in response
to the need to teach sentient beings, such as the historical buddha, Sākyamuni. See
also dharmakāya.
three poisons: The three basic afﬂictions from which all other afﬂictive states ultimately
derive: (1) greed, desire, or craving (Skt. rāga); (2) anger, ill-will, or hatred (dveṣa);
and (3) nescience, delusion, or folly (moha). See also afﬂictions; nescience.
three realms: Three realms of existence into which living beings transmigrate, consisting
of the realms of desire (kāmadhātu), form (rūpadhātu), and formlessness (ārūpyadhātu).
two vehicles: The vehicles of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, usually cast in a negative
light by Mahayanists as representative of the so-called Hinayana, in contradistinction
to the Mahayana ideal of the bodhisattva. Followers of the two vehicles are understood as those whose views of practice and enlightenment will lead them to individual
salvation, arhatship but not buddhahood. See also bodhisattva; buddhahood;
Hinayana; Mahayana; śrāvaka; pratyekabuddha.
Vinaya: The corpus of Buddhist monastic rules. Along with the scriptures (Sutra), and
philosophical treatises (śāstras, or Abhidharma), the Vinaya forms one of the three
major components of the Buddhist canon, the Tripiṭaka (“three baskets”).
Vairocana (“Luminous One”): A buddha who represents Buddhismʼs most profound
speculation on the emptiness and interpenetration of all elements in the universe
(Skt. dharmadhātu). Originally the name referred to the light of the sun but later
took on the connotation of the buddha as the fundamental principle of the universe.
The chief deity of the ﬁve buddhas depicted in the Vajradhātu and Garbhadhātu
Maṇḍalas of Tantric Buddhism. As the true buddha body, Vairocana is generally
recognized as the spiritual or essential body of truth (dharmakāya), manifesting as
all-pervasive light. He dwells quiescent in the formless realm (arūpyadhātu) and
is the essence of bodhi-wisdom and absolute purity. Also referred to in this text as
Rocana. See also dharmakāya; three realms.

85

Bibliography
Funayama, Tōru. “Bonmōkyō no shohon no ni keitō,” Toho gakuho Kyoto Daigaku
Jinbun kagaku kenkyūsho 80 (2010): 178–211.

—. “Bonmōkyō geken sengyo no sai kentō,” in Kunio Mugitani, ed., Sankyō kōshō ron
zokuhen, pp. 127–156. Kyoto: Kyōto Daigaku Jinbun Kagaku Kenkyūjo, 2011.
Gim Yeongmi. Silla bulgyo sasang sa yeon-gu. Seoul: Minjoksa, 1994.

Groner, Paul. “The Fang-wang ching and Monastic Discipline in Japanese Tendai: A
Study of Annen’s Futsū jubosatsukai koshaku,” in Robert E. Buswell, Jr., ed.,
Chinese Buddhist Apocrypha, pp. 251–290. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press,
1990.

—. “Tradition and Innovation: Eison’s Self-Ordinations and the Establishment of New
Orders of Buddhist Practitioners,” in William M. Bodiford, ed., Going Forth: Visions
of Buddhist Vinaya. Essays Presented in Honor of Professor Stanley Weinstein, pp.
210–235. Honolulu: University of Hawai`i Press, 2005.
Gwon Sangno. Joseon bulgyo yaksa. Seoul: Sinmungwan, 1917.

Hui, Seng. The Buddha Speaks the Brahmā Net Sutra: The Ten Major and Forty-eight
Minor Bodhisattva Precepts. Talmadge, CA: Buddhist Text Translation Society,
1981.
I Neunghwa. Joseon bulgyo tongsa. Seoul: Gyeonghui, 1918.

Jo Myeonggi. Silla bulgyo ui inyeom gwa yeoksa. Seoul: Sin Taeyangsa, 1962.

Muller, A. Charles. The Collected Works of Korean Buddhism, Volume XI: Exposition
of the Sutra of Brahmā’s Net. Seoul: Compilation Committee of Korean Buddhist
Thought, Jogye Order of Korean Buddhism, 2012.
Ono, Hōdō. Daijō kaikyō no kenkyū. Tokyo: Sankibō shorin, 1954.

Satō, Tatsugen. “Zen no kairitsu kan to gokai ni tsuite,” Indogaku bukkyōgaku kenkyū
9–1 (1957): 231–234.

Yamabe, Nobuyoshi. “Visionary Repentance and Visionary Ordination in the Brahmā
Net Sūtra,” in William M. Bodiford, ed., Going Forth: Visions of Buddhist Vinaya.
Essays Presented in Honor of Professor Stanley Weinstein, pp. 17–39. Honolulu:
University of Hawai‘i Press, 2005.

87

Bibliography
U Jeongsang and Gim Yeongtae. “Silla tong-ilgi hakseung ui jeosul iram, Taehyeon jo,”
Hanguk bulgyo sa. Seoul: Sinheung, 1968.

Yi Mang. Silla Taehyeon ui yusik sasang yeon-gu. Seoul: Dongjjok nara, 1989.

88

Index
A

Bhagavan, 76
See also Buddha
bhikṣu, xix, 43, 45, 47, 72, 73, 80n26
See also monk(s)
bhikṣuṇī, 43, 45, 47, 73, 80n26
See also nun(s)
bodhi, 4, 11, 75
-mind, 21
bodhicitta. See bodhi, -mind; enlightenment, aspiration/determination/
intention for, mind of
bodhisattva(s), xvii, 4–8, 12, 21, 25, 36,
38, 40–49, 50, 51–55, 61, 63, 65,
66, 68–74, 75, 76, 77n6, 78n7
beginner/newly initiated, 41, 53, 56, 57,
67
Dharma teacher/preceptor, 68
future, 43, 73
householder/lay, 45, 59
image(s), 57, 61, 65, 69
mind-ground(s), ten, xviii, 6
monk(s)/renunciant, 45, 53, 56, 58, 59,
65, 72
past, 43, 73, 75
path, 5, 58
practice(s), 4, 54
precepts, xviii, xx, 3, 4, 41–42, 43, 48,
54, 57, 69, 73, 74, 79n19
Bodhisattva Prātimokṣa, xviii
See also Brahmā’s Net Sutra; Prātimokṣa
Bodhisattva Vinaya Sutra, xviii, 55
See also Brahmā’s Net Sutra; vinaya(s)/
Vinaya

Abhidharma, 58
ācārya, 48, 79n23
accusations, precept against, 52
actions/deeds, speech, and thought, 30, 36
See also body, speech, and mind
administrative duties, precept against
improper fulﬁllment of, 58
aggregate(s), 16, 17, 20
of bodily form, 23
ﬁve, 8, 12
Ākāśagarbha, 36
alcohol, xx, 45
drinking, precept against, 48–49
selling, precept against, 45
animals, 43, 44, 45, 55, 59, 70, 71, 78n11
badgers, 62
captive, releasing, 55
cats, 62
cattle, 71
dogs, 62
horse(s), 37, 71
raising, precept against, 62
sheep, 71
six kinds of, 52
swine, 62, 71
auspicious sign/vision, 57, 69
austerities, 65

B

Beommanggyeong bosal gyebon sagi, xviii
Beommanggyeong gojeokgi, xviii

89

Index
bodhi tree(s), 6, 39, 40, 41, 42, 74
body, speech, and mind, 15, 29, 56
See also actions/deeds, speech, and
thought
brahmans, ﬁre-worshiping, 72
Brahmā’s Net Prātimokṣa, xviii
See also Brahmā’s Net Sutra; Prātimokṣa
Brahmā’s Net Sutra, xvii–xx, 3–4, 37,
79n19
“Bhadrakalpa Chapter,” 39
“Chapter on all the Approaches to the
Dharma,” 28
“Chapter on Arhats,” 34
“Chapter on Brahmadaṇda,” 67
“Chapter on Expiating Sins,” 55
“Chapter on Flower Radiance King
Buddha,” 75
“Chapter on Innumerable Dharma
Gates,” 31
“Chapter on Regulations and Precepts,”
61
“Chapter on Supernormal Abilities,” 31
“Chapter on the Contemplation of the
Twelve Limbs of Dependent Arising,” 31
“Chapter on the Course of the Sun and
Moon,” 28
“Chapter on the Dharma Access of the
Mind-ground,” 39
“Chapter on the Dharma Approach of
the Mental Stages,” 38
“Chapter on the Dharma Approach of
the Mind-ground,” 39
“Chapter on the Dharma Gate of the
Bodhisattva’s Stages of Practice,” xix
“Chapter on the Dharma Gate of the
Mind-ground,” 40
“Chapter on the Dharma Gate of the
Mind-ground of Vairocana Buddha,”
74

90

“Chapter on the Dharma of the Ten
Inexhaustible Precepts,” 74
“Chapter on the Eighty Thousand Rules
of Conduct,” 48
“Chapter on the Forty Dharmas,” 7
“Chapter on the Heaven of Radiant
Sound,” 36
“Chapter on the Heavenly Flower of
All Sentient Beings,” 25
“Chapter on the Markless Heavenly
King,” 74
“Chapter on the Mind-ground
Dharma,” 6
“Chapter on the Original Source of
Buddha-nature,” 5
“Chapter on the Tathāgata’s Hundred
Contemplations,” 8
“Chapter on the Ten Celestial Illuminations,” 13
“Chapter on the Ten Inexhaustible
Precepts Treasury,” 40
as “concluding chapter” of the Flower
Ornament Sutra, xix
ﬁrst fascicle, xviii, 3–36
second fascicle, xviii–xix, 37–76
See also Bodhisattva Prātimokṣa;
Bodhisattva Vinaya Sutra; Brahmā’s
Net Prātimokṣa; Prātimokṣa
Brahmā’s Net Sutra: The Mind-ground
Dharma Gate Taught by Vairocana
Buddha, Chapter Ten, in Two Fascicles, xix
See also Brahmā’s Net Sutra
buddha(s), 5–8, 13, 17, 20–22, 25, 27,
30–34, 36, 38–43, 48, 53, 57, 59,
62, 63, 68–70, 73–76, 77nn4, 6;
78n11, 80n27
activities/practices/works, 12, 34, 76
eighty minor and thirty-two major
marks, 34
future, 38, 41

Index
image(s), 57, 61, 65, 69, 72
as locus for reception of precepts, 57
land(s)/realm(s), 7, 21, 22, 25, 26, 27,
32, 33, 34, 35, 36
-mind, 74
past, 35, 38
precepts, xviii, 37
stupas, 66
transformation-body, 38
See also Seven Buddhas
Buddha, xxi, 5, 15, 20, 21, 22, 25, 26,
32–34, 36, 37, 40–44, 47, 48, 51,
52, 56, 58, 61, 63, 67, 74, 77n5
comportment/deportment, 21, 36
Dharma-body, 36, 79n17
eighteen distinctive abilities/characteristics/practices, 7, 22, 35, 77n6
family/lineage, 13, 22
lands, 21, 22
moral code/precepts/vinaya, 41, 42, 43,
63, 70, 71, 73, 76
roar, 7, 32
teachings, 20, 25, 38, 40, 41, 63
Way, 76
See also Śākyamuni; Tathāgata;
World-honored One
buddha-dharma, 14, 35, 46, 50, 70
See also Dharma
Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha. See Three
Treasures
Buddha Flower Sutra, 21
See also Flower Ornament Sutra
buddhahood, 20, 25, 35
buddha-nature, 22, 28, 34, 36, 40, 44, 47,
54, 58, 74, 75
See also Dharma-nature; tathāgatanature
Buddhism, 80n31
East Asian, xvii, 77n6
Indian, 77–78n7, 79n23
Mahayana, xvii

Theravāda and Nikāya, 80n26
See also Hinayana; Mahayana
Buddhist, xvii
believers, four groups of, 72
gathering, 67–68
canon/texts, xvii, 80n31
twelve divisions of, 25
community/sangha, xvii, xviii
disciples/friends/practitioners, xvii, 55,
63, 76
protocol, regarding sitting order, 60

C

Caodong Temple, 4
Caotang Temple, 3
Chang’an, 4
chanting, 65
China/Chinese, xviii, xix, xx, 78n16,
79n19, 80n30
compassion, 13, 25, 44, 46, 49, 52, 71
great, 34, 49, 71, 79n6
lack of, 54, 56
concentration, 6, 10, 11, 16, 32, 34, 74
fourth, 4
mindful, 27
See also dhyāna; meditation; mindfulness
conditioned, 8, 10, 12, 23, 24, 25, 32
See also unconditioned
contemplation(s), 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15,
19, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27
of dependent arising, 26
of emptiness, 19
of sky-ﬂowers, 28
See also meditation
craving, 24, 25, 78n7

D

Daehyeon, xviii, xxi, 77n2, 78n16, 79n18
danqi, 62, 80n30
See also games

91

Index
Daorong, 3, 4
Daoying, 3, 4
dependent arising, 26
twelve limbs of, 8, 22
destinies:
six, 13, 14, 16, 22, 23, 26, 28, 29, 30,
31, 33, 34, 55
three evil, 23, 47
See also rebirth
detachment, 6, 8, 9, 14, 78n13
deva(s), 39, 43
Devamāra, 73
dhāraṇī, 33, 36
dharma(s), 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 16, 17, 18,
20, 21, 22, 24, 25, 27, 28, 31, 33,
34, 35, 36, 43, 75
emptiness of, 14, 15, 17, 18, 19, 78n14
nonarising of, 6, 16
Dharma, 3, 8, 9, 14, 15, 18, 25, 26, 27, 28,
30, 31, 32, 33, 35, 43, 46, 48, 50, 53,
54, 55, 58, 68,71–72, 73, 74, 75,
78n7, 80n33
approach(es)/entrances/gate, 4, 22, 23,
27, 29, 34, 36, 38
body(ies), 5, 7, 25, 33, 35, 40, 58,
79n17
lecture(s), 50, 58, 72
master, 3, 4
preacher/teacher(s), 33, 43, 50, 52, 55,
56, 57, 68, 72
precepts/rules, 40, 42
realm(s), 18, 20
semblance, 37
speech/voices/words, 15, 26, 29, 36
teachings, 15, 28, 31, 32
true, 21
wheel of, 13, 32, 34, 36
See also Three Treasures
Dharmaguptaka school, xvii, xx, 79n19
See also Four-part Vinaya

92

Dharma King, 32
See also Buddha
Dharma-nature, 9, 12, 35
See also buddha-nature; tathāgatanature
dhūta. See austerities
dhyāna, 4, 77n5
See also concentration; meditation
divination, 60
See also fortune-telling, precepts
against
divine eye, 28, 29
doubt(s), 5, 12

E

East, 4, 39
East Asia(n), xviii, xix
Buddhism, xvii, 77n6, 80n31
schools, xviii, xx
eight difﬁcult circumstances/difﬁculties,
12, 31, 49, 67, 74, 78n11, 80n28
eighteen elements, 8
eighteen noble ones, 31, 32
eight ﬁelds of merit, 51, 59
eight inverted views/eight inversions, 9,
10, 11, 12, 78n9
See also view(s), false/mistaken/wrong
eight kinds of spiritual beings, 43
emptiness, 9, 11, 13–19, 21, 24, 26, 32–33,
35, 60
contemplation/samādhi of, 8, 19
of dharmas, 14, 15, 16, 17, 19, 27,
78n14
emptied/emptying/emptiness of, 9, 10,
14, 17, 18, 33, 35
of nonarising, 9, 20
one/single, 19, 20
path of, 11, 12, 18
truth of, 18
two kinds of, 21, 24
wisdom of, 10, 20, 22, 23, 32

Index
emptiness, wishlessness, and signlessness,
11
enlightenment, 30, 34, 36, 41, 65, 75
aspiration/determination/intention for,
mind of, 13, 40, 42, 47, 53, 61, 62, 71
peerless/perfect, 5, 41, 42
place/site of, 40, 41
of Śākyamuni/Vairocana, 5, 32, 40, 42
thirty-seven factors of, 22
eunuch(s), 43, 66, 68
evil(s), 14, 26, 28, 30, 45, 51, 54, 65, 67,
72, 74
intent/intention(s), 52, 60
lands/world, 29, 61
non-Buddhists, 70, 73
people/person(s), 47, 53, 61, 70
ten, 12, 25
three grades of, 14
See also destinies, three evil; teaching(s), evil

F

faith, 3, 6, 9, 17, 27, 47, 68, 70, 72, 74,
75, 78n13
correct/true, 11, 13, 14
in the Great Vehicle, 46, 62
markless, as point of departure for all
practices, 17
and moral discipline, 42
See also seven holy assets
faithful donors, 63–64
falconry, as improper livelihood, precept
against, 60
Fanwang jing. See Brahmā’s Net Sutra
Fanwangjing pusa jieben shu, xviii, xix
father(s) and mother(s), 32, 35, 42, 47,
51, 55, 59
killing, 51, 68, 80n27
See also parents; relations/relatives
fault-ﬁnding, precept against, 45–46

Fazang, xviii, xix, 79n20, 80nn32, 34
ﬁlial/ﬁlial piety, xix, 52, 60, 63, 72
ﬁre(s), 29, 55, 63, 66, 67
setting, precept against, 52–53
ﬁve pungent roots, precept against eating,
49
Flower Ornament Sutra, xix
See also Buddha Flower Sutra
Flower Radiance King Great Wisdom
Illumination, 7
fortune-telling, precepts against, 60, 62
See also divination
four continents, 6
See also Jambudvīpa(s)
four elements, 25
four groups of Buddhist believers/disciples/followers, 72
See also laymen and laywomen;
monk(s); nun(s)
four modes of deportment, 9
Four Noble Truths, 35
Four-part Vinaya, xvii, xx, 79n19
See also vinaya(s)/Vinaya
four seas, 4, 25

G

gambling, as idleness, precept against, 62
games, 62
See also danqi
Ganges River(s), 38
Gautama, 79n18
See also Śākyamuni; Siddhārtha
giving, 6, 15, 61
See also ten nourishing mental
states/ten stages of nurturance
government ofﬁcial(s), 48, 54, 57, 67, 72
Great Vehicle, 17, 19, 20, 57
faith in, 46, 62
scriptures/sutras and vinayas, 50, 53,
58, 63, 66, 67, 69, 71
See also Mahayana

93

Index

H

Hanguk bulgyo jeonseo (Collected Works
of Korean Buddhism), 80n34
harmony, living in, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60
heaven(s):
Brahmā, 40
eighteen, 42, 43, 68
four, 22, 34
long-life, 78n11
of Mahêśvara, 40
Nirmāṇarati, 39
Paranirmitavaśavartin, 39
six, of the desire realm, 42, 43, 68
fourth, 39
Yama, 39
hell, 73, 78n11
of uninterrupted suffering, 37
Hinayana, 78n9
canon/texts, xx, 3
Prātimokṣa/precepts/vinaya, xvii, xix,
xx, xxi, 79n19
See also Buddhism, Theravāda and
Nikāya; vehicle(s), lesser
Huayan jing. See Flower Ornament Sutra

I

idleness, precept against, 62
ill/illness, 51, 59, 66, 78–79n16
illumination, 5, 7, 11, 14, 17, 18–19, 21,
26, 28, 32, 33
illusion/illusory, 11, 12, 13, 20
ill-will, 12, 25, 53, 78n7
image(s) of bodhisattva(s)/buddha(s), 57,
61, 65, 72
confession/repentance/taking precepts
and vows before, 56, 57, 65, 69
selling, precept against, 61
impermanence, 26, 78n9
Indra, 39, 40

94

J

Jambudvīpa(s), 6, 39, 40
Japan, xix

K

Kalpanā maṇḍitikā, 80n31
Kapilavastu, 3, 39
karma, 17, 18, 20, 24, 28, 77n5
karmic:
activities, three, 55–56
ﬂux, 23, 24
formation, 12, 13
fruit/effects/retribution, 13, 18, 24
killing, 60, 78n8, 79n20
abstaining from, 13
animals, 55
an arhat, 68, 80n27
father(s) or mother(s), 51, 68, 80n27
precept against, 44, 80n25
teacher(s), 68, 80n27
kindness, 6, 9, 13, 23, 39
king(s), 3, 42, 43, 48, 52, 54, 56, 57, 58,
65, 66, 67, 68, 70, 72, 73
Brahmā/of Brahmā Heaven, 4, 40
deva, 39
wheel-turning, 48
Korea, xix
See also Silla
Kumārajīva, xix, 3, 4

L

lay believers/practitioners, xvii, 67,
80nn25, 26
See also bodhisattva(s), householder/lay;
laymen and laywomen; laypeople
laymen and laywomen, 37, 74
laypeople, xvii, xx, xxi, 72, 79–80n24
liberation, 9, 18, 24, 30, 31, 35, 36, 77n6,
79n19
entrances, 33

Index
knowledge of, 29, 30
stage of, 21, 77n5
livelihood, improper, precept against, 60
lotus(es), 5, 36, 38, 39
ﬂower/store platform, 6, 41
-radiance, 7, 39
thrones, 27
See also world(s), lotus ﬂower platform
store/treasury
lust/lustful behavior, 13, 60, 67
precept against, 44, 80n25
lying, intentional, precept against, xx, 45

M

magical spells, 44
Mahayana, xvii, xviii, xix, 4, 78n9
moral code/Prātimokṣa/vinaya, xx
precepts, xviii, xix, xx–xxi
stages, xviii
texts, 3
See also Great Vehicle
Mahayana Yoga of the Adamantine
Ocean, Mañjuśrī with a Thousand
Arms and Thousand Bowls: Great
King of Tantras, 78n7
Mahêśvara, 4, 39, 40, 79
māra(s), 21, 33, 34, 35
mark(s), 7, 8, 9, 13, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20,
21, 34, 35, 57, 75
See also buddha(s), eighty minor and
thirty-two major marks
markless/marklessness, 7, 10, 11, 12, 14,
17, 20, 21
Māyā, 39
meat, eating, precept against, 49
meditation(s), 58, 65, 66, 77n6
of calmness and insight, 10
mistaken, 20
retreat(s), 59, 66
ten/ten limbs of, 16, 22, 39, 69
See also concentration; contemplation; dhyāna; samādhi

Middle Way, 10, 11, 18, 19, 21, 22, 26,
28, 33
military affairs/battles/matters, xvii, 52, 62
mindfulness, 7, 18, 19, 31, 77n6
no loss of, 31
six kinds of, 18
three bases of, 77–78n6
See also concentration, mindful
mind-ground(s), 3, 4, 5, 6, 38, 40, 75,
78n15
monastic(s), xvii, 73
dwellings/quarters, 52, 58, 66
requisites, 65
robes, 65, 68
dyeing of, precept regarding, 68
rules and regulations, xvii
monk(s), xx, xxi, 4, 37, 42, 48, 51, 52,
54, 58–63, 65–68, 72, 74, 79n23,
80nn27, 31
bodhisattva, 58, 59, 65, 72
code of behavior/precepts for, xvii, xx,
79n19, 80n25
personal invitations to/from, precepts
against, 59–60
renunciant, xvii, 72
See also bhikṣu
moral/morality, xix, 6, 8–9, 77n5
See also precept(s)
moral code/discipline, 41, 42, 51, 67, 79
of the Buddha/Seven Buddhas, 63, 70,
72, 74
of the Great Vehicle/Mahayana, xx, 50,
53
using to gather believers, 67–68
See also Prātimokṣa; precept(s);
vinaya(s)/Vinaya
music, listening to, 64
precept against, 62, 79–80n24
Mysterious Penetration Flower Radiance
King, 5

95

Index

N

Nirvana Sutra, xix
nominal, 9, 10, 12, 17, 18
nonarising, 9, 11, 16, 17, 19
of dharmas, 6, 16
emptiness of, 9, 20
nonattachment, 8, 13, 14, 23
non-Buddhist(s), 20, 35, 45, 47, 51, 53,
58, 60, 61, 62, 66, 70, 73
mistaken beliefs/theories/views of, 11,
17, 53, 78n9
nonproduction, 9, 11, 14
nonretrogression, 7, 19, 77n6
nun(s), xvii, 61, 66, 67, 68, 74
precepts for, xx, 79n19, 80n25
See also bhikṣuṇī

O

offering(s), 27, 48, 50, 51, 53, 59, 63, 69,
71, 72, 76
acceptance of, precepts against, 59, 63,
70
burning of body, arm, or ﬁngers as, 53
One Vehicle, 20
See also vehicle(s)

P

parents, 52, 61, 63, 67, 68, 72, 73, 78n12
murder/slaughter of, 55, 56
See also father(s) and mother(s);
relations/relatives
parsimony, precepts against, 46, 53
patience, 6, 7, 9
See also ten departures/ten stages of
departure toward the destination
phrenology. See fortune-telling, precepts
against
pity, 6, 13–14, 23, 75
See also ten nourishing mental states/
ten stages of nurturance

96

political inﬂuence/intrigues/turmoil, xvii,
54, 65
poṣadha, 65
See also precept(s), confession;
upoṣatha
Prātimokṣa, xviii, 37, 41, 42, 43, 74,
79n19
“Hinayana” and “Mahayana,” 79n19
ten/ten-part, 40, 43–48
See also moral code/discipline; precept(s); vinaya(s)/Vinaya
pratyekabuddhas, 77n6
See also vehicle(s), two
precept(s), xviii, xx–xxi, 8, 26, 37–38,
40, 41–43, 50–65, 66–74, 75, 76,
78n7, 79n19, 80nn31, 34
bodhisattva, xviii, xx, 3, 4, 37, 41–42,
43, 48, 54, 57, 69, 73, 74, 79n19
confession, 65, 79n19
eight, 49, 79n24
ﬁve, 49, 80nn25, 26
forty-eight minor, xviii, xx, xxi, 41,
48–74
Great Vehicle/Mahayana, xvii, xviiii,
xix, xx, xxi, 42, 70
Hinayana, xix, xx, xxi
ten, xviii, xx, xxi, 3, 8–9, 41, 44–47,
49, 65, 69, 71, 73, 78n8, 79nn19,
24; 80n26
See also moral/morality; moral code/
discipline; Prātimokṣa; vinaya(s)/
Vinaya
preceptor(s), xxi, 42, 54, 57, 59, 67, 68,
69, 79n23
Pure Land, 22, 29
Pusajie yishu, xviii, xix
Pusa yingluo benye jing, xviii

Q

Qin dynasty, 3, 4
quiescence/quiescent, 10, 12

Index

R

realm(s), 3, 7, 12, 29, 35
buddha/of the Buddha, 7, 22, 25, 27,
33, 34, 35, 36
Dharma, 18, 20
desire, six heavens of, 42, 43
human/of sentient beings/worldlings,
27, 35, 80n25
māra, 34
See also three realms
rebirth(s), 13, 28, 30, 55, 74, 75, 80n25
See also destinies
relations/relatives, 45, 53, 68
six kinds of, 52, 78n12, 79n22
See also father(s) and mother(s);
parents; siblings
relinquishment, 24–25
repentance, xxi, 38, 49, 57
See also precept(s), confession
Rocana, 5, 6, 7, 38, 79n17
See also Vairocana

S

Saichō, xix
Śākya(s), 6, 38, 39
Śākyamuni, 4–5, 31, 39–40, 41, 42, 59,
74, 80n33
See also Buddha; Gautama; Siddhārtha
samādhi(s), 10, 21, 25, 30, 31, 32, 34,
77n5
of all buddha essences, 33
approach/entrances, 33, 36
beneﬁcent, 15
Buddha’s roar, 32
of emptiness/that understands the
emptiness of essences, 8, 13
of essential caring speech, 15
essential nature space lotus-radiance/
marvelous ﬂower/of great brilliant
ﬂower radiance/radiant ﬂower, 5,
25, 27, 39

hundred, 16, 30
markless, of immeasurable activity
and immeasurable mind, 10
of the path of teaching and conversion,
23
peak/summit, 12, 21, 27
of perfect cessation of thought, 12
of the sameness of dharmas, 16
of space-penetrating illumination, 5
of the stage of the king of the Dharma,
32
See also meditation
śamatha. See meditation, of calmness
and insight
sangha, xviii, xx, 49, 50, 72
disrupting, 58, 68, 80n27
maintaining, precepts regarding, 58–60
self, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16, 17, 18,
19, 26, 28, 75
emptiness of, 78n14
view(s) of, 8, 12, 78n9
selﬂessness, 13
self-nature(s), 14, 40
Sengzhao, 3
sensation(s), 12, 13, 17, 23, 26, 64
three, 26
sense ﬁelds, twelve, 8, 17
Seven Buddhas, 60, 70, 73, 74
seven heinous acts, 49, 52, 56, 67, 68, 69,
80n27
seven holy assets, 15, 78n13
seven precious metals, 48, 56, 58, 71
siblings, 35, 52, 55, 56, 67, 78n12
See also relations/relatives
Siddhārtha, 40
See also Buddha; Gautama; Śākyamuni
Silla, xx
See also Korea
skandha. See aggregate(s)
skillful means, 10, 17, 27, 28, 29, 44, 76
path of, 23, 27

97

Index
sorcery. See livelihood, improper, precept
against
speech, 31
caring/good/right, 6, 15, 45
false/wrong, 45, 50n25
See also actions/deeds, speech, and
thought; body, speech, and mind
śrāvakas, 53, 77n6
See also vehicle(s), two
stealing, xx, 8, 13, 44, 60, 78nn7, 8
precept against, xx, 44, 80n25
stupas, 66, 72
Śuddhodana, 40
suffering, 9, 13, 14, 16, 20, 23–24, 26,
29, 37, 78n16
awareness/consciousness of, 13, 23–24,
26
compounded, 23, 24
three kinds of, 23, 78–79n16
truth of, 23, 24, 26
Sui dynasty, xvii
supernatural/supernomal cognition/
power(s), 5, 10, 26, 31, 32, 33
ten, 22, 29, 30
Sutra for Humane Kings, xix
Sutra of Māra’s Conversion, 39

T

Tang dynasty, xx
tathāgata/Tathāgata, 4, 34, 35
See also Buddha
tathāgata-nature, 35
See also Dharma-nature; buddha-nature
teaching(s), 4, 8, 18, 20, 22, 23, 36, 38,
39, 40, 45, 53, 54, 63, 72, 74, 75, 76
buddhas/Buddha’s/Buddhist, 20, 22,
25, 32, 38, 40, 41, 51, 63, 78n11
Dharma, 15, 28, 31, 32
evil, 13
ten adamantine mental states/ten admantine
stages, 6–7, 17–31, 42, 47, 53, 63

98

ten departures/ten stages of departure
toward the destination, xviii, 6, 7,
8–13, 31, 42, 47, 53, 63
ten grounds, xviii, 5, 7, 8, 21–36, 39, 42,
47
ten nourishing mental states/ten stages of
nurturance, xviii, 6, 7, 13–17, 47, 53,
63
ten unwholesome actions/activities, 13, 22
ten wholesome precepts, 8, 12, 78n7
three divisions of time, 14, 29, 30, 38
three realms, 10, 17, 19, 20, 24, 31, 32
Three Treasures, 9, 11, 38, 42, 47, 58, 63,
70, 71
denigration/despoiling of, 47, 54, 60, 72
Tiantai, xix
Tiantai pusajie shu, xviii
thusness, 15, 16, 20
treachery, precept against, 54
truth(s), 9, 18
cardinal, 15, 33, 56, 69
one/single, 10, 11, 20, 24, 25, 26
of suffering, 23, 24
See also Four Noble Truths; two truths
two truths, 11, 18, 20, 22, 31, 35
conventional, 9, 17, 18, 27
ultimate, 17, 18, 22, 33

U

Uijeok, 80n34
unconditioned, 17, 32, 35
See also conditioned
unwholesome, 14, 28, 29, 46
upoṣatha, 79n19
See also poṣadha; precept(s), confession

V

Vairocana, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 13, 17, 21, 38,
39, 40, 41, 74, 79n17
See also Rocana

Index
vehicle(s), 20, 22, 28
correct/true, 61, 62
lesser, 50
two, 45, 51, 53, 58, 62
See also Great Vehicle; Hinayana;
Mahayana; One Vehicle
view(s), 10, 11, 12, 14, 16, 17, 19, 26, 27,
34, 36, 48, 50, 51, 58
buddha, 34
correct/right, 9, 24, 45, 58
false/mistaken/wrong, 8, 11, 14, 16,
17, 45, 47, 58, 70, 78nn7, 8
of self, 8, 10, 12, 78n9
sixty-two, 12
See also eight inverted views/eight
inversions
vinaya(s)/Vinaya, xvii–xx, 46, 50, 54, 56,
57, 58, 61, 63, 65, 67, 69, 71, 79n19
Great Vehicle/Mahayana, xix, xx, 53,
63, 66, 67, 69, 71
Hinayana/of the two vehicles, xvii, xx,
53
See also Bodhisattva Vinaya Sutra;
Four-part Vinaya; Prātimokṣa
vipaśyanā. See meditation, of calmness
and insight
vision, xxi, 3, 28, 57, 75, 77n6
of buddha(s)/Buddha, xxi, 55, 57, 74
vows, 6, 11, 57, 61, 63–65, 74
great, 22, 30
ten, 30, 39, 63

wholesome/wholesomeness, 10, 14, 28,
29, 37, 46, 52
faith, 46, 62
root(s), 9, 15, 23, 24, 46
wisdom, 4, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16,
18, 20–21, 23–24, 27, 28, 29, 31, 34,
35, 45, 75, 77–78n6, 78n13
of emptiness, 10, 20, 21, 22, 23, 32–33
of equality, 21
essence of/of the essence/of the essential nature, 7, 9, 10, 16, 23–24, 28
inexplicable observing, 10
of no-self, 16
path of/vehicle, 15, 20, 21
perfection of, 20
of thusness, 20
Wonhyo, xviii
world(s), 4, 5–6, 15, 21, 25, 32, 36, 37,
39, 40, 56, 61, 68, 70, 74, 75
lotus ﬂower platform store/treasury,
4–5, 7, 38, 39, 74
sahā, 40
World-honored One, 7, 36, 42
See also Buddha
worldlings, 27, 40
worldly, 10, 19, 78n11
world-oceans, ten, 39
world-renunciant, 79n18

Way, 3, 12, 13, 14, 16, 19, 21, 24, 27, 32,
33, 66, 76
weapons, amassing, precept against, 51

zeal, 6, 9
See also ten departures/ten stages of
departure toward the destination
Zhiyi, xviii, xix

W

Y

Yao Xing, 3

Z

99

BDK English Tripiṭaka
(First Series)

Title

Abbreviations
Ch.: Chinese
Skt.: Sanskrit
Jp.: Japanese
Eng.: Published title

Ch. Chang ahan jing (長阿含經)
Skt. Dīrghāgama
Eng. The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses
(Volume I, 2015)
The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses
(Volume II, 2017)

Taishō No.

Ch. Zhong ahan jing (中阿含經)
Skt. Madhyamāgama
Eng. The Madhyama Āgama (Middle-length Discourses)
(Volume I, 2013)

1

26

Ch. Dasheng bensheng xindi guan jing (大乘本生心地觀經)

159

Ch. Zabao zang jing (雜寶藏經)
Eng. The Storehouse of Sundry Valuables (1994)

203

Ch. Xiaopin banruo boluomi jing (小品般若波羅蜜經)
Skt. Aṣṭasāhasrikā-prajñāpāramitā-sūtra

227

Ch. Fo suoxing zan (佛所行讃)
Skt. Buddhacarita
Eng. Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts (2009)

Ch. Faju piyu jing (法句譬喩經)
Eng. The Scriptural Text: Verses of the Doctrine, with Parables (1999)

101

192

211

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Jingang banruo boluomi jing (金剛般若波羅蜜經)
Skt. Vajracchedikā-prajñāpāramitā-sūtra

Taishō No.

235

Ch. Daluo jingang bukong zhenshi sanmoye jing
(大樂金剛不空眞實三麼耶經)
Skt. Adhyardhaśatikā-prajñāpāramitā-sutra
Eng. The Sutra of the Vow of Fulﬁlling the Great Perpetual
Enjoyment and Beneﬁting All Sentient Beings Without
Exception (in Esoteric Texts, 2015)

243

Ch. Banruo boluomiduo xin jing (般若波羅蜜多心經)
Skt. Prajñāpāramitāhṛdaya-sutra

251

Ch. Wuliangyi jing (無量義經)
Eng. The Inﬁnite Meanings Sutra (in Tiantai Lotus Texts, 2013)

276

Ch. Dafangguang fo huayan jing (大方廣佛華嚴經)
Skt. Avataṃsaka-sutra

279

Ch. Renwang banruo boluomi jing (仁王般若波羅蜜經)
Skt. *Kāruṇikārājā-prajñāpāramitā-sutra

245

Ch. Miaofa lianhua jing (妙法蓮華經)
Skt. Saddharmapuṇḍarīka-sutra
Eng. The Lotus Sutra (Revised Second Edition, 2007)

262

Ch. Guan Puxian pusa xingfa jing (觀普賢菩薩行法經)
Eng. The Sutra Expounded by the Buddha on Practice of the Way
through Contemplation of the Bodhisattva All-embracing
Goodness (in Tiantai Lotus Texts, 2013)

277

Ch. Shengman shizihou yisheng defang bianfang guang jing
(勝鬘師子吼一乘大方便方廣經)
Skt. Śrīmālādevīsiṃhanāda-sutra
Eng. The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of the Lion’s Roar (2004)

353

Ch. Guan wuliangshou fo jing (觀無量壽佛經)
Skt. *Amitāyurdhyāna-sutra
Eng. The Sutra on Contemplation of Amitāyus
(in The Three Pure Land Sutras, Revised Second Edition, 2003)

365

Ch. Wuliangshou jing (無量壽經)
Skt. Sukhāvatīvyūha
Eng. The Larger Sutra on Amitāyus (in The Three Pure Land Sutras,
Revised Second Edition, 2003)

102

360

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Taishō No.

Ch. Amituo jing (阿彌陀經)
Skt. Sukhāvatīvyūha
Eng. The Smaller Sutra on Amitāyus (in The Three Pure Land Sutras,
Revised Second Edition, 2003)

366

Ch. Fochuibo niepan lüeshuo jiaojie jing (佛垂般涅槃略説教誡經)
Eng. The Bequeathed Teaching Sutra (in Apocryphal Scriptures, 2005)

389

Ch. Banzhou sanmei jing (般舟三昧經)
Skt. Pratyutpanna-buddhasammukhāvasthita-samādhi-sutra
Eng. The Pratyutpanna Samādhi Sutra (1998)

418

Ch. Da banniepan jing (大般涅槃經)
Skt. Mahāparinirvana-sutra
Eng. The Nirvana Sutra (Volume I, 2013)

374

Ch. Dizang pusa benyuan jing (地藏菩薩本願經)
Skt. *Kṣitigarbhapraṇidhāna-sutra

412

Ch. Yaoshi liuli guang rulai benyuan gongde jing
(藥師琉璃光如來本願功徳經)
Skt. Bhaiṣajyaguru-vaiḍūrya-prabhāsa-pūrvapraṇidhāna-viśeṣavistara

450

Ch. Wenshushili wen jing (文殊師利問經)
Skt. *Mañjuśrīparipṛcchā
Eng. The Sutra of Mañjuśrī’s Questions (2016)

468

Ch. Mile xiasheng chengfo jing (彌勒下生成佛經)
Skt. *Maitreyavyākaraṇa
Eng. The Sutra that Expounds the Descent of Maitreya Buddha
and His Enlightenment (2016)

454

Ch. Weimojie suoshuo jing (維摩詰所説經)
Skt. Vimalakīrtinirdeśa-sutra
Eng. The Vimalakīrti Sutra (2004)

475

Ch. Yueshangnü jing (月上女經)
Skt. Candrottarādārikā-paripṛcchā

480

Ch. Damoduoluo chan jing (達磨多羅禪經)

618

Ch. Zuochan sanmei jing (坐禪三昧經)
Eng. The Sutra on the Concentration of Sitting Meditation (2009)

614

Ch. Yuedeng sanmei jing (月燈三昧經)
Skt. Samādhirāja-candrapradīpa-sutra

639

103

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Shoulengyan sanmei jing (首楞嚴三昧經)
Skt. Śūraṅgamasamādhi-sutra
Eng. The Śūraṅgama Samādhi Sutra (1998)

Taishō No.

642

Ch. Jinguang ming zuishengwang jing (金光明最勝王經)
Skt. Suvarṇaprabhāsa-sutra

665

Ch. Jie shenmi jing (解深密經)
Skt. Saṃdhinirmocana-sutra
Eng. The Scripture on the Explication of Underlying Meaning (2000)

676

Ch. Sishierzhang jing (四十二章經)
Eng. The Sutra of Forty-two Sections (in Apocryphal Scriptures, 2005)

784

Ch. Dasheng rulengqie jing (大乘入楞伽經)
Skt. Laṅkāvatāra-sutra

672

Ch. Yulanpen jing (盂蘭盆經)
Skt. *Ullambana-sutra
Eng. The Ullambana Sutra (in Apocryphal Scriptures, 2005)

685

Ch. Dafangguang yuanjue xiuduoluo liaoyi jing
(大方廣圓覺修多羅了義經)
Eng. The Sutra of Perfect Enlightenment
(in Apocryphal Scriptures, 2005)

842

Ch. Da Biluzhena chengfo shenbian jiachi jing
848
(大毘盧遮那成佛神變加持經)
Skt. Mahāvairocanābhisambodhi-vikurvitādhiṣṭhāna-vaipulyasūtrendrarājanāma-dharmaparyāya
Eng. The Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi Sutra (2005)

Ch. Jinggangding yiqie rulai zhenshi she dasheng xianzheng dajiao
865
wang jing (金剛頂一切如來眞實攝大乘現證大教王經)
Skt. Sarvatathāgata-tattvasaṃgraha-mahāyānā-bhisamaya-mahākalparāja
Eng. The Adamantine Pinnacle Sutra (in Two Esoteric Sutras, 2001)

Ch. Suxidi jieluo jing (蘇悉地羯囉經)
Skt. Susiddhikara-mahātantra-sādhanopāyika-paṭala
Eng. The Susiddhikara Sutra (in Two Esoteric Sutras, 2001)
Ch. Modengqie jing (摩登伽經)
Skt. *Mātaṅgī-sutra
Eng. The Mātaṅga Sutra (in Esoteric Texts, 2015)

104

893

1300

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Mohe sengqi lü (摩訶僧祇律)
Skt. *Mahāsāṃghika-vinaya

Taishō No.
1425

Ch. Sifen lü (四分律)
Skt. *Dharmaguptaka-vinaya

1428

Ch. Fanwang jing (梵網經)
Skt. *Brahmajāla-sutra
Eng. The Brahmā’s Net Sutra (2017)

1484

Ch. Shanjianlü piposha (善見律毘婆沙)
Pāli Samantapāsādikā

1462

Ch. Youposaijie jing (優婆塞戒經)
Skt. Upāsakaśīla-sutra
Eng. The Sutra on Upāsaka Precepts (1994)

1488

Ch. Shizha biposha lun (十住毘婆沙論)
Skt. *Daśabhūmika-vibhāṣā

1521

Ch. Apidamojushe lun (阿毘達磨倶舍論)
Skt. Abhidharmakośa-bhāṣya

1558

Ch. Miaofa lianhua jing youbotishe (妙法蓮華經憂波提舍)
1519
Skt. Saddharmapuṇḍarīka-upadeśa
Eng. The Commentary on the Lotus Sutra (in Tiantai Lotus Texts, 2013)
Ch. Fodijing lun (佛地經論)
Skt. *Buddhabhūmisutra-śāstra
Eng. The Interpretation of the Buddha Land (2002)

1530

Ch. Zhonglun (中論)
Skt. Madhyamaka-śāstra

1564

Ch. Cheng weishi lun (成唯識論)
Eng. Demonstration of Consciousness Only
(in Three Texts on Consciousness Only, 1999)

1585

Ch. Yüqie shidilun (瑜伽師地論)
Skt. Yogācārabhūmi-śāstra

1579

Ch. Weishi sanshilun song (唯識三十論頌)
Skt. Triṃśikā
Eng. The Thirty Verses on Consciousness Only
(in Three Texts on Consciousness Only, 1999)

1586

105

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Weishi ershi lun (唯識二十論)
Skt. Viṃśatikā
Eng. The Treatise in Twenty Verses on Consciousness Only
(in Three Texts on Consciousness Only, 1999)

Taishō No.

1590

Ch. She dasheng lun (攝大乘論)
1593
Skt. Mahāyānasaṃgraha
Eng. The Summary of the Great Vehicle (Revised Second Edition, 2003)
Ch. Bian zhongbian lun (辯中邊論)
Skt. Madhyāntavibhāga

1600

Ch. Dasheng chengye lun (大乘成業論)
Skt. Karmasiddhiprakaraṇa

1609

Ch. Yinming ruzheng li lun (因明入正理論)
Skt. Nyāyapraveśa

1630

Ch. Jingangzhen lun (金剛針論)
Skt. Vajrasūcī

1642

Ch. Dasheng zhuangyanjing lun (大乘莊嚴經論)
Skt. Mahāyānasūtrālaṃkāra

1604

Ch. Jiujing yisheng baoxing lun (究竟一乘寳性論)
Skt. Ratnagotravibhāga-mahāyānottaratantra-śāstra

1611

Ch. Dasheng ji pusa xue lun (大乘集菩薩學論)
Skt. Śikṣāsamuccaya

1636

Ch. Zhang suozhi lun (彰所知論)
Eng. The Treatise on the Elucidation of the Knowable (2004)

1645

Ch. Jingangding yuqie zhongfa anouduoluo sanmiao sanputi xin lun
(金剛頂瑜伽中發阿耨多羅三藐三菩提心論)
Eng. The Bodhicitta Śāstra (in Esoteric Texts, 2015)

1665

Ch. Shimoheyan lun (釋摩訶衍論)

1668

Ch. Putixing jing (菩提行經)
Skt. Bodhicaryāvatāra

Ch. Dasheng qixin lun (大乘起信論)
Skt. *Mahāyānaśraddhotpāda-śāstra
Eng. The Awakening of Faith (2005)

106

1662

1666

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Naxian biqiu jing (那先比丘經)
Pāli Milindapañhā

Taishō No.
1670

Ch. Banruo boluomiduo xin jing yuzan (般若波羅蜜多心經幽賛)
Eng. A Comprehensive Commentary on the Heart Sutra
(Prajñāpāramitā-hṛdaya-sutra) (2001)

1710

Ch. Guan wuliangshou fo jing shu (觀無量壽佛經疏)

1753

Ch. Miaofalianhua jing xuanyi (妙法蓮華經玄義)

1716

Ch. Sanlun xuanyi (三論玄義)

1852

Ch. Zhao lun (肇論)

1858

Ch. Dasheng xuan lun (大乘玄論)
Ch. Huayan yisheng jiaoyi fenqi zhang (華嚴一乘教義分齊章)

1853

1866

Ch. Yuanren lun (原人論)

1886

Ch. Xiuxi zhiguan zuochan fayao (修習止觀坐禪法要)

1915

Ch. Guoqing bai lu (國清百録)

1934

Ch. Foguo Yuanwu chanshi biyan lu (佛果圜悟禪師碧巖録)
Eng. The Blue Cliff Record (1998)

2003

Ch. Liuzu dashi fabao tan jing (六祖大師法寶壇經)
Eng. The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch (2000)

2008

Ch. Mohe zhiguan (摩訶止觀)

Ch. Tiantai sijiao yi (天台四教儀)
Eng. A Guide to the Tiantai Fourfold Teachings
(in Tiantai Lotus Texts, 2013)

Ch. Zhenzhou Linji Huizhao chanshi wulu (鎭州臨濟慧照禪師語録)
Eng. The Recorded Sayings of Linji (in Three Chan Classics, 1999)

Ch. Wumen guan (無門關)
Eng. Wumen’s Gate (in Three Chan Classics, 1999)

Ch. Xinxin ming (信心銘)
Eng. The Faith-Mind Maxim (in Three Chan Classics, 1999)

Ch. Huangboshan Duanji chanshi chuanxin fayao
(黄檗山斷際禪師傳心法要)
Eng. Essentials of the Transmission of Mind (in Zen Texts, 2005)

1911

1931

1985

2005

2010
2012A

107

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Yongjia Zhengdao ge (永嘉證道歌)

Taishō No.
2014

Ch. Chixiu Baizhang qinggui (勅修百丈清規)
Eng. The Baizhang Zen Monastic Regulations (2007)

2025

Ch. Ayuwang jing (阿育王經)
Skt. Aśokāvadāna
Eng. The Biographical Scripture of King Aśoka (1993)

2043

Ch. Yibuzonglun lun (異部宗輪論)
Skt. Samayabhedoparacanacakra
Eng. The Cycle of the Formation of the Schismatic Doctrines (2004)

2031

Ch. Maming pusa zhuan (馬鳴菩薩傳)
Eng. The Life of Aśvaghoṣa Bodhisattva
(in Lives of Great Monks and Nuns, 2002)

2046

Ch. Longshu pusa zhuan (龍樹菩薩傳)
Eng. The Life of Nāgārjuna Bodhisattva
(in Lives of Great Monks and Nuns, 2002)

2047

Ch. Posoupandou fashi zhuan (婆藪槃豆法師傳)
Eng. Biography of Dharma Master Vasubandhu
(in Lives of Great Monks and Nuns, 2002)

2049

Ch. Gaoseng zhuan (高僧傳)

2059

Ch. Datang Daciensi Zanzang fashi zhuan (大唐大慈恩寺三藏法師傳) 2053
Eng. A Biography of the Tripiṭaka Master of the Great Ci’en
Monastery of the Great Tang Dynasty (1995)

Ch. Biqiuni zhuan (比丘尼傳)
Eng. Biographies of Buddhist Nuns
(in Lives of Great Monks and Nuns, 2002)

2063

Ch. Datang xiyu ji (大唐西域記)
Eng. The Great Tang Dynasty Record of the Western Regions (1996)

2087

Ch. Gaoseng Faxian zhuan (高僧法顯傳)
Eng. The Journey of the Eminent Monk Faxian
(in Lives of Great Monks and Nuns, 2002)

Ch. Youfangjichao: Tangdaheshangdongzheng zhuan
(遊方記抄: 唐大和上東征傳)

108

2085

2089-(7)

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Hongming ji (弘明集)
Eng. The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation
of Buddhism (Volume I, 2015)
The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation
of Buddhism (Volume II, 2017)

Taishō No.

Ch. Fayuan zhulin (法苑珠林)

2102

2122

Ch. Nanhai jigui neifa zhuan (南海寄歸内法傳)
Eng. Buddhist Monastic Traditions of Southern Asia (2000)

2125

Jp. Shōmangyō gisho (勝鬘經義疏)
Eng. Prince Shōtoku’s Commentary on the Śrīmālā Sutra (2011)

2185

Jp.

Hokke gisho (法華義疏)

2187

Jp.

Daijō hossō kenjin shō (大乘法相研神章)

2309

Jp. Risshū kōyō (律宗綱要)
Eng. The Essentials of the Vinaya Tradition (1995)

2348

Jp.

2376

Ch. Fanyu zaming (梵語雑名)

2135

Jp. Yuimakyō gisho (維摩經義疏)
Eng. The Expository Commentary on the Vimalakīrti Sutra (2012)

2186

Jp.

2203

Jp.

Hannya shingyō hiken (般若心經秘鍵)

Kanjin kakumu shō (觀心覺夢鈔)

2312

Jp. Tendai hokke shūgi shū (天台法華宗義集)
Eng. The Collected Teachings of the Tendai Lotus School (1995)

2366

Jp.

2377

Kenkairon (顯戒論)

Sange gakushō shiki (山家學生式)

Jp. Hizōhōyaku (秘藏寶鑰)
Eng. The Precious Key to the Secret Treasury (in Shingon Texts, 2004)

Jp. Benkenmitsu nikyō ron (辨顯密二教論)
Eng. On the Differences between the Exoteric and Esoteric
Teachings (in Shingon Texts, 2004)

Jp. Sokushin jōbutsu gi (即身成佛義)
Eng. The Meaning of Becoming a Buddha in This Very Body
(in Shingon Texts, 2004)

2426

2427
2428

109

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Taishō No.

Jp. Shōji jissōgi (聲字實相義)
2429
Eng. The Meanings of Sound, Sign, and Reality (in Shingon Texts, 2004)

Jp. Unjigi (吽字義)
Eng. The Meanings of the Word Hūṃ (in Shingon Texts, 2004)
Jp. Gorin kuji myōhimitsu shaku (五輪九字明秘密釋)
Eng. The Illuminating Secret Commentary on the Five Cakras
and the Nine Syllables (in Shingon Texts, 2004)

2430

2514

Jp. Mitsugonin hotsuro sange mon (密嚴院發露懺悔文)
Eng. The Mitsugonin Confession (in Shingon Texts, 2004)

2527

Jp. Fukan zazengi (普勧坐禪儀)
Eng. A Universal Recommendation for True Zazen
(in Zen Texts, 2005)

2580

Jp. Zazen yōjin ki (坐禪用心記)
Eng. Advice on the Practice of Zazen (in Zen Texts, 2005)

2586

Jp. Kenjōdo shinjitsu kyōgyō shōmon rui (顯淨土眞實教行証文類)
Eng. Kyōgyōshinshō: On Teaching, Practice, Faith, and
Enlightenment (2003)

2646

Jp. Kōzen gokoku ron (興禪護國論)
Eng. A Treatise on Letting Zen Flourish to Protect the State
(in Zen Texts, 2005)

2543

Jp. Shōbōgenzō (正法眼藏)
Eng. Shōbōgenzō: The True Dharma-eye Treasury (Volume I, 2007)
Shōbōgenzō: The True Dharma-eye Treasury (Volume II, 2008)
Shōbōgenzō: The True Dharma-eye Treasury (Volume III, 2008)
Shōbōgenzō: The True Dharma-eye Treasury (Volume IV, 2008)

2582

Jp. Senchaku hongan nenbutsu shū (選擇本願念佛集)
Eng. Senchaku Hongan Nembutsu Shū: A Collection of Passages
on the Nembutsu Chosen in the Original Vow (1997)

2608

Jp. Tannishō (歎異抄)
Eng. Tannishō: Passages Deploring Deviations of Faith (1996)

2661

Jp.

2682

Jp. Rennyo shōnin ofumi (蓮如上人御文)
Eng. Rennyo Shōnin Ofumi: The Letters of Rennyo (1996)

110

Ōjōyōshū (往生要集)

2668

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Taishō No.

Jp. Risshō ankoku ron (立正安國論)
Eng. Risshōankokuron or The Treatise on the Establishment
of the Orthodox Teaching and the Peace of the Nation
(in Two Nichiren Texts, 2003)

2688

Jp. Kaimokushō (開目抄)
Eng. Kaimokushō or Liberation from Blindness (2000)

2689

Ch. Fumu enzhong jing (父母恩重經)
Eng. The Sutra on the Profundity of Filial Love
(in Apocryphal Scriptures, 2005)

2887

Jp. Kanjin honzon shō (觀心本尊抄)
Eng. Kanjinhonzonshō or The Most Venerable One Revealed
by Introspecting Our Minds for the First Time at the
Beginning of the Fifth of the Five Five Hundred-year Ages
(in Two Nichiren Texts, 2003)

2692

Jp. Hasshūkōyō (八宗綱要)
Eng. The Essentials of the Eight Traditions (1994)

extracanonical

Jp. Mappō tōmyō ki (末法燈明記)
Eng. The Candle of the Latter Dharma (1994)

extracanonical

Jp.

Sangō shīki (三教指帰)

extracanonical

Jp.

Jūshichijō kenpō (十七條憲法)

extracanonical

111

