THE COLLECTION FOR THE PROPAGATION
AND CLARIFICATION OF BUDDHISM
VOLUME I

dBET PDF Version
© 2017
All Rights Reserved

BDK English Tripiṭaka Series

THE COLLECTION FOR THE
PROPAGATION AND CLARIFICATION
OF BUDDHISM
VOLUME I
(Taishō Volume 52, Number 2102)

Translated from the Chinese
by

Harumi Hirano Ziegler

Bukkyō Dendō Kyōkai America, Inc.
2015

Copyright © 2015 by Bukkyō Dendō Kyōkai and
BDK America, Inc.

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored
in a retrieval system, or transcribed in any form or by any means
—electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise—
without the prior written permission of the publisher.
First Printing, 2015
ISBN: 978-1-886439-49-8
Library of Congress Control Number: 2014957879
Published by
BDK America, Inc.
1675 School Street
Moraga, California 94556

Printed in the United States of America

A Message on the Publication of the
English Tripiṭaka
The Buddhist canon is said to contain eighty-four thousand different teachings.
I believe that this is because the Buddha’s basic approach was to prescribe a
different treatment for every spiritual ailment, much as a doctor prescribes a
different medicine for every medical ailment. Thus his teachings were always
appropriate for the particular suffering individual and for the time at which the
teaching was given, and over the ages not one of his prescriptions has failed to
relieve the suffering to which it was addressed.
Ever since the Buddha’s Great Demise over twenty-ﬁve hundred years ago,
his message of wisdom and compassion has spread throughout the world. Yet
no one has ever attempted to translate the entire Buddhist canon into English
throughout the history of Japan. It is my greatest wish to see this done and to
make the translations available to the many English-speaking people who have
never had the opportunity to learn about the Buddha’s teachings.
Of course, it would be impossible to translate all of the Buddha’s eightyfour thousand teachings in a few years. I have, therefore, had one hundred thirtynine of the scriptural texts in the prodigious Taishō edition of the Chinese Buddhist
canon selected for inclusion in the First Series of this translation project.
It is in the nature of this undertaking that the results are bound to be criticized.
Nonetheless, I am convinced that unless someone takes it upon himself or herself
to initiate this project, it will never be done. At the same time, I hope that an
improved, revised edition will appear in the future.
It is most gratifying that, thanks to the efforts of more than a hundred Buddhist
scholars from the East and the West, this monumental project has ﬁnally gotten
off the ground. May the rays of the Wisdom of the Compassionate One reach
each and every person in the world.
NUMATA Yehan
Founder of the English
Tripiṭaka Project

August 7, 1991
v

Editorial Foreword
In January 1982, Dr. NUMATA Yehan, the founder of Bukkyō Dendō Kyōkai
(Society for the Promotion of Buddhism), decided to begin the monumental
task of translating the complete Taishō edition of the Chinese Tripiṭaka (Buddhist
canon) into the English language. Under his leadership, a special preparatory
committee was organized in April 1982. By July of the same year, the Translation
Committee of the English Tripiṭaka was ofﬁcially convened.
The initial Committee consisted of the following members: (late) HANAYAMA
Shōyū (Chairperson), (late) BANDŌ Shōjun, ISHIGAMI Zennō, (late) KAMATA
Shigeo, (late) KANAOKA Shūyū, MAYEDA Sengaku, NARA Yasuaki, (late) SAYEKI
Shinkō, (late) SHIOIRI Ryōtatsu, TAMARU Noriyoshi, (late) TAMURA Kwansei,
URYŪZU Ryūshin, and YUYAMA Akira. Assistant members of the Committee
were as follows: KANAZAWA Atsushi, WATANABE Shōgo, Rolf Giebel of New
Zealand, and Rudy Smet of Belgium.
After holding planning meetings on a monthly basis, the Committee selected
one hundred thirty-nine texts for the First Series of translations, an estimated
one hundred printed volumes in all. The texts selected are not necessarily limited
to those originally written in India but also include works written or composed
in China and Japan. While the publication of the First Series proceeds, the texts
for the Second Series will be selected from among the remaining works; this
process will continue until all the texts, in Japanese as well as in Chinese, have
been published.
Frankly speaking, it will take perhaps one hundred years or more to accomplish the English translation of the complete Chinese and Japanese texts, for
they consist of thousands of works. Nevertheless, as Dr. NUMATA wished, it is
the sincere hope of the Committee that this project will continue unto completion,
even after all its present members have passed away.
Dr. NUMATA passed away on May 5, 1994, at the age of ninety-seven, entrusting his son, Mr. NUMATA Toshihide, with the continuation and completion of the
Translation Project. The Committee also lost its able and devoted Chairperson,

vii

Editorial Foreword

Professor HANAYAMA Shōyū, on June 16, 1995, at the age of sixty-three. After
these severe blows, the Committee elected me, then Vice President of Musashino
Women’s College, to be the Chair in October 1995. The Committee has renewed
its determination to carry out the noble intention of Dr. NUMATA, under the leadership of Mr. NUMATA Toshihide.
The present members of the Committee are MAYEDA Sengaku (Chairperson),
ICHISHIMA Shōshin, ISHIGAMI Zennō, KATSURA Shōryū, NAMAI Chishō, NARA
Yasuaki, SAITŌ Akira, SHIMODA Masahiro, Kenneth K. Tanaka, WATANABE Shōgo,
and YONEZAWA Yoshiyasu.
The Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research was established
in November 1984, in Berkeley, California, U.S.A., to assist in the publication of
the BDK English Tripiṭaka First Series. The Publication Committee was organized
at the Numata Center in December 1991. In 2010, the Numata Center’s operations
were merged into Bukkyō Dendō Kyōkai America, Inc. (BDK America) and
BDK America continues to oversee the English Tripiṭaka project in close cooperation with the Editorial Committee in Tokyo.
MAYEDA Sengaku

Chairperson
Editorial Committee of
the BDK English Tripiṭaka

viii

Publisher’s Foreword
On behalf of the members of the Publication Committee, I am happy to present
this volume as the latest contribution to the BDK English Tripiṭaka Series. The
Publication Committee members have worked to ensure that this volume, as all
other volumes in the series, has gone through a rigorous process of editorial efforts.
The initial translation and editing of the Buddhist scriptures found in this
and other BDK English Tripiṭaka volumes are performed under the direction of
the Editorial Committee in Tokyo, Japan. Both the Editorial Committee in Tokyo
and the Publication Committee, headquartered in Berkeley, California, are dedicated to the production of accurate and readable English translations of the
Buddhist canon. In doing so, the members of both committees and associated
staff work to honor the deep faith, spirit, and concern of the late Reverend Dr.
Yehan Numata, who founded the BDK English Tripiṭaka Series in order to disseminate the Buddhist teachings throughout the world.
The long-term goal of our project is the translation and publication of the
texts in the one hundred-volume Taishō edition of the Chinese Buddhist canon,
along with a number of influential extracanonical Japanese Buddhist texts. The
list of texts selected for the First Series of this translation project may be found
at the end of each volume in the series.
As Chair of the Publication Committee, I am deeply honored to serve as
the fifth person in a post previously held by leading figures in the field of Buddhist
studies, most recently by my predecessor, John R. McRae.
In conclusion, I wish to thank the members of the Publication Committee for
their dedicated and expert work undertaken in the course of preparing this volume
for publication: Senior Editor Marianne Dresser, Dr. Hudaya Kandahjaya, Dr.
Carl Bielefeldt, Dr. Robert Sharf, and Rev. Brian Kensho Nagata, President of
BDK America.
A. Charles Muller

Chairperson
Publication Committee

ix

Contents
A Message on the Publication of the English Tripiṭaka
NUMATA Yehan

v

Editorial Foreword

MAYEDA Sengaku

vii

Translator’s Introduction

Harumi Hirano Ziegler

xv

A. Charles Muller

Publisher’s Foreword

ix

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I
Fascicle One
Preface
Mouzi’s [Discourse on] the Elucidation of Delusions (Lihuolun),
or the Exposition by Mouzi Bo, Governor of Cangwu Prefecture
The Discourse to Correct Faulty Accusations [against Buddhism]
(Zhengwulun) by an Anonymous Writer

Fascicle Two
The Discourse to Clarify Buddhism (Mingfolun) by Zong Bing
of the Jin Dynasty

Fascicle Three
The Discourse to Explain the [Buddhist] Way (Yudaolun)
by Sun Chuo
Response to He Chengtian’s Letter by Layman Zong Bing:
The Criticism on the Discourse on Buddhist Laymen and Clergy
(Baiheilun)
He’s Letter to Zong
Zong’s Response to He’s Letter
The Elucidation of the Criticism on [the Discourse on] the
Equality of Good (Junshanlun) (i.e., the Discourse on
Buddhist Laymen and Clergy) by He Chengtian

xi

3
5
37
49
91
100
100
101
107

Contents

Response to He of Hengyang, the Criticism on the Elucidation
of the Discourse on Buddhist Laymen and Clergy by Zong Bing
He’s Second Response to Zong

Fascicle Four
The Discourse on the Full Understanding of Life (Daxinglun)
by He Chengtian
The Expatiation of the Discourse on the Full Understanding of Life
of He of Hengyang by Yan Yanzhi
Response to Yan of Yongjia
The Second Expatiation to He of Hengyang
The Second Response to Yan of Yongjia
The Third Expatiation to He of Hengyang

Fascicle Five
The Discourse on Regeneration (Gengshenglun)
by Luo Junzhang
Sung Changsha’s Letter [to Luo Junzhang] by Anguo (Sun Sheng)
Response to Sun [Sheng]
The Discourse on the Immortality of the Spirit (Shen bumielun)
by Zheng Daozi
The New Discourse on Body and Spirit by Huan Junshan
The Discourse on Why Śramaṇas Do Not Bow to the Sovereign
(Shamen bujing wangzhelun) by Dharma Teacher [Hui]yuan
Section One: Lay Buddhists
Section Two: The Buddhist Clergy
Section Three: Those Who Pursue the Ultimate Law of Nature
Do Not Follow the Principle of the Mutation [of Birth and
Death in the Phenomenal World]
Section Four: Those Who Have Mastered the Ultimate Way
Do Not Respond to the World by Serving Both [for Relief
by Politics and Emancipation by Religion]
Section Five: The Body is Mortal but the Spirit is Immortal
The Discourse on the Śramaṇa’s Robe Worn with a Bared Shoulder
(Shamen tanfulun) by Dharma Teacher [Hui]yuan
A Criticism by He [Wuji], Zhennan [General]

xii

115
122
125
127
129
132
138
144
161
162
163
164
170
174
175
177
178
180
183
190
192

Contents

Dharma Teacher [Hui]yuan’s Response [to He]
The Discourse on the Clariﬁcation of Reward and Retribution
(Ming baoyinglun) by Dharma Teacher [Hui]yuan,
Responding to Huan [Xuan] of Nanjun
The Discourse on Three Periods of Reward and Retribution
(Sanbaolun), Composed for Those Who Doubt That There is No
Testimony of [Reward or Retribution] Corresponding to Good
or Bad Conduct, by Dharma Teacher [Hui]yuan

Fascicle Six
The Discourse to Elucidate the Refutation (Shibolun)
by Shi Daoheng
The Discourse to Rectify [the Argument on] the Two Teachings
(Zheng erjiaolun) by Ming Zhengjun
Family Law (Menlü) by Zhang Rong and the Criticism
by Zhou [Yong, Director of] Shan
A Letter Given to He [Dian], He [Yin], Kong [Zhigui], Kong
[Zhongzhi], and Zhou [Yong, Director of] Shan, Shanci
Response to Zhang’s Letter Together with Questions to Zhang
The Second Letter Given to Zhou with Answers to His Questions
The Second Response and Further Questions by Zhou Yong
Letter to the Daoist Gu [Huan] by Xie Zhenzhi
The Second Letter Given to the Daoist Gu

Fascicle Seven
Critique of the Daoist Gu’s Discourse on the Non-Chinese
and the Chinese by Zhu Zhaozhi, Attendant-in-Ordinary
Doubts about the Discourse on the Non-Chinese and the Chinese
and Inquiries to the Daoist Gu by Zhu Guangzhi
The Disputation on the Daoist Gu’s Discourse on the Non-Chinese
and the Chinese by Huitong at Yecheng [Temple]
The Discourse on the Western Tribe and China (Rong hualan),
Breaking the Daoist Gu’s Discourse on the Non-Chinese and the
Chinese, by Shi Sengmin at Guangling
Notes

Glossary

193
196

202
207
221
230
230
231
234
239
245
251
257
265
273
282

289
323

xiii

Contents

Bibliography

331

A List of the Volumes of the BDK English Tripiṭaka (First Series)

361

Index

xiv

335

Translator’s Introduction
The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism (Taishō
shinshū daizōkyō, volume 52, number 2102, 1a3–96b3) is a compilation by Shi
Sengyou (445–518), a Vinaya master of the Liang dynasty (502–557) consisting
mainly of discourses, critical responses to anti-Buddhist discourses, correspondence, reports to the emperor, family codes, and written appeals by Buddhist
laypeople and monks, mostly from the Eastern Jin dynasty (317–420) through
the second decade of the sixth century of the Liang dynasty. These writings
were intended to protect the Buddhist Dharma from interference by those who
valued the teachings based on Confucianism and Daoism, and by the political
powers of the time, as well as in order to promulgate Buddhism.
Sengyou was deeply concerned about delusions and misinformation held
by anti-Buddhists, which he saw as a major cause of negative views toward
Buddhism. In his Afterword to the Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism (in Volume II, forthcoming), he lists six kinds of secular
scholars’ doubts about Buddhism: (1) what the Buddhist scriptures expound is
preposterous and unveriﬁable; (2) since one’s spirit perishes when one dies, it
is hardly possible that the spirit will transmigrate in the three periods of existence;
(3) no one has ever seen the real Buddha and his teaching has no beneﬁt to
state governance; (4) the Dharma teaching did not exist in ancient times and
emerged only recently during the Han period; (5) the Buddhist teaching should
exist only in the region of the western tribes as its ediﬁcation is not for Chinese
people; and (6) the Dharma was rarely practiced in the Han and Wei periods
and began ﬂourishing only during the Jin period.
Sengyou believed that “The Way is propagated by people, and the teaching
is clariﬁed by literature.” By collecting literary works from distinctive scholars
of former ages that were intended to dispel wrong views toward Buddhism,
which included expressions to protect Buddhism and were advantageous in protecting the Three Treasures, he hoped to disperse these doubts.

xv

Translator’s Introduction

Historical Background

Buddhist teachings transmitted to China before the Common Era were initially
practiced only among non-Chinese groups. During the Han dynasty, the
Buddhist clergy consisted of śramaṇas from India or Central Asia, and there
was not a large number of Chinese followers. Around the middle of the third
century we see the remarkable activities of a Chinese Buddhist group led by
Zhu Shixing (or Zixing). More conspicuous activities of Chinese monks can
be seen during the time of the Eastern Jin dynasty. Thanks to eminent Chinese
monks such as Zhi Dun (314–366), Daoan (312–385), and Huiyuan (334–
416), who expended great effort to spread Buddhist teachings, the number
of Chinese monks notably increased. Intellectuals who were well versed in
the Chinese classics, such as the Zhuangzi and the Laozi Daodejing, and who
enjoyed “pure talks” (qingtan), became increasingly devoted to Buddhism.
By the early sixth century, when Sengyou compiled the Collection for the
Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism (hereafter, the Collection),
Buddhism had come to ﬂourish in both north and south China.
The growth of Buddhism subsequently caused serious conﬂicts between
Buddhists and non-Buddhists in political and social arenas and thought. People
became more aware that the Buddhist teachings differed signiﬁcantly from
Confucianism and Daoism in many ways. Moreover, lay Buddhists’ enthusiasm
resulted in the construction of many Buddhist temples and pagodas, which
caused ﬁnancial burden on civil administration and society, and the increasing
number of monks who did not observe the precepts and engaged in secular
life and business contributed to the deterioration of the sangha. In the north,
where non-Chinese groups had ruled continuously since the collapse of the
Western Jin dynasty (316), government reaction to the ascendancy of Buddhism
resulted in Emperor Wu’s persecution of Buddhists between 446 and 452
during the Northern Wei dynasty. In the south, where the Chinese established
political power successively, there was no such large-scale Buddhist persecution, but there were longstanding serious conﬂicts between Buddhists and
non-Buddhists. Accordingly, Buddhist groups became the target of criticism
from anti-Buddhist groups and were compelled to explain their positions and
protect Buddhism at the same time.

xvi

Translator’s Introduction

Characteristics and
Significance

The Collection is widely known as an invaluable source to examine the early
development of Chinese Buddhism. It offers much insight into how Buddhism,
a foreign religion, was accepted in Chinese society, mainly by intellectuals
of the southern dynasties, and how these early adopters understood the
Buddhist tenets in relation to their abundant knowledge of the Chinese classics.
In fact, we ﬁnd various issues encountered by Buddhists to be deeply rooted
in Chinese society and belief: whether or not the spirit perishes after death;
the causality of reward and retribution in the three periods of existence; the
differing viewpoints of the sovereign and of monks; Chinese monks’ beliefs
and Chinese customs and thought on such notions as ﬁlial piety, taking the
tonsure, and styles of personal deportment (such as manners of sitting, eating,
and dress); lay Buddhists’ religious practices; a ruler’s attempt to recruit
monks for his brain trust; and criticism of Daoism.
A notable aspect of this work is that Buddhist tenets are explained using
Confucian and Daoist terminology. It is widely known that geyi, a way to
interpret Buddhist scriptures by means of the philosophy asserted in the Laozi
Daodejing and the Zhuangzi, was popular during the Eastern Jin period. It
began with Zhu Faya and Kang Falang who studied with Daoan under Fotudeng. Even though Daoan criticized geyi, it is known that he allowed only
Huiyuan, his eminent disciple, to explain Buddhist doctrines using nonBuddhist texts. We see many examples of this tendency in this work.
In addition to geyi, throughout the Hongmingji authors quote from the
Chinese classics and historical records to support their arguments. Wherever
possible I have tried to indicate in the notes the sources of these quotations
together with available English translations.
Moreover, the Collection is a valuable source to examine the early stage
of Daoism in the south, particularly the Daoist school called the Way of the
Five Pecks of Grains (Wudoumidao), or the Way of the Celestial Master
(Tianshidao). For instance, in fascicle eight (in Volume II of this translation,
forthcoming), in Shi Xuanguang’s criticism of Daoism, Daoist practices, and
rituals such as the “unity of the yin-yang vapors” (heqi) and the “mud and
ash fête” (tutanzhai) are described. In addition, we ﬁnd the titles of each

xvii

Translator’s Introduction

position of the organization together with their derivations. A scarcity of
clearly dated Daoist sources for studies of early Daoism is a crucial problem
in current scholarship. Although the Collection is a Buddhist work from
chieﬂy the fourth and ﬁfth centuries, it also serves well as a primary source
for contemporary Daoism.
Finally, it should be noted that this text served as inspiration for Daoxuan (596–667), who took Sengyou’s compilation as his model in compiling
his own Extensive Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of
Buddhism (Guang Hongmingji) in 664.

Questions on the Compilation

The text of the Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism
currently circulated consists of fourteen fascicles, with ﬁfty-eight headings.
Sengyou, however, lists this work as consisting of ten fascicles together with
a table of contents, with thirty-three headings, in his compilation Collection
of Records Derived from the Tripiṭaka (Chusanzangjiji), completed around
515 in the last years of his life. The Buddhist catalogue Zhongjing mulu compiled by Fajing in 593 lists this text as being comprised of ten fascicles as
well, but Fei Changfang’s catalogue Lidai sanbaoji completed in 597 records
the Collection as consisting of fourteen fascicles. Questions about the completion of the fourteen-fascicle text are still controversial and require further
research.

Note on the Translation

Citations from the Taishō shinshū daizōkyō are listed in this form: Taishō
serial number; volume number; page; register (a, b, or c); line number(s).
For example, Taizi ruiying benqi jing, T.185.3:472c1–483a13.
Transliterations of Chinese language follow the Pinyin system. Japanese
Romanization follows the modiﬁed Hepburn system as employed in
Kenkyūsha’s New Japanese-English Dictionary (third and later editions).

xviii

THE COLLECTION FOR THE PROPAGATION
AND CLARIFICATION OF BUDDHISM
VOLUME I
Compiled by Shi Sengyou at Jianchu Temple in Yangdu
during the Liang dynasty

Fascicle One

Preface

The awakening [of the Buddha] is as boundless as the ocean. The wisdom
[of the Buddha] is as completely illuminating as a mirror. The ediﬁcation [of
the Buddha] ingeniously spreads throughout the universe; in fact, it created
[the sage kings] Yao and Shun, as if molding ceramic art or casting metal.
The law [of the Buddha] dominates beyond the world in which we cling to
language; therefore it created the Duke of Zhou and Confucius, just as if
fashioning clay into ﬁgures.
Nevertheless, the greater the Way is, the more difﬁcult it is to believe;
the higher the tone of the music, the fewer there are who can sing it harmoniously. Mount Sumeru is lofty and steep, where very strong winds (Skt.
vairambhaka) arise. Treasures accumulate in a depository and then theft
occurs. Once upon a time, when the Tathāgata resided in this world, his ediﬁcation shook the trichiliocosm, and yet the four devils harbored grudges
and the six masters embraced poisonous thoughts;1 not to speak of today, the
last phase of the period of the Semblance Dharma.
Almost ﬁve hundred years have passed since the time the Great Dharma
reached the east. When conditions are good, people have faith [in Buddhism],
but when conditions are not, they do not; the fortune [of Buddhism] has its
ups and downs as well. Those who have right views propagate and support
[the teaching], and those who are evil and deluded slander [it]. As for perverse
Confucianists who abide by literature, they keep their distance [from
Buddhism] because it is considered heathen. The honey-tongued heretics
(i.e., Daoists) adopt [Buddhism] in their teaching and consider both to be the
same teaching. Those who keep their distance [from Buddhism] suffer drastic
delusion, and those who adopt [Buddhism in their teaching] experience confusion about the colors of vermilion and purple.2 As a consequence, sophisticated arguments have gradually become more complicated and corrupted
forms of words have exceedingly ﬂourished.

3

1a3

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

The hedan bird screeches in the night [in search of daybreak], yet it
cannot split the darkness for broad daylight. The legendary jingwei bird holds
pebbles in its mouth [and drops them in the sea in order to ﬁll it up], yet it
fails to mar the natural features of the blue ocean.3 Nevertheless, if brightness
is disturbed by darkness and greatness is slandered by smallness, even though
nothing can be changed at all, it would pollute people’s eyes and ears. This
will cause those of weak and inﬁrm natures to follow false debates and go
astray for a long time, and those who have disordered logic to pursue heretical
doctrines and indulge in everlasting [delusion]. This is why it is easy to fall
into hell and difﬁcult to ascend to the pure state.
I, Sengyou, am of superﬁcial learning, but I am deeply bent on propagating and guarding [Buddhism]. I resent in my mind ﬂattering statements
and groundless customs. Thereupon, making use of short intervals of medical
treatment or spare moments while dwelling in the mountains, I have compiled
intelligent writings of ancient and modern times and collected polished essays
by Buddhist clergy and laypeople. Among them, I made use of all those [writings] that painstakingly eliminate evil [teachings] and are irrefutable expressions to protect the Dharma, regardless of the length of the works. In addition,
among written records and literature by distinguished scholars of former
ages, I have compiled all those that are advantageous [for the Three Treasures]
as well. They are classiﬁed and arranged in fourteen fascicles.
The Way is propagated by people, and the teaching is clariﬁed by literature. [This work] is [intended] to propagate the Way and clarify the teaching.
Therefore, it is called the Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation
[of Buddhism] (Hongmingji). At the same time, led by my shallow thought,
I append my own discussion at the end. I pray that by a drop of water and a
particle of dust I will be able to help increase the water of the ocean and raise
the height of Mount Dai. However, my learning is solitary and uncultivated
and my knowledge is limited. I am ashamed of being narrow-minded. Wellversed expert gentlemen, please grant your aid to enlarge this compilation.

4

Fascicle One

Mouzi’s [Discourse on] the Elucidation
of Delusions (Lihuolun), or the
Exposition by Mouzi Bo, Governor
of Cangwu Prefecture4

Mouzi has already studied the Classics, commentaries on them, and all philosophers’ works. Regardless of the size or length, there was no book he did not
like. Although he was not delighted with books on the art of war, he still read
them. He read books on the immortals and immortality, but restrained himself
and never believed [in these things]; he considered them to be preposterous.
In the time after Emperor Ling (r. 168–189) [of the Later Han dynasty]
had passed away, the world was in turmoil. Only Jiaozhou was relatively
peaceful. People of the heterodoxy moved en masse from the north to settle
there. Many practiced the art of the immortals, abstaining from [eating] grain
to prolong their life spans. There were many contemporary people who learned
[the art of the immortals from these people]. Mouzi always rebuked them by
[referring to] the Five Classics. None among the Daoists and practitioners of
the heterodox arts dared respond to [his rebuke]. [People] compared this with
the case where Meng Ke (i.e., Mencius) drove off Yang Zhu and Mo Di.5
Before this, Mouzi ﬂed with his mother to Jiaozhi (present-day Vietnam).
At the [Chinese] age of twenty-six he returned to Cangwu and took a wife.
The governor [of Cangwu prefecture] heard that Mouzi abided by learning,
and visited him to ask him to become a civil ofﬁcial. At that time, [Mouzi]
was just in the prime of his youth, and had intensely set his heart on learning.
Moreover, he saw that the world was in chaos and he had no intention of
entering government service. He did not accept the offer after all.
During this period, all the provinces and prefectures were suspicious of
each other and isolated from one another, without communication. Since
[Mouzi] had profound learning and great knowledge, the governor [of Cangwu
prefecture] wanted to send him as a diplomatic envoy to pay homage to
Jingzhou (in present-day Hubei province). Mouzi believed that while it is
easy to decline honor and rank, it is difﬁcult to shirk a mission. Consequently
he dressed properly and was about to go. As it happened, the regional governor
of the province [learned that] Mouzi was a well-educated recluse and summoned him. Again Mouzi feigned illness and excused himself.

5

1b

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

A younger brother of the regional governor, the governor of Yuzhang
prefecture (in present-day Jiangxi province), had been murdered by the Leader
of Court Gentlemen Ze Rong (d. 195). The regional governor then planned
to send the Commandant of Cavalry Liu Yan, who commanded troops and
who was about to head to [Yuzhang]. [But the regional governor] was afraid
that [this action] would provoke reciprocal suspicion from the outer world
and the troops would not be able to proceed. So he asked Mouzi, “My younger
brother was killed by a rebel. My great indignation about this, [as his brother
who shares] the same ﬂesh and bones, arises from the bottom of my heart.
I am about to send the Commandant of Cavalry Liu there, [but] I am afraid
that the outer world is in turmoil and travelers cannot get through. You are
well learned in both literary and military arts and especially talented in diplomacy. Now I would like you to oblige us by giving your consent to going to
Lingling and Guiyang (in present-day Hunan province) and to making their
roads available for our passage. What do you think?”
Mouzi replied, “Just like a horse that has been fed and waits at your
stable, I have been treated [kindly] for a long time. [When the moment
arrives], a patriot forgets himself and hopes to devote himself as much as he
can.” Accordingly, [Mouzi] dressed and was about to depart. At this point,
his mother suddenly passed away and he was not able to make the trip.
For a long time [Mouzi] reﬂected, “Since I have a ﬂuent tongue, I am
handily appointed for a mission. Just now the world is in disturbance, and it
is not a time to distinguish myself in the world.” Then he lamented, “Laozi
wrote, ‘Exterminate sagacity and reject knowledge.’6 If one cultivates himself
and maintains truth, all of nature does not take away his ambition, the world
does not deny his pleasure, a son of Heaven cannot subjugate him, and feudal
princes cannot befriend him. Therefore, he ﬁnds approval as noble.”
Then Mouzi had the earnest intention [to learn] the Buddhist Way, and
concurrently studied Laozi’s Five Thousand Words (i.e., the Daodejing).
He took in the profound subtle meanings as if they were wine and drink,
and played on the Five Classics as if they were [musical instruments like]
the Chinese zither (qin) and the reed organ. Many common people condemned him, thinking that he had gone against the Five Classics and turned
to a heterodox way. Even if he wished to engage these people in disputation,
it was not [in accordance with] the [Buddhist] Way. Even if he wanted to

6

Fascicle One

keep silent, he was unable to do so. Consequently, he spent time with brush
and ink to brieﬂy cite the words of the sages and wise ones in order to make
a testament of [his response to the condemnation of Buddhism] with explanations. This is called Mouzi’s [Discourse on] the Elucidation of Delusions
(Lihuo[lun]).
A person asked, “From whom was the Buddha born? Does he or does
he not have ancestors and a country [to which he belonged]? What does he
bestow on all people? What does he look like?”
Mouzi replied, “You have big questions. I am dull, but I will roughly
explain the outline [of the biography of the Buddha]. I have heard the state
of the Buddha’s transformations. It is impossible to record his [entire] chronicle, since he accumulated moral conduct for several hundreds of billions of
years. Nevertheless, when he came into [the existence in which he would
become] the Buddha, he was born in India, in the provisional form of the
son of [Lady Māyā], the queen of King Śuddhodana. Once, while taking a
midday nap, she had a dream that she rode upon a white, six-tusked elephant.
She was very delighted and accordingly felt that she had become with child.
On the eighth day of the fourth month, [the child] was born from the right
armpit of his mother. He landed upon the ground, took seven steps forward,
and said, raising his right arm, ‘There is no one in Heaven and Earth who
goes beyond me.’ At that time, Heaven and Earth quaked tremendously and
the palace became bright all over. On the same day, a servant of the royal
family also gave birth to a child, and a white horse in the stable bore a white
colt. The [servant’s] baby was called Chandaka and the white colt was named
Kaṇṭhaka. The king instructed them to always attend the prince.
“The prince had thirty-two major marks and eighty minor marks of
physical excellence. He was one zhang and six chi tall, and his body was
of a golden color all over. He had a protuberance (rouji; Skt. uṣṇīṣa) on the
top of his head. His jaws were just like those of a lion. His tongue [was so
long that it] could cover his face. His palms had the pattern of a thousandspoked wheel. The light radiating from the top of his head illuminated everything for ten thousand li. This is a rough description of the major marks of
the Buddha.
“When [the prince] was seventeen years old, his [father,] the king, chose
as [the prince’s] consort a girl from a neighboring state. Whenever the prince

7

1c

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

seated himself, he moved his seat away from her. When he slept, he did not
share a bed with her. The Way of Heaven is, [however,] quite evident; yin
and yang had relations [with each other]. Consequently she conceived a son,
who was born six years later. The king regarded the prince as invaluable and
extraordinary, and he built palaces for him and arranged female entertainers
and precious amusements in a row in front of him. But the prince did not
wish for worldly pleasure; his intention lay in morality.
“At midnight on the eighth day of the fourth month of the year [the
prince] turned nineteen years old. He called Chandaka, had him put the bit
and bridle on Kaṇṭhaka, and mounted the horse. Spiritual beings helped them,
lifting them up, and [they all] ﬂew out of the palace.
“The next day [the prince’s quarters] were found empty and no one
knew where [he] was. There was none among the king, the ofﬁcials, and
the people who did not sob, [missing him]. They pursued [the prince] and
caught up with him in a ﬁeld. The king said [to the prince], ‘Before you
were born, I prayed and asked the gods [for you]. Now I already have you,
you who are just like a precious stone or a jade tablet. You must succeed to
the throne, and yet you have left [the palace]. What are you going to do?’
The prince replied, ‘All things are impermanent; any existence will pass
away. I would like to learn the way [to enlightenment] and liberate all sentient
beings in the ten directions.’ The king realized that [the prince’s resolution]
was steady and ﬁrm. So the king rose and returned [to the palace]. The prince
promptly departed. He contemplated the Way for six years, and ﬁnally
attained buddhahood.
“The reason [the Buddha] was born in the ﬁrst month of the summer
season is because it is the time of the fourth month of the year (zhonglü),7
when it is neither [too] cold nor [too] hot, when grasses and trees bloom, and
when people take off the fox-fur robes and put on linen clothes. The reason
he was born in India is because it is located in the center of the universe,
which maintains its justice and peace. There are altogether twelve kinds of
scriptures he authored, eight hundred and forty million fascicles in all. Among
them, a large fascicle contains less than ten thousand words and a small fascicle consists of more than a thousand words. The Buddha gave the teaching
all over the world and liberated the people. Accordingly, on the ﬁfteenth day
of the second month, he entered nirvana.

8

Fascicle One

“His teaching and precepts continuously exist. If we follow [the teaching
and precepts] and are capable of practicing them, we will be able to attain
wuwei as well, and happiness will be passed on to later generations.8
“Those who observe the ﬁve precepts have six puriﬁcation days in a
month. On the day of puriﬁcation, one concentrates his or her mind, repents,
and turns over a new leaf. Śramaṇas observe two hundred and ﬁfty precepts
and have puriﬁcation every day. Their precepts are not what laymen (Skt.
upāsaka) are not able to learn. Their proper deportment and course of action
are not different from those of the [Chinese] classical rites of antiquity.
Throughout the day and night, they talk about the [Buddhist] Way and recite
sutras, and do not take part in worldly affairs. Laozi said, ‘Deportment [of
those who] have exceeding virtue is just to follow the Way.’9 This is what
he meant [about śramaṇas].”
A person asked, “For what reason precisely is he called the Buddha?
What is the meaning of ‘buddha’?”
Mouzi replied, “The word buddha is a posthumous title, just as the Three
Augusts are called gods and the Five Thearchs are called sages [in China].
The Buddha is the founder of morals and the originator of divinities. The term
buddha means awakened. [The Buddha] is beyond our sensory perception;
he can transform into and manifest as various entities; he sometimes appears
and sometimes disappears; he can become smaller or larger; he can be a round
or a square shape; he can become old or young; and he can hide and reveal
himself. He goes through ﬁre without being burned. He steps on a sword without being injured. He can be in ﬁlth without being soiled. Even if he experiences
a calamity, it has no effect on him. When he wants to travel, he ﬂies through
the air, and when he sits, he emits light. Therefore, his title is Buddha.”
A person asked, “What is called the ‘Way’? What category is the Way?”
Mouzi replied, “The term ‘Way’ means to lead. It leads people to wuwei.
Pull it forth and it does not advance. Pull it back and it does not retreat. Lift it
and it does not ascend. Lower it and it does not descend. Look at it and it has
no shape. Listen to it and it has no sound. Outside of the visible world is
vastness, [but the Way] meanders beyond it. A breadth of a hair is minute, [yet
the Way] is full of twists and turns within it. Therefore, it is called the Way.”
A person asked, “Confucius considered the Five Classics to be the teaching of the Way, which should be recited while folding one’s hands before

9

2a

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

2b

one’s breast and practiced. Now, the [Buddhist] Way you explain is the
absolute vacancy (xuwu) and beyond our sensory perception. It does not
expose its signiﬁcance and does not direct its performance. Why is it different
from what the sage (i.e., Confucius) said?”
Mouzi replied, “You cannot consider what you are familiar with to be
important and what you are unfamiliar with to be trivial. You are confused
by matters of the outside world and lose yourself in the mind. In doing something, you should not lose morality. It is just as in the case that one should
not lose gong and shang [of the fundamental notes] when tuning the strings
of a musical instrument.10 The Way of Heaven is regulated with the four seasons and the ways of human beings are regulated with the ﬁve cardinal virtues.
Laozi said, ‘There was something mixed, coming into existence before
Heaven and Earth. It can be considered as the mother of the world. I do not
know its name, but if I dare to give a name to it, it is called the Way.’11 The
Way helps people in being able to serve their parents at home, helps those
who govern the state in ruling over the people, and helps those who establish
themselves [in the world] without the assistance of others in harnessing themselves. If you practice [the Way], it will ﬁll the universe. If you reject and
do not practice it, it will disappear and yet will not leave you behind. You
do not understand this. Why [do you think] it is different from [the Way of
which Confucius speaks]?”
A person asked, “The greatest reality does not look adorned, and the
highest level of expression has no polished [words]. [An expression of]
concise words that is comprehensible is elegant. Things that require less
work and yet achieve a goal are clever.
“Therefore, pearl and jade are rare and yet valuable, while rubble is
common and worthless. The sages [of China] established the foundation of
the Seven Classics, which consist of less than thirty thousand words and
within which all issues are treated. The Buddhist scriptures are numbered at
some ten thousand fascicles, whose words are in the hundreds of millions,
which is more than one person is able to sustain. I think they are troublesome
and unimportant.”
Mouzi replied, “The reason large rivers and oceans are different from a
pool of water on a street is because they are deeper and wider. The reason
the Five Sacred Mountains are dissimilar to mounds is because they are taller

10

Fascicle One

and bigger. If [the Five Sacred Mountains] are not extremely higher than
[ordinary] mountains and hills, even a crippled sheep could climb up to the
peaks. If [large rivers and oceans] are not extremely deeper than small streams,
even a small boy could take a bath in the abysses. Qiji (a legendary ﬁne horse
capable of covering a thousand li in a day) does not live in a garden, and a
ﬁsh that [is capable of] swallowing a boat does not swim in mountain streams
that are several ren deep. If you break open a three-cun large oyster to look
for a pearl [that is as large as] a bright moon, or if you try to ﬁnd a brood of
Chinese phoenixes in a nest of thorny brambles, it will certainly be difﬁcult
to ﬁnd them. This is because the minor cannot contain the great.
“The Buddhist scriptures expand issues for hundreds of millions of years
in the past, and still state main points for all ages. When the primordial substance had not yet arisen, when the primal beginning had not yet been produced,12 and when Heaven and Earth began to rise, their slightness could not
be grasped, and their minuteness could not be entered. [But] the Buddha
governed over them all, even the vast world outside [of the universe], analyzed
within the profound and subtle world, and missed nothing to record about
them. Therefore, the scriptures are counted in some ten thousand fascicles,
with words in the hundreds of millions. The more [words there are], the closer
to completion [it is] and the richer [the content is]. Why [do you think] it is
unimportant? Even though [the scriptures] cannot be sustained by one person,
it is like the case where you drink water when arriving at a river. When you
have drunk enough and you feel satisﬁed (i.e., your thirst is quenched), would
you then care about the remaining water?”
A person asked, “The Buddhist scriptures are numerous. I would like to
master their main points and dismiss the superﬂuities. Please simply discuss
their essence and eliminate embellishments.”
Mouzi replied, “No. The sun and moon are both bright, but each has its
own time to shine. Each of the twenty-eight constellations has its own place
over which it rules. Multifarious medicinal herbs grow equally, but each of
them has its own effect to heal sickness. Fox-fur robes are worn to protect
against coldness, while linen clothes are worn to keep out heat. A boat and
a carriage travel different routes from each other, though both of them transport
travelers. The reason Confucius did not take the Five Classics to be perfect
and further wrote the Spring and Autumn Annals (Chunqiu) and the Canon

11

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

2c

of Filial Piety (Xiaojing) is simply because he wanted to propagate the means
of the Way by which people may act freely. Even though Buddhist scriptures
are numerous, [they all] result in one. Although the Seven Classics are different
from each other, the esteem in which they hold morality, benevolence, and
righteousness results in the same, too. The reason why ﬁlial piety is explained
in numerous ways is to give instruction according to people’s conduct. It is
just as when both Zichang and Ziyou asked the same question about ﬁlial
piety Confucius gave each a different answer to correct their individual shortcomings. Why [do you think] there is something [in Buddhist scriptures] to
dismiss?”
A person asked, “If the Buddhist Way is the most august and the greatest,
why did [Emperor] Yao and [Emperor] Shun, the Duke of Zhou, or Confucius
not cultivate it? No expression [of the Buddhist teaching] is found in the
Seven Classics. Master, you have already indulged in the Book of Odes (Shijing) and the Book of History (Shujing), and have been delighted with the
Book of Rites (Liji), and the Book of Music (Yuejing). Why are you also fond
of the Buddhist Way and happy about this foreign method? How could
[Buddhism] surpass the Classics and their commentaries and be better than
the sages’ works? If I were you, I would not accept it.”
Mouzi replied, “It is not necessarily that only books of the words of Confucius are [useful], just as medicines do not have to be prescribed by the great
doctor Bian Que [to be efﬁcacious]. Whatever meets righteousness is followed,
and whatever heals sickness is good. Gentlemen extensively take all that is
wholesome in order to complement themselves. Zigong said, ‘What necessity
was there for my master to have a regular master?’13 Emperor Yao served Yin
Shou, Emperor Shun served Wu Cheng, [the Duke of Zhou] Dan studied with
[Taigong Wang] Lü [Shang],14 and Confucius studied with Lao Dan (i.e.,
Laozi), but none of these are found in the Seven Classics. Even though these
four masters [Yin Shou, Wu Cheng, Lü Shang, and Lao Dan] are sages, when
compared with the Buddha they are like white deer compared with a kylin,
or swallows compared with a Chinese phoenix. [Even so,] Emperor Yao and
Emperor Shun, the Duke of Zhou, and Confucius still studied with them.
“Moreover, the Buddha has the marks of physical excellence, he can
transform, he has supernatural powers, and he has no set pattern. How can
you reject and not study Buddhism? In the items and meanings of the Five

12

Fascicle One

Classics, there are some lacunae. As for the fact that the Buddha is not mentioned [in the Seven Classics], how worthwhile is it to be doubtful and suspicious?”
A person asked, “It is said that the Buddha has thirty-two major and
eighty minor marks of physical excellence. Why is he so different from [ordinary] people? I am afraid that this is an extravagant expression and a description of unreality.”
Mouzi replied, “As the saying goes, ‘The fewer chances to see, the more
suspicious [one is].’ A man sees a camel and says that it is a horse with a
swollen back. [We also say that] Emperor Yao’s eyebrows were of eight different colors, each of Emperor Shun’s eyes had double pupils, the mouth of
Gao Yao (a chief judical ofﬁcer for Emperor Shun) was [just like] a crow’s
beak, King Wen [of the Zhou dynasty] had four nipples, [the legendary ruler]
Yu had three oriﬁces in each ear, the Duke of Zhou was hunchbacked, Fuxi
had a nose [just like] a dragon’s, and Confucius had a depression on the top
of his head. Laozi had a sun-shaped lump and the mark of a moon on his forehead, and two nose bridges. He held the Chinese characters of the Ten [Celestial
Stems] in his hands, and treaded upon the two [principles of yin and yang]
and the ﬁve [primary elements] (i.e., metal, wood, water, ﬁre, and earth).15
These men are not different from [normal] people, are they? How worthwhile
is it to be doubtful of the Buddha’s marks of physical excellence?”
A person asked, “The Canon of Filial Piety says, ‘Your body, hair, and
skin are received from your parents. Do not dare to damage them.’16 When
Zengzi was about to die, he said, ‘Uncover my feet, uncover my hands!’17
Now, śramaṇas shave their heads. Why do they go against the sage’s words?
They do not follow the way of ﬁlial piety. You are always fond of discussing
right and wrong and correcting wrong to right, yet on the contrary, [you think]
it is alright [for śramaṇas to shave their heads], don’t you?”
Mouzi replied, “It is not benevolent to slander sages and virtuous people.
It is not intelligent that correction is not much to the point. How can you cultivate virtue being neither benevolent nor intelligent? If you are not going
to cultivate virtue, you are the same as those who are stubborn and stupid.
How can I easily discuss [these matters] with [such a person]?
“Once upon a time a man of Qi crossed a large river by boat, and his
father fell into the water. He bared his hands, grasped his father’s head, turned

13

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

3a

his father upside down, made him regurgitate the water, and so was able to
bring his father back to life. It is the gravest impiety to grasp the head of
one’s own father and to turn him upside down, but by doing so this man
helped his father escape death. If he had cultivated himself as is usual for a
ﬁlial son, folding his arms [and doing nothing], his father would have died
by drowning. Confucius said, ‘If you can be faithful to the Way with them,
you may not yet take measures suited to the occasion with them.’18 This
refers to acting in what is considered a proper manner at the time.
“Moreover, the Canon of Filial Piety says, ‘Kings of previous times had
the highest virtue and the essential points [of what is good and appropriate].’
Taibo, however, had his hair cut off and his body tattooed following the
custom of the Wu-Yue region [of southern China], disregarding the righteousness toward one’s body, hair, and skin [stated in the Canon of Filial
Piety]. Nevertheless, Confucius praised him [and said], ‘[Taibo] may be said
to be a man of the highest virtue.’19 Confucius did not defame Taibo for
having his hair cut.
“Seeing this, if one has great virtue, he will not be tied down by triﬂing
[faults]. It can be said that the utmost concessions are that śramaṇas give up
their family property, abandon their wives and children, do not listen to music,
and do not look upon [beautiful] worldly things. Why [do you say that] they
go against the sage’s words and do not follow [the way of] ﬁlial piety? Yu
Rang [of Jin] swallowed charcoal and lacquered his body [for a vendetta].
Nie Zheng ﬂayed the skin of his face and punished himself [after committing
a successful assassination]. Princess Bo [of Lu state, who was married to the
Duke of Gong of Song state], in order to follow the way of womanhood
stayed in the ﬂames [when a ﬁre broke out in her mansion]. Gao Xing, [a
widow of Liang state,] mutilated her [beautiful] appearance [by cutting her
nose off]. Gentlemen consider that these people were brave and died for
righteousness; I have heard no one slander their self-mutilation or suicides.
Compared to the actions taken by these four people, śramaṇas’ shaving their
beards and hair is not far removed from them.”
A person asked, “There is no happiness beyond having posterity, and
there is no impiety greater than having no posterity. Śramaṇas abandon their
wives and children and give up wealth, or they never marry for their entire
lives. Why do they carry out [such a] practice against happiness and ﬁlial

14

Fascicle One

piety? They themselves suffer and yet they have nothing wonderful. They
exhaust themselves and yet they have nothing marvelous.”
Mouzi replied, “One who is strong on the left must be weak on the right.
One who formerly had the extensive must later have the narrow. [Confucius
says,] ‘Meng Gongchuo is excellent as a chief retainer of [the powerful families such as] the Zhao or Wei [of Jin], but he is unﬁt to be a high ofﬁcial of
[a small state such as] Teng or Xue.’20 Wives, children, and belongings are
extra in secular life. Purity and wuwei are the wonders of the Way. Laozi
said, ‘Fame or body, which do you hold more dear? Body or wealth, which
do you think more valuable?’”21
Again [Mouzi] said, “One may observe customs handed down from the
three preceding dynasties (i.e., Xia, Yin, and Zhou), read the arts of the ways
of Confucians and Mohists, recite the Book of Odes and the Book of History,
cultivate etiquette, respect benevolence and righteousness, and consider cleanliness [to be important]. The people of the world will hand down [this person’s]
virtuous works to the next generation and he will brim over with fame.
“Such [acts] are what mediocre people perform, and what people of
peace and non-worldly desire do not seek. Therefore, if in front of you there
is a pearl like that of the Marquis of Sui22 but there is a tiger behind you,
even though you may see [the pearl] you will run away. Why do you dare
not take the pearl? [It is because preserving] your life comes before proﬁt.
“Xu You lived in the nest of a tree. [Bo]yi and [Shu]qi starved on [Mount]
Shouyang. The sage Confucius praised their virtues and said, ‘They are the
ones who sought benevolence and attained it.’23 I have never heard them
ridiculed for not having posterity or property. Śramaṇas cultivate morality
instead of having worldly pleasures, and return to [the ways of] virtuous wise
people, having given up the joys of having wives and children. If this is not
wonderful, what can be wonderful? If this is not marvelous, what can be
marvelous?”
A person asked, “The Yellow Emperor [sat] with his garments hanging
down and established rules for clothing and ornaments.24 The Viscount of Ji
recited [to King Wu of Zhou] the Great Model (Hongfan), in which deportment
is the most important of the ﬁve issues (i.e., deportment, language, looking,
listening, and thinking).25 Confucius authored the Canon of Filial Piety, in
which [he considers that the regulation of] clothing is the beginning [of] the

15

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

3b

three virtues (i.e., the regulation of clothing, the regulation of manners, and
virtuous acts). In addition, [Confucius] said, ‘[A gentleman] adjusts his clothes
and cap, and imbues his appearance with dignity.’26 Even though Yuan Xian
was poor, he did not take off his cap made of birch bark. When Zilu encountered
danger, he did not forget to tie the chin-straps of his cap. Today śramaṇas
shave off their hair and wear undyed cloth. When they come across other people, they make no decorum of kneeling and standing up. They have no proper
manners in their course of action. Why do they go against the code of deportment and clothing, and denigrate the adornments of the ofﬁcial class?”
Mouzi replied, “Laozi said, ‘Those who possess the highest degree of
virtue do not consider that they are virtuous, and therefore they possess virtue.
Those who possess the lowest degree of virtue [seek] how not to lose it, and
therefore they do not [actually] possess virtue.’27 During the times of the
Three Augusts, the people ate [raw] meat, wore animal-skin clothing, and
lived in nests in trees or caves. They valued the simple and unadorned life.
Why would they need zhangfu caps or furs woven with adornments?28 [Without those things,] the people of that time are said to have been virtuous,
honest, trustworthy, and [possessing] wuwei. The conduct of śramaṇas is
similar to theirs.”
A person said, “If things were just as you say, such people as the Yellow
Emperor, Emperor Yao and Emperor Shun, the Duke of Zhou, and Confucius
would be rejected; they would not be worthy of being emulated.”
Mouzi replied, “If you see things extensively, you will not be confused.
If you have a good faculty of hearing, you will not be deluded. Emperor Yao
and Emperor Shun, the Duke of Zhou, and Confucius cultivated worldly
affairs, while the Buddha and Laozi pursued wuwei. Confucius traveled to
more than seventy states. Xu You heard that there was to be an abdication
of the throne [for his sake], and he then washed his ears in a gulf [because
he thought the abdication was so foul that it polluted his ears]. The way to
be a gentleman is sometimes to go out [for ofﬁcial service] and sometimes
to remain in seclusion, or to sometimes remain silent and to sometimes speak
out. He does not let his emotions overﬂow and he does not give full sway to
his nature. Therefore, the reason why the way [of a gentleman] is noble lies
in the purpose for which it is employed. What reason is there in rejecting
them (i.e., the sages)?”

16

Fascicle One

An inquirer said, “In the Way of the Buddha, it is said: ‘People die and
then must be reborn.’ I do not believe this is true.”
Mouzi asked, “When a man is about to breathe his last, a family member
goes up to the roof and calls his name. He has died. What then is [his family]
trying to call back?”
A person replied, “[That person] tries to call the spirit of the dead (hunpo)
back [to rejoin the body].”
Mouzi asked, “If the spirit (gui) returns, he revives, [but] if it does not
return, what is the spirit then called?”
[A person] replied, “It becomes a spiritual being (guishen).”
Mouzi said, “That is correct! Without doubt, the spirit (hunshen) does
not perish. Only the physical body decays and becomes rotten. The body is
just like the roots and leaves of the ﬁve major grains, and the spirit is compared
to the seeds and kernels of the grains. The roots and leaves come into existence
and then inevitably die. How could the seeds and kernels have a termination?
[People] attain the Way and only their bodies perish. Laozi said, ‘The reason
we have great calamity is because we have a body. If we did not have a body,
what calamity would we have?’29 He also said, ‘When the work is done, retiring into obscurity is the Way of Heaven.’”30
Someone said, “Those who practice the Way die and those who do not
practice the Way also die. What difference is there [between the two]?”
Mouzi replied, “[Your question is], so to speak, to ask for a lifetime
honor without performing good conduct for even one day. If one attains the
Way, even if he dies, his spirit returns to Heaven. If he has committed evil
conduct, after death his spirit inevitably receives retribution. Ignorant people
are in darkness about the established facts, while intelligent people foresee
things that have not yet germinated. Comparison between practicing the Way
and not practicing the Way is just like that between gold and grass. Having
wholesomeness and being given happiness are [as clear as] the comparison
between white and black. How could there not be a difference? Nevertheless,
you ask what is the difference [between the two].”
A person asked, “Confucius said, ‘While you are not able to serve human
beings, how can you serve the spirits? While you do not know life, how can
you know about death?’31 The sage declined to answer this [question on spiritual beings and life and death]. Now Buddhists always speak of matters of

17

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

3c

life and death, as well as of the affairs of spiritual beings. I am wondering if
this goes against the words of sages and saints. Those who follow the Way
ought to make the mind absolutely vacant and simple, and return to the principle
of simplicity. Why, then, do [Buddhists] disturb our will by talking about life
and death? Why do they speak unnecessary words about spiritual beings?”
Mouzi replied, “It appears that your words are, so to speak, like those
who observe the outside and yet are not aware of the inside. Confucius
deplored the fact that Zilu did not consider the whole issue from beginning
to end. [Therefore,] he merely restrained [Zilu] with those words. The Canon
of Filial Piety says, ‘Build the ancestral shrine [for one’s departed parents].
Present offerings to them in the same way as you would worship spiritual
beings. Offer sacriﬁces in the spring and autumn, thinking of them.’ It continues, ‘Devote yourself to loving and respecting them while they are alive.
Devote yourself to mourning after their death.’32 Did [the sage] not teach
people to serve the spiritual beings and to know about life and death?
“The Duke of Zhou begged [spiritual beings] for Emperor Wu’s life and
said, ‘I, Dan, am versatile and able to serve spiritual beings.’33 What does
this mean? Isn’t the tenor of life and death stated in the Buddhist scriptures
of this kind? Laozi said, ‘If one who knows the child (i.e., the phenomenal
world) proceeds to guard the child’s mother (i.e., to preserve the One), he
will be free from all peril to the end of his life.’34 [Laozi] also said, ‘If he
who employs the light reverts to its [source of] brightness, no disaster will
befall him.’35 These statements are about the tenor of life and death and the
positions of good or bad fortune. The essence of the highest Way is to truly
esteem solitude. Why would Buddhists be fond of debate [about life and
death]? It is only that they cannot ignore it when someone comes to ask questions. Can there be a bell or a drum that makes a sound by itself? They only
produce sounds when struck.”
A person asked, “Confucius said: ‘The barbarians of the east and north
have their rulers, but they are still not as good as the states without rulers in
our great land.’36 Mencius ridiculed Chen Xiang, who was learning more of
Xu Xing’s teaching, saying, ‘I have heard of people using [teachings of] our
great land to change the barbarians’ [customs], but I have never heard that
our customs were changed by the barbarians’ teachings.’37 You learned the
way of Emperor Yao and Emperor Shun, the Duke of Zhou, and Confucius

18

Fascicle One

at an early age, but you abandoned it and are learning more about the barbarians’ teaching. Are you continuously deluded?”
Mouzi replied, “[Words like] this sound only like the idle talk of the
time when I did not yet understand the Great Way. It may be said that you
see the elegance of ceremonial forms and yet lack knowledge about the truth
of morality, or that you catch a glimpse of the light of a torch or candle but
you have not yet seen the sun in the sky. What Confucius spoke of are the
ways to correct social customs or practices. Why Mencius spoke thus is
merely that he deplored [that Chen Xiang] concentrated his attention on [Xu
Xing’s teaching]. Formerly wishing to live in the region of the nine barbarian
tribes of the east, Confucius said, ‘If a gentleman dwelled among them, what
vileness would there be?’38 When Confucius could not ﬁnd an ofﬁcial position
in the states of Lu and Wei, and when Mencius was not employed in the
states of Qi and Liang, how could they have taken service in the states of the
barbarian tribes of the east and north?
“[The legendary ruler] Yu is from Qiang, the barbarian tribe in west
China, and yet he was a sage. Gusou is the father of [the sage king] Shun
and yet he was foolish. You Yu was born in [the barbarian state of] Di [to
the north of our great land], and yet [he helped] Qin establish hegemony.
Guan[shu Xian] and Cai[shu Du] (i.e., the Duke of Zhou’s brothers) came
from the basin between the Yellow River and the Luo River, but they spread
a false rumor [to cause trouble for the Duke of Zhou].
“A commentary says, ‘The polestar is located in the middle of the sky,
in the north above us.’ Seen from this point of view, the land of Han (i.e.,
China) is not necessarily the center of the universe. According to what the
Buddhist scriptures state, all sentient beings of the entire universe belong to
the Buddha. Therefore, I heartily esteem Buddhism and study it. What reason
do I have to abandon the way of Emperor Yao and Emperor Shun, the Duke
of Zhou, and Confucius? Gold and pearl never impair each other. The Marquis
of Sui’s pearl and emerald never hindered each other. You say that other
people are deluded, yet it is you yourself who is deluded!”
A person asked, “It cannot be said to be charitable to give away one’s
father’s property to a stranger. It cannot be said to be benevolent to sacriﬁce
oneself for others while one’s parents are still alive. Nowadays a Buddhist
scripture states that Prince Sudāna gave his father’s property to complete

19

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

4a

strangers, granted a precious elephant belonging to the state to its enemies,
and [gave away] his own wives and children to others.39 It is said to be uncivil
to not respect one’s own parents and yet to respect others. It is said to be
immoral to not love one’s own parents and yet to love others.40 Prince Sudāna
was neither ﬁlial nor kind, but Buddhists respect him. Isn’t this peculiar?”
Mouzi replied, “In the doctrine of the Five Classics, the ﬁrst son [from
the legal wife] is designated as heir. Yet the Great King [of the Zhou dynasty]
saw [his grandson] Chang’s ambition. [So] he moved his youngest son [Jili,
who was Chang’s father, up in the succession] to become his heir. Consequently, the enterprise of the Zhou dynasty was achieved, and by means of
this a peaceful world was realized. In the custom of marrying a woman, a
man must inform his parents [to obtain their approval]. [Nevertheless,]
Emperor Shun married [two daughters of Emperor Yao] without telling [his
parents]. By this means, he achieved the important relation of husband and
wife. People of integrity must be invited for service and talented vassals wait
to be drafted for public services. Yi Yin, [however,] carried a heavy threelegged caldron on his back and besought King Tang [of the Yin dynasty for
an ofﬁcial position]. Ning Qi knocked on [his ox’s] horns to beseech [Lord
Huan of] Qi [to grant him an ofﬁcial position]. With [the help of Yi Yin,]
King Tang won the throne, and with [the help of Ning Qi,] Qi state attained
hegemony.
“According to etiquette, a man and a woman should not put their hands
on each other, [but] if the wife of one’s elder brother is drowning, it is an
expedient way in [such an] emergency to put one’s hands on her [in order to
pull her out of the water]. If we can comprehend the greatness of things, then
we should no longer pay attention to minor details. Why should a great person
comprehend ordinary matters? Prince Sudāna saw that the world is impermanent, and money and property were not real treasures for him. Therefore,
he donated at his will, and by doing so he achieved the Great Way. His father’s
kingdom received the blessings, and enemies were unable to invade [his
father’s kingdom]. When [Prince Sudāna] attained buddhahood, his parents
and brothers were all able to attain liberation as well. If this is not a ﬁlial and
benevolent [act], then what is benevolent and ﬁlial?”
A person asked, “In Buddhism, wuwei is of value, giving alms is pleasurable, and observing the precepts requires as much caution and attention as

20

Fascicle One

if one were approaching an abyss. Today, śramaṇas give themselves up to
wine. Some have wives and children, or purchase [goods] at a low price and
sell [them] at a high price [for proﬁt]. They devote themselves to such swindles. This is a great hypocrisy in the world.41 Is this what is called wuwei in
Buddhism?”
Mouzi replied, “Gongshu [Ban, a master carpenter in Lu state during
the Spring and Autumn period,] was able to give people a hatchet, an ax, and
an ink line [with which to do construction], but he was not able to make them
as skillful as himself. Sages are able to impart their ways to others, but they
cannot make others follow and perform them. Gao Yao was able to punish
thieves, but he couldn’t make greedy people become [as upright as] Boyi
and Shuqi. The ﬁve penalties can punish villains, but they cannot regenerate
such evil people to be [as virtuous as the disciples of Confucius,] Zeng Shen
and Min Ziqian. Emperor Yao was not able to educate [his son] Dan Zhu,
and the Duke of Zhou was unable to admonish [his brothers] Guan[shu Xian]
and Cai[shu Du]. Wouldn’t Tang’s (i.e., Emperor Yao) teaching be clear?
Wouldn’t the Duke of Zhou be possessed of morality? [Yes, they were.]
Nevertheless, there was no help for bad people.
“Figuratively speaking, if people who are well versed in the Seven Classics are smitten with money and women, can it be said that the six arts [that
these people have mastered] are depraved and lustful? Hebo, even though
he is the god [of the Yellow River], cannot drown people who stay on land.
A violent wind, though it blows swiftly, cannot ﬂing dust onto the surface
of deep water. You must be worried about the fact that people are unable to
practice. How can you say that Buddhism has vice?”
A person asked, “Confucius said, ‘Luxury leads to haughtiness, and frugality to meanness. It is better to be mean than to be haughty.’42 Shusun
[Qiaoru] said, ‘Frugality is respectful. Luxury is the worst among evil acts.’43
Today Buddhists consider donating all one’s property to be honorable and
giving all one’s money to others to be valuable. How can there be merit [in
doing so]?”
Mouzi replied, “‘That was one [critical] time, and this is another.’44 This
expression by Confucius [indicates that] he detested luxury and impoliteness,
and Shusun’s comment [is intended] to admonish the arrogance of Lord
[Zhuang], who carved pillars. Neither case prohibits making donations. When

21

4b

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

[Emperor] Shun tilled on Mount Li, his benevolence did not reach even the
neighboring area. Taigong [Wang Lü Shang] butchered cows [to make a living],45 but his kindness did not extend to his wife and children. After these
two men were employed, their benevolence ﬂowed all over the world and
their kindness was bestowed upon the world. For those who have abundant
property and plenty of money, it is valuable to give alms to others. For those
who live in poverty and who are often poor, it is valuable to follow the Way.
“Xu You was not greedy to ascend the throne. Boyi was not contented
to take the reins of the state. Yu Qing gave up a ﬁef of tens of thousands of
households, and gave relief to destitute people in a crisis. These are all [acts
of] their goodwill. Xi Fuji [of Cao state took his wife’s advice and] gave a
pot of food to [Zhong’er, who defeated Cao], and his kindness helped keep
his community intact (i.e., Zhong’er did not attack the community).46 Xuan
Meng (i.e., Zhao Dun) saved his most important life and body in return for
a meal [he had given to Ling Zhe].47 If you have done good in secret, without
expecting return, you will receive a positive reward as bright as the sun.
Needless to say, if you sink in fortune in order to give rise to good intentions,
your merit and virtue are as lofty as Mount Song or Mount Tai, and as vast
as a great river or the ocean. Those who embrace a compassionate heart are
rewarded with happiness, and those who harbor evil receive misfortune as
retribution. It has never happened that those who have planted rice will
harvest wheat, or that those who have caused disaster will obtain happiness.”
A person said, “Among qualities, nothing surpasses sincerity; in speech,
nothing goes beyond truth. Laozi eschewed artful expressions and showed
respect for simple words. Buddhist scriptures, [however,] do not directly
indicate the matter and yet extensively take allegories in vain. Allegory is
not the essence of reason. It is a combination of different matters in order to
express one thing, which is not an excellent explanation. Even though
[Buddhist scriptures] have numerous expressions and extensive words, they
are similar to a cart full of fragments of jade pieces, which are not considered
to be treasure.”
Mouzi responded, “Things that both [a speaker and a listener] have seen
can be explained with the real thing, but things that only a speaker has seen
are difﬁcult to explain in exact words. Formerly a person who had not seen
a kylin asked someone who had seen one, ‘What kind [of animal] is a kylin?’

22

Fascicle One

The one who had seen it answered, ‘A kylin is just like a kylin.’ The questioner
said, ‘If I had seen a kylin, then I would not have asked you the question.
Nevertheless, you said only that a kylin is just like a kylin. How can I understand this?’ The one who had seen a kylin said, ‘The kylin has a body like a
roe deer, a tail like a cow, hooves like a deer, and a back like a horse.’ The
questioner understood right away.
“Confucius asked, ‘Is one not like a gentleman when he does not feel
depressed even though people do not know of him?’48 Laozi said, ‘Can the
space between Heaven and Earth not be compared to a bellows?’49 Moreover,
he said, ‘How the Way is in the world is compared to waterways between
mountains that ﬂow into large rivers and oceans.’50 Would these be considered
artful expressions? The Analects (Lunyu) of Confucius states, ‘He who takes
the reins of government by means of virtue can be compared to the north
polestar.’51 Here, a celestial body is referred to and compared to a human
being. Zixia said, ‘It is just as all plants have differences [in their growth].’52
The three hundred chapters in the Book of Odes [were compiled], collecting
events and arranging them into each category. In writings by the thinkers of
the numerous schools [in the late Zhou dynasty] and books about the occult,
up to books classiﬁed for sages, there is none that does not employ allegories
or use parables. Do you maliciously say that when he expands the teaching,
the Buddha alone uses allegories and parables?”
A person asked, “There is no one among the people who, while conducting
themselves in life, does not like wealth and high position, does not hate poverty,
is not pleased by joy and leisure, or does not avoid troubles. The Yellow
Emperor considered the ﬁve kinds of meat (i.e., beef, lamb, pork, ﬁsh, and
venison) to be the best to keep us in good health. Confucius said, ‘He does
not detest ﬁnely cleaned rice and ﬁnely minced meat.’53 Nowadays śramaṇas
put on red robes, have only one meal a day, and shut off their six sense organs
throughout their lifetimes. If they are like this, what fun do they have?”
Mouzi replied, “[Confucius said,] ‘Wealth and high position are what
people desire, but if a gentleman does not obtain them in the proper way, he
would not place himself there. Poverty and meanness are what people detest,
but if a gentleman cannot avoid them in the proper way, he would not abandon
them.’54 Laozi said, ‘The ﬁve colors (i.e., blue, yellow, red, white, and black)
cause people to become blind. The ﬁve notes [of traditional Chinese music]

23

4c

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

(i.e., gong, shang, jue, zhi, and yu) cause people to become deaf. The ﬁve
ﬂavors (i.e., sweet, sour, bitter, pungent, and salty) cause people’s tastebuds
to be paralyzed. Going at full speed in the wild while hunting makes people
crazy. Rare goods distract people from having [proper] conduct. [As a result,]
sages take care of their bellies and not their eyes.’55 How could these words
be false? Hui of Liuxia [of Lu state] did not change the way he acted even
after he was offered a position as one of the three highest-ranking ofﬁcials.56
Mu of Duangan did not barter his body for the wealth offered by Lord Wen
of Wei state.57 Xu You and Chaofu lived high up in a tree, which they said
was more peaceful than the imperial palace. Boyi and Shuqi starved on Mount
Shouyang, but they said they were more satisﬁed than King Wen and King
Wu. Probably they were satisﬁed just with their resolutions. Why [do you
say that śramaṇas] have no fun?”
A person asked, “If Buddhist scriptures are profound and extravagant,
why do you neither talk about them at court nor discuss them with your superior and father? You cultivate only at home and relay [the teaching] to your
friends. Why do you also study the Classics and commentaries and read various philosophers’ works?”
Mouzi replied, “You have not yet reached the origin, and yet you ask
about the streams [that emanate from the source]. I do not mean that it is not
magniﬁcent to set out a sacriﬁcial stand and pot at a camp gate, to hoist military ﬂags and banners in a palace hall, to cope with [the heat of] the ﬁfth
month by wearing a fox-fur robe, or to ward off [the coldness of] the eleventh
month by putting on a hemp garment. These actions are perverse in their orientation of time and place.58 Therefore, if you sustain the teaching of Confucius
and become a disciple of [the Legalist Gongsun] Yang, the lord of Shang, or
if you have the theory of Mencius [who advocated the rule of right] in your
mind yet call on Su Qin or Zhang Yi [who advocated the rule of might], you
will have no accomplishment at all but you will have made a big mistake.
“Laozi said, ‘When scholars of the highest class hear about the Way,
they diligently practice it. Scholars of the middle class, when they hear about
the Way, keep only half in their mind. Scholars of the lowest class, when
they hear about the Way, have a great laugh at it.’59 Since I am afraid that
[scholars of the lowest class] will burst into laughter, I will not talk [about
Buddhism]. When one is thirsty, he does not necessarily drink the water of

24

Fascicle One

a large river. But how can he be dissatisﬁed with the water of wells and fountains? For this reason, I study the Classics and commentaries as well.”
A person asked, “What is the history of the land of Han (i.e., China)
hearing about Buddhism for the ﬁrst time?”
Mouzi replied, “Many years ago, Emperor Xiaoming (r. 57–75) saw in
a dream a holy man who had sunlight on his body and who ﬂew in front of
the palace. [The emperor] was greatly delighted with this. Next day, he asked
of the entire body of ministers, ‘What god is this?’ Fu Yi, a well-read, greatly
experienced person, answered, ‘I have heard that in India there was a man
who had attained the Way. He is called the Buddha. He could ﬂy in the air
and had sunlight on his body. I am worried that [you saw] that god.’ Then
the emperor came to realize this and dispatched [to the west] eighteen people,
including the Inner Gentleman Cai Yin, the Gentleman of the Palace Guard
Qin Jing, and the Disciple of the Erudite Wang Zun. They copied the Buddhist
scripture [called] the Sutra of Forty-two Chapters (Sishierzhang), in [the
country of] Dayuezhi [in Central Asia]. The sutra was deposited in the fourteenth cubicle of the Lantai stone chambers [in Luoyang]. Then, outside the
Yong gate to the west of Luoyang a Buddhist temple was built. On the walls
[of the temple] was painted an illustration of a large military group of mounted
soldiers circumambulating a pagoda thrice clockwise. Furthermore, buddha
images were made and placed on the Qingliang Tower of the southern palace
and on the Kaiyang Gate of the city wall. During his reign, Emperor Ming
had his mausoleum called Xianjie (“Prominence and Uprightness”) constructed in advance. Illustrations and images of the Buddha were made and
placed on it as well. At that time, the nation was rich, the people enjoyed
peace, and barbarians in distant regions admired our morality. Hence, the
number of those who studied Buddhism increased.”
A man asked, “Laozi said, ‘Those who know do not speak, while those
who speak do not know.’60 He also said, ‘He who is greatly eloquent speaks
with a stammer, and he who is greatly skillful looks clumsy.’61 [Just as Confucius said,] ‘A gentleman is ashamed that his words are greater than his conduct.’62 Supposing that śramaṇas have attained the highest Way, why do they
not practice it instead of sitting [and doing nothing]? Why do they talk about
right and wrong and take up right and wrong for discussion? I think that these
[śramaṇas] commit the theft of virtue.”

25

5a

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

Mouzi replied, “Suppose you are afraid that next spring there will be a
serious famine, so you do not eat in the autumn [in order to save food]. Or,
fearful that it will be cold in the eleventh month, you wear two fur robes,
one over the other, in the ﬁfth month. Although these actions are taken in
order to be fully prepared beforehand, it is unavoidable that you look stupid.
Laozi’s maxim refers only to those who have attained the Way. What do
those who have not attained the Way know? When the Great Way is explained
in one word, the whole world is joyful. Isn’t this great eloquence? Didn’t
Laozi say that ‘When the work is done, to retire into obscurity is the Way of
Heaven’?63 When a person has already retired into obscurity, what more does
he have to say? Śramaṇas of today have not yet attained the Way. How can
they help but to speak? Even Laozi, [who said ‘those who know do not
speak,’] still made speeches. If he remained silent, [as he taught,] how could
he give the account of the Five Thousand Words (i.e., the Daodejing)?
“It is all right if one knows [the Way] and does not speak it. But if one
is unable to know [the Way] and furthermore unable to speak it, he is just
stupid! Consequently, he who is able to speak [the Way] but unable to carry
it out is the teacher of the nation. He who is able to carry out [the Way] but
unable to speak it is the force of the nation. He who is able to carry out [the
Way] and also speak it is the treasure of the nation. Each of these three types
of people has an applicable point. How then could they commit the theft of
virtue? Only those who are unable to speak and also unable to carry out [the
Way] can be said to commit the theft [of virtue].”
A person asked, “If things are just as you say, we should only have to
learn how to progress in our debates and study speeches and discussions.
Why do we have to regulate our minds and follow morality as well?”
Mouzi replied, “How slow to understand you are! Spoken language and
discussion have their own proper and adequate times. It is said about Qu
Yuan [in the Analects of Confucius], ‘When the Way prevails in the world,
he is straightforward. When the Way does not prevail in the world, he can
roll up [his principles] and keep them close to his heart.’64 About Ning Wuzi,
it is said [in the Analects], ‘When the Way prevailed in the world, he displayed
his intelligence. When the Way did not prevail in the world, he behaved like
a stupid person.’65 Confucius said, ‘Not to talk to one with whom you may
talk is to waste a person [of talent]. To talk to one with whom you may not

26

Fascicle One

talk is to waste your words.’66 Therefore, to be intelligent or to behave like
a stupid person both have their proper times. [Based on time and place,]
speech and discussion serve several purposes. Why [do you say that] we
[only have to learn how to progress in] debates and discussion without carrying
out [the Way]?”
A person asked, “Why do you say that Buddhism is the most esteemed
and the happiest teaching of wuwei and freedom from avarice? Many people
and scholars in the world slander [Buddhism], saying that ‘Its words and
theory are vague, difﬁcult to take up [for practice], and [the notion of] absolute
emptiness is hard to believe.’ Why [do they say this]?”
Mouzi replied, “The most delicious food does not satisfy every palate.
Great music is not familiar to every ear. Even if [the noble music] Xianchi
[composed by the Yellow Emperor] is played, [the reﬁned music] Dazhang
[composed by Emperor Yao] is set forth, [the lofty music] Xiaoshao [composed by Emperor Shun] is set out, and the music is sung nine times, no one
joins in the chorus. [On the contrary,] if music from a stringed instrument of
[the ruined states] Zheng and Wei is played, or if current popular songs are
sung, [many people] unexpectedly clap their hands on the beat without fail.
Therefore, Song Yu, [replying to King Xiang of Chu state,] said, ‘A visitor
sang in Ying, [the capital city of Chu]. When he performed simple and crude
folk songs, those who joined in the chorus numbered a thousand people.
When he played [highbrow music], making the [reﬁned] note shang and
stringing up to the clear note jue, no one in the audience responded.’67 This
indicates that all the people were pleased with vulgar music and did not
understand well-cultivated [music].
“Han Fei criticized Emperor Yao and Emperor Shun from a narrow viewpoint, as if looking at [the sky] through a tube. Jie Yu reproached Confucius
with a view as small as a [strand of] hair.68 They all stand pat in their inferior
[views] and disregard great [views]. To hear the clear note shang and say
that it is the note jue is not the fault of the player but due to the listener’s
poor faculty [of listening]. To see [Bian] He’s jade and call it a stone is not
because the jade is ignoble but due to the beholder’s lack of knowledge.69 A
snake with supernatural powers can regenerate its body into one even if it is
cut into many pieces, but [the snake] cannot cause people not to cut it apart.
A turtle with mysterious powers appeared to Lord Yuan of Song state in a

27

5b

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

5c

dream, but [the turtle] could not evade the net of [the ﬁsherman] Yu Qie.70
The Great Way is wuwei, which is neither what ordinary people understand,
nor what may increase its value by praise, nor what may lose its value by
slander. Whether or not it is employed is up to Heaven. Whether or not it is
practiced is up to the turn of time. Whether or not it is believed is up to fate.”
A person asked, “You interpret the Buddha’s teaching with the Classics
and their commentaries. Your expressions are rich, and the meanings are
clear. Your compositions are energetic and the explanations are beautiful.
Isn’t this due to your rhetorical skill rather than being the truth?”
Mouzi replied, “No, it is not. Since I have a broad view of things, I am
simply not deluded.”
A person asked, “How did you come to have a broad view of things?”
Mouzi replied, “Through the Buddhist scriptures. When I did not understand Buddhist scriptures, I was more deluded than you are. Even though I
recited the Five Classics, I just considered them to be ﬂowery and had not
come to realize their truth. Now I see the doctrines of the Buddhist scriptures,
read the essentials of the Laozi [Daodejing], abide by the nature of tranquility
without worldly desires, and contemplate the practice of wuwei. When I come
back to view the affairs of the world, I feel as if I am stealing a glance at a
gorge from high above the earth,71 or as if I am ascending Mount Song and
Mount Dai to look over the small foothills. The Five Classics are just like the
ﬁve ﬂavors and Buddhism is just like the ﬁve grains (i.e., staple foods). Since
I heard the Way, I have been in a condition that is just like clouds opening up
to reveal the sun, or entering into a dark room holding a torch.”
A person asked, “You said that [the Buddhist] scriptures are [as deep
as] great rivers and seas, and the words are [as beautiful as] brocade and
embroidery. Why do you respond to my questions referring to [the Classics
such as] the Book of Odes and the Book of History instead of using Buddhist
scriptures? Do you intend to combine different categories in one?”
Mouzi replied, “A thirsty man does not need [the water of] a large river
or the sea to quench his thirst. A hungry man does not need the granary of
Mount Ao to ﬁll his stomach. The Way is established for the wise. Debate
is well constructed for knowledgeable people. Books are transmitted for
those who understand them. Things are clariﬁed for people of insight. I refer
to phrases [of the Classics] since I think that you know the meanings. If I

28

Fascicle One

speak with the words of Buddhist scriptures and discuss the essentials of
wuwei, it would be like explaining the ﬁve colors to the blind, or playing the
ﬁve notes [of traditional Chinese music] for the deaf. Even though [music]
master Kuang [of Jin state] was artful, he could not strum a Chinese zither
that had no string. Although fox and badger furs are warm, they cannot warm
the dead.
“Gongming Yi [of Lu state] played the musical piece Cao in the note
qingjue for a cow, but the cow just bent her head down and ate [grass] as
before. This does not mean that she did not listen to [the music], but [the
music] did not meet her ears. On the other hand, if there were the buzz of a
mosquito or gadﬂy or the lowing of an orphaned calf, she would promptly
swish her tail, strain her ears, and stamp on the ground, listening to it. This
is why I only respond to your questions referring to the Classics.”
A person asked, “Once when I was in the capital, I entered Dongguan
Library and studied at Taixue National University, where I saw what talented
scholars regulated and I listened to what the circle of Confucian scholars discussed. However, I never heard that to cultivate Buddhism is considered valuable and that to damage one’s appearance by oneself is considered superior.
Why do you indulge in [Buddhism]? When you get lost, alter the route! When
you exhaust all methods, return to the old [method]! Don’t you think so?”
Mouzi replied, “One who excels in dealing with extraordinary matters
cannot be deceived. One who is versed in the Way cannot be surprised by
strange things. One who discerns tones in words cannot be deluded by words.
One who understands righteousness cannot be swayed by proﬁt. Laozi said,
‘Fame harms oneself. Advantages debauch one’s behavior.’72 He also said,
‘If deception is set up and power is established, the absolute vacancy spontaneously becomes valuable.’73 To cultivate the art of the inner chamber, to
go with the current of the times, and to strive to tune oneself to the present
time, taking advantage of unguarded moments, are actions taken by scholars
of the lowest class and rejected even by scholars of the middle class.
“It is needless to speak of the highest Way, which is vast and what sages
of the highest class practice. [The highest Way] is as expansive as the sky
and as deep as the sea. It is not suitable for people who peep over a wall or
for those who consider a several ren-high wall to be tall. This is proper, as
a matter of course. [These people] see the gate (i.e., outer factors), while I

29

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

6a

see the room (i.e., inner factors). They pluck the ﬂowers (i.e., worldly glory),
while I take the fruit (i.e., truth). They seek perfection, while I preserve the One.
You should change course immediately! I ask you to follow [Buddhism]. You
have not been aware of what the causes of fortune and misfortune are like.”
A person asked, “With the words of the Classics and their commentaries
and the splendid doctrines, you praise the Buddha’s conduct and extol his
virtue, which [you say] is lofty, as it rides the high clear clouds, and is wide,
as it goes beyond the end of the earth. Can it be that [your praises] exceed the
essential qualities and surpass the reality [of the Buddha]? Accordingly, my
taunt considerably touches Buddhism on its disadvantage and hits the vitals.”
Mouzi replied, “Alas! My praises [for the Buddha’s virtue] are just like
adding a speck of dust to Mount Song and Mount Tai, or collecting the morning dew and throwing it into a large river or the sea. Your slanderous words
[against Buddhism] are like using a ladle and goblet to attempt to reduce
[the volume of water in] a large river or the sea, or plowing by foot to attempt
to lower Mount Kunlun, or raising a hand to block the sunlight, or lifting a
lump of earth to block the ﬂow of the Yellow River. My praises cannot make
the Buddha loftier and your slander cannot bring him low.”
A person asked, “Is the issue of longevity stated in the talisman registers
of Wang Qiao, Chisongzi, and the eight immortals, and in the one hundred
and seventy fascicles of [Gan Ji’s] Divine Book (Shenshu), the same as that
in the Buddhist scriptures?”
Mouzi replied, “A comparison [between these texts of the immortals
and the Buddhist scriptures] in category is just like comparing the ﬁve powers
(i.e., the ﬁve states of Qi, Song, Jin, Qin, and Chu in the late Zhou dynasty)
with the Five Thearchs [who ruled in accordance with virtue], or comparing
Yang Huo, [who looked like Confucius,] with Confucius himself. A comparison [between them] in shape is just like comparing foothills with Mount
Hua and Mount Heng, or small creeks and ditches with large rivers and seas.
A comparison [between them] in elegance is just like comparing a tiger hide
with a sheepskin, or mottled hemp with brilliant and beautiful embroidery.
There are ninety-six different teachings, but the most esteemed among them
is none other than Buddhism. The texts of the immortals, when we listen to
their words, sound great and ﬁll our ears, but when we seek their efﬁcacy, it
is like grasping at wind or trying to catch a shadow. Hence, [the texts of the

30

Fascicle One

immortals] are not upheld in the Great Way and are not valued in wuwei.
How could they be the same?”
A person asked, “Some among the practitioners of the Way [of the Immortals] avoid grain and do not eat it, yet they drink wine and eat meat. They
say also that this is the way of Laozi. In Buddhism, however, to drink wine
and eat meat are the heaviest violations to the precepts, and yet [Buddhists]
do eat grain. Why do they contradict each other?”
Mouzi replied, “There are extant about ninety-six various teachings in
total. So far as having no worldly attachment and wuwei are concerned, nothing
is more esteemed than Buddhism. I have inspected the two volumes of the
Laozi [Daodejing] and have learned that this scripture prohibits the ﬁve
ﬂavors, but I have never seen any word to proscribe against the ﬁve major
grains. The sage (i.e., Confucius) formulated the writings of the seven canons
in which there is no mention of a prohibition against eating grain. Laozi
wrote the Five Thousand Words (i.e., the Daodejing) and yet the issue of
abstaining from grains is not indicated. The sage (i.e., Confucius) said, ‘Those
who eat grain are intelligent. Those who eat grass are silly. Those who eat
meat are violent. Those who eat vapor have a long life.’74 The people of the
world do not understand this matter; they see that the six kinds of birds stop
breathing and do not eat in the autumn and winter seasons, and then they try
to imitate them. They do not know that each thing or being has its own true
nature. It is just as a magnet attracts [a heavy piece of] iron and yet it cannot
pull a [light strand of] hair.”
A person asked, “Should we rather stop eating grain or not?”
Mouzi replied, “Before I understood the Great Way, I once learned [the
way of abstaining from grain] too. There are several thousand and several
hundred methods to abstain from grain. When I practiced them, they were
not effective at all; when I performed them, there were no [good] signs at
all. Therefore, I just gave up [these methods]. I observed the three teachers
with whom I studied. They described themselves to be seven hundred, ﬁve
hundred, and three hundred years old [respectively], but in less than three
years after I had begun to study with them, they all died. The cause of their
deaths is probably that they abstained from grain, did not eat it, and [instead]
ate various fruits; they went back for second and third servings when they
enjoyed meat; they had an entire barrel of wine when they drank; their spirits

31

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

6b

were muddled and delirious; the energy of grain did not ﬁll [their bodies];
and their ears and eyes were deluded and were not debarred from lewdness
and evil. When I asked them why they did this, they replied, ‘Laozi said that
he reduces and again reduces till he comes up to wuwei.75 We need only to
reduce day by day.’ As far as I observed them, however, they just increased
[their self-interest] day by day and did not reduce [anything at all]. Thereupon,
they all died before reaching the age at which one may know the decrees of
Heaven (i.e., ﬁfty years old).76 Even Emperor Yao, Emperor Shun, the Duke
of Zhou, and Confucius were all unable to live to a hundred years of age.
Nevertheless, foolish and deluded people of these latter days want to seek
inexhaustible longevity by [the alimentotherapy of] ingesting drugs and the
avoidance of grain. How sad!”
A person asked, “Those who practice the Way [of the Immortals] say
that they can prevent disease and do not get sick, or that they can recover
from illness without acupuncture and medicine. Is this true? Why do Buddhists
recommend acupuncture and medicine when someone becomes ill?”
Mouzi replied, “Laozi said, ‘When things reach their prime, they begin
aging. This may be said to be the deviation from the Way. Anything that deviates from the Way soon comes to an end.’77 Only those who have attained
the [Buddhist] Way will not be reborn. Since they are not reborn, they will
not be in the prime, either. Since they are not in the prime, they will not age,
either. Since they do not age, they will not become ill. Since they do not
become ill, they will not decay. For this reason, Laozi considered having a
body to be a great calamity.78 When King Wu was ill, the Duke of Zhou
begged for [King Wu’s] life,79 and when Confucius was ill, Zilu asked leave
to pray for [Confucius].80 I see that all the sages became ill, but I have never
seen that they did not fall into illness. Shen Nong tasted [the ﬂavors of the
various] grasses and he was about to die several tens of times.81 The Yellow
Emperor bowed with his head to the ground and received acupuncture from
Qi Bo. How could these three sages be inferior to Daoist practitioners of the
present time? When I examine [these points], your words are also worthy of
rejection.”
A person asked, “All teachings are the same in [regard to learning]
wuwei. Why do you distinguish them from each other, arrange them, and

32

Fascicle One

indicate their differences? Furthermore, you cause those who learn the teaching
to be suspicious. I am afraid that this is wasteful and futile.”
Mouzi replied, “Although we call all of them ‘grass,’ the natures of various grasses cannot be distinctively explained. We call them all ‘metal,’ but
the natures of various kinds of metals cannot be distinctively explained. Even
in the same category, there are differences in their natures. All things are just
so. Why would this not be so only in regard to teachings? In bygone days
Yang [Zhu] and Mo [Di] blocked the path of a group of Confucianists. Their
carts could not advance, and people could not make progress. It was not until
Mencius opened up [the path] that the people came to know what to follow.82
[Music] master Kuang played his Chinese zither, waiting for someone who
could understand his tune to appear in later ages.83 Sages formulated the
model decorum, hoping that gentlemen would see it in the future.
“Seeing that a jade and a stone were put in the same chest, Yi Dun turned
pale.84 Seeing that purple overpowered vermilion when the two colors mixed,
Confucius sighed in lamentation.85 [The light of] the sun and moon is not
unclear, yet numerous clouds obscure it. Buddhism is not incorrect, but
numerous private teachings obscure its justice. Thereupon, I distinguish and
differentiate [Buddhism from other teachings]. The intelligence of Zang Wen
[Zhong] and the uprightness of Weisheng [Gao] were what Confucius was
very stern about.86 All of his words were [spoken in order] to correct [the
vices of] the world. Why is it wasteful and futile [to distinguish teachings
from each other]?”
A person asked, “It is all right if you slander the immortals, repress
unusual things, and do not believe that there is a way to immortality. Why
do you believe that it is only Buddhism by which one should attain liberation?
The Buddha lived in a foreign land. You have not set foot on that soil, and
have not yet seen the place. You have only read the writings and trust in what
[the Buddha] did. He who sees [only] a bright aspect is unable to know the
reality. He who sees a shadow is unable to discern the form. [What you
believe] is almost untrue.”
Mouzi replied, “Confucius said, ‘See what a man does, observe what
he has done, and examine with what he is content. How could he conceal
his character?’87 Formerly, [Taigong] Wang Lü [Shang] and the Duke of

33

6c

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

Zhou asked each other about their administrations, and each knew how [the
states of Qi and Lu] would end up.88 Yan Yuan, on the day when he rode on
a carriage drawn by a team of four horses, observed Dongye Bi’s way of
handling the horses and he knew [that the horses] would break down.89 Zigong
witnessed the meeting of [Prince Yin of] Zhu state and [Prince Ding of] Lu
state, and intuited the reasons for their death [based on their behavior].90
Confucius heard the notes of strings played by [music] master Kuang and
recognized that it was King Wen’s musical composition.91 Jizha [of Wu] listened to music and saw the customs of various countries.92 Why is it necessary
to set foot on [that soil] and see [that place]?”
A person asked, “I once traveled in Khotan country where I often met
śramaṇas and Buddhist followers, whom I reproved, referring to my [Confucian] doctrines. None could respond to me and they all backed down. Many
of them corrected their resolution and changed their intention. Why do you
alone have difﬁculty reforming yourself?”
Mouzi replied, “When light feathers meet with wind high above, they
are blown away. When ﬁne stones get into the ﬂow of water from a mountain
stream, they are carried down[stream]. Mount Tai alone remains unmoved
in a whirlwind. Massive rocks are not swept away even by a rapid current.
When plum trees are nipped by the frost, they become leaﬂess, but pines and
cypresses are hardly withered. The Buddhist followers you met were certainly
not of broad experience and knowledge and did not have extensive insight.
Consequently, they humbly backed down. You, [however,] are not going to
vanquish even a stupid person such as myself, not to speak of those who are
well versed in the [Buddhist] Way. You do not reform yourself and yet want
to change others. I have never heard that Confucius followed the robber Zhi,
or that King Tang [of the Yin dynasty] and King Wu [of the Zhou dynasty,
who are known as sages,] modeled themselves after [the tyrants] King Jie
[of the Xia dynasty] and King Zhou [of the Yin dynasty].”
A person said, “In the Way of the Divine Transcendents, one does not
eat in autumn and winter, nor does he shut himself up in a room for dozens
of days. This can be said to be the [condition of] the most content, free from
avarice. I think that this should be considered respectful and valuable, and I
am afraid that Buddhism is not as good as [the Way of Divine Transcendents].”

34

Fascicle One

Mouzi said, “Pointing to the south when it is in fact the north, one says
to himself that he is not confused. Considering west to be east, he says to
himself that he is not stupid. Being a [humble] owl, he laughs at [a noble]
phoenix. Holding [insigniﬁcant creatures such as] mole crickets and earthworms, one ridicules turtles and dragons. Cicadas do not eat, but gentlemen
do not value them. Frogs and pythons hibernate, but sages do not attach
importance to them. Confucius said, ‘Of all [beings who have] life between
Heaven and Earth, human beings are the noblest.’93 I have never heard that
he respected cicadas and pythons. Nevertheless, among the people of the
world there are inherently those who eat sweet ﬂag [grass] and discard cinnamon and ginger, and who decline to drink sweet dew but sip unreﬁned
vinegar. The ﬁne hair on the skin, although it is small, can be examined if
you look at it [closely enough]. Mount Tai’s loftiness cannot be seen if you
turn your back on it. It is a matter of whether or not you pay attention to it,
or whether or not you are careful. In Lu state the Ji family was respected and
Confucius was viliﬁed.94 In Wu state, Great Steward Pi was considered to
be capable and [Wu]zi Xu was not considered to be good.95 So, [given these
situations,] your questions [may be seen to be] reasonable.”
A person asked, “The school of Daoism says, ‘Emperor Yao and Emperor
Shun, the Duke of Zhou, Confucius, and seventy-two of his disciples did not
die and became immortals.’ The school of Buddhism says, ‘All people die
and no one can avoid death.’ Why?”
Mouzi replied, “These are absurd statements, not what the sages said.
Laozi said, ‘Even Heaven and Earth cannot last long. How much less can
human beings?’96 Confucius said, ‘Furthermore, [the virtuous] withdraw
from the world.97 Those who are benevolent and ﬁlial permanently exist.’
For as long as I have read books of the six arts and looked at biographies
and records, Emperor Yao passed away; Emperor Shun was [buried] on the
mountain of Cangwu; there is Emperor Yu’s mausoleum at Guiji; Boyi and
Shuqi have their tombs on Mount Shouyang; King Wen died before he could
put King Zhou (the last emperor of the Yin dynasty) to death; King Wu could
not wait for King Cheng to grow to adulthood but he passed away; there is
a chapter [in the record] regarding the reburial of the Duke of Zhou; Confucius
had a dream [in which he sat between] two pillars [receiving an offering];

35

7a

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

there is a record for the age of Bo Yu, when he died before his father (i.e.,
Confucius); there is a record that Zilu’s [body] was salted; there is the expression of [Confucius], ‘It is fate!’ for [Ran] Boniu;98 there is Zeng Shen’s expression [before his death], ‘Uncover my feet!’;99 and there are the records for
Yan Yuan that [Confucius] said, ‘Unfortunately, he was short-lived’100 and
then composed the parable of a young plant that does not go on to ﬂower.101
All these [examples] are written in the Classics, and are the utmost signiﬁcant
words by sages. I consider the Classics and their commentaries to testify [to
my words]. The people of the world take [the Daoist assertion] as testimony
and say [that these sages] did not die. Are they not deluded?”
A person asked, “Your interpretation is indeed perfect! Certainly it is
not what we can understand. I wonder, however, why your responses are
arranged in thirty-seven sections. Is there any model for this?”
Mouzi replied, “[Taking a hint from] rolling mugwort, wheels were
invented, and [observing ﬂoating] driftwood, boats and oars were devised.102
[Picking up an idea from] spider’s webs, nets [for catching birds] were
invented. [Seeing] bird tracks, [the Chinese] written language was created.
Therefore, it is easy to accomplish something if there is a model, while it is
difﬁcult to accomplish anything without a model. I read the essentials of the
Buddhist scriptures, which list thirty-seven elements [for enlightenment].103
The Laozi Dao[de]jing consists of thirty-seven chapters as well.104 Thereupon,
I modeled [my responses] after these [examples].”
Then the deluded people who heard [Mouzi’s explanation] became reverent and nervous; they turned pale. They stood up, folding their hands in
salute. They haltingly prostrated themselves and said, “We are ignorant, and
we were born in a benighted place. We dared to make stupid statements without worrying about fortune and misfortune. Now we have heard your instructions and [our doubts have been dispelled] very rapidly, just as hot water
melts snow. We tell you now that we will be able to repent, clear our minds,
and admonish ourselves. We wish to receive the ﬁve precepts and become
Buddhist laypeople.”

36

Fascicle One

The Discourse to Correct Faulty Accusations
[against Buddhism] (Zhengwulun)
by an Anonymous Writer

There was an idiosyncratic person who brought a false charge against the
Buddha. He said, “Yin Wenzi is a man who possessed supernatural power.
He sympathized with the northern barbarians [since they are like] a deer
whose father shares a doe with his son, they are avaricious and cruel, they
are proﬁteers, they are shameless, they encroach upon [neighboring lands],
they do not tire of massacring people, they cannot be persuaded by means
of the virtue of modesty, and they cannot be admonished by means of talk.
Therefore, [Yin] managed all things for them, and so forth. Moreover, he
had a disciple (i.e., the Buddha) who had attained the Way to transform, and
so on. Moreover, he made [the disciple] prohibit [the northern barbarians]
from destroying life, forbade their style of marriage, and proscribed them
from having offspring. As a measure to smite the barbarians, what is better
than this? And so forth.”
I corrected this, “The accuser already said that the Buddha does not
exist. Furthermore, he said that Wenzi had supernatural power. He also said
that there was a disciple who attained the Way, who could transform, who
was broadminded, and who completed the marvelous principles. These are
superﬁcial and heartless words. Now, Yin Wenzi is precisely a disciple of
Laozi. Laozi is namely a disciple of the Buddha. Therefore, it is stated in the
sutra, ‘I have heard it said that in Zhugan there was an old teacher who thoroughly entered nirvana and who eternally and everlastingly remains there
without beginning or end.’105 [The Chinese word] Zhugan means India. [The
term] nirvana is a barbarian word; the Chinese [equivalent] is wuwei. If the
Buddha was not [born] before Laozi, how could [Laozi] call [the Buddha]
the one who was born before himself (xiansheng)? If Laozi was not [born]
before Yin Wen, how could [Yin Wen] ask [Laozi] for the Daodejing? Inferring
from this, [we see that] the Buddha was formerly Wenzi’s ancestor, and the
original of all sages. How could it happen that a disciple can supernaturally
transform and his teacher cannot?
“Moreover, when a sage governs the world, he certainly rules over it
with morality. If the people in remote regions do not submit [to his rule], he

37

7b

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

paciﬁes them with [the inﬂuence of] civil culture and virtue. He uses weapons
only if compelled to out of necessity. He is one who will remove violence,
stop ﬁghting, save the people, and carry out a minor killing in order to stop
mass murder. Consequently, in the Spring and Autumn period, when feudal
lords subjugated [other states], they took actions relying on [the principles
of] justice and order. If their hostile state had a fault, they assuredly beat a
drum in order to make [the fault] known, and assembled troops of justice in
order to deal with those who caused the fault. They did not punish others for
ambiguous reasons. Therefore, when their enemies were subjugated, they
soothed [them] in a soft and gentle manner, and neither inﬂicted punishment
indiscriminately nor used armed force excessively beyond all reason. When
they won, they performed the rite of mourning [for those who had lost their
lives in battle]. When they killed, they wept with grief for those who had
been killed. Accordingly, to arrest by means of temptation was severely censured, and causes of extermination were strongly restricted.
“To appease evil in order to quell injustice, and to use the road [of the
other state] in order to carry out an atrocity [against its own enemy],106 are
variants of [stories found in] the Classics and their annotations. Innumerable
derisive comments and condemnation about them can be found. Therefore,
when [Zhao Meng of Jin state] met the feudal lords at [the west gate of] Song
state for a treaty of alliance, the reason [Zhao Meng] gave priority to Jin state
and restrained Chu state is because he hated [the people of Chu,] who were
deceptive and wore armor under their clothes [in order to wage a surprise
attack on the people of Jin], and he respected the virtue of honesty.107
“Resentment and benevolence toward an enemy should not affect the
descendants [of the enemy]. Vice is put to an end within one generation.
Heavy punishment should not be recklessly dispensed. This is a clever system
for all rulers to follow and an excellent law for governing a country. Generals
and jingoistic fellows of later ages, when they were troubled by the degeneration of morals, began to compete with each other depending on their cunning powers, and indulged their ravenous minds with deceptive plots. When
they did battle in a ﬁeld, they were unrestrained in attacking and killed everything in sight. When they annihilated a city, they completely buried [the
inhabitants] alive, to the last person. Therefore, Bai Qi (?–258 B.C.E.), [who
had buried alive many people of Zhao state who had surrendered,] cut off

38

Fascicle One

his own head at Duyou.108 Dong Zhuo (?–192), [a tyrannical vassal of the
Later Han dynasty,] was slaughtered at a palace gate.109
“Gentlemen know that such [immoral people] inevitably come to ruin.
The whole world grieves when [innocent people] are slaughtered. The harm
of armed might reaches this point. This is what we should be distressed by,
and why we should sigh deeply [in sorrow]. How could there be a sage who
wants to indulge in cunning and exterminate common people? Moreover,
[even in a small village of only] ten households a wise person can be found,
not to speak of a vast area, mile after mile. Zhonghua (i.e., Emperor Shun)
was born in [the region of] the eastern barbarians. Wenming (i.e., King Yu)
was from [the region of] the western barbarians. How could there be a ﬁxed
place from which sages and wise people emerge? Either articulating [the
teaching] here or teaching in silence there, styles of teaching are myriad, and
yet the thread of the principles does not differ. Examining the reason why
the Buddha manifested his trace in Central India and illuminated miracles
in Central Asia, there are probably very profound meanings that cannot be
explained in detail.
“How could there be a sage who hates the enemies’ power and wants to
exterminate them without even a single survivor? [If there were,] how different
is this from the case where once a pestilential vapor runs rampant, it cannot
be purged by any clear and good thing, or that once a ﬁre is set in the center
of a ﬁeld, [fragrant] orchid and caryopteris divaricata (a water plant with a
foul smell that lasts very long) are both burned? Wasn’t the tyranny of King
Jie and King Zhou just like this? Even if the northern barbarian states really
do commit many treacherous acts, if you displace violence with violence,110
this goes against the purpose of leading [the world] by an expedient means.
To engage in argument referring to these [examples] is sufﬁcient to abuse others
with slander and to confuse ignorant and inexperienced people. How could it
be a rebuke [by someone who] is kindhearted, logical, and thoughtful?”
Again, the accuser said, “Yin Wenzi deceived [the people]; he told them
that there are thirty-two levels of Heaven, and so on. Moreover, he recklessly
quoted [a phrase of] the Loutanjing, ‘[Each of all] heavenly palaces is two
hundred and forty thousand li in circumference. One side [of the heavenly
palace] has a hundred gates, and the gate is ten thousand li wide,’ and so
on.”111

39

7c

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

I replied, “The Buddhist scriptures state that in realms of the heavens
and the earth there are stages from high to low. The [scriptures] all present
[an analysis of] the sections [of the heavens and the earth], which are systematically described in good order and with logic. Nevertheless, the accuser
has exaggerated [the descriptions] and either fabricated a false statement or
was confused and misled and could not investigate the reality. How could
there be a land two hundred and forty thousand li in circumference, containing
gates four million li wide in total? This case serves as an example for the
rest [of the accuser’s statement], and it is enough to clarify that he made
many mistakes. Even slaves and herders may know that this is not so, not to
speak of intellectuals. [The accuser] wants to show his erudition and yet only
reveals his stupidity.”
Again, the accuser said, “The Buddha also went all around the ﬁve realms
of existence [before he became a buddha]. He committed many transgressions
and atrocious acts, yet he still attained buddhahood. This is not a law to
frighten those who do evil. Moreover, in counting people, there are few good
people but many bad people. When bad people die, they would ﬁll up the
realm of the six domestic animals. It has been a long time since the creation
of the world up to the present day. [If this were the case], then animals would
occupy nine-tenths [of the world] and the human race would already be rare.”
I corrected this, “It is indeed as you said that the Buddha was once evil,
too. The reason he attained buddhahood is because he corrected his mistakes
and followed what is good. If he had grown [even more] evil, if he had never
reformed himself, and if he had been deluded and consequently had kept
going [the wrong way], he would have received [the retribution of] suffering
for a long, dark period; he would have transmigrated in the ﬁve realms of
existence without the means for liberation. [The Buddha, however,] was able
to dig up the saplings of various evils, extinguish the ember of the three poisons, cultivate the wholesomeness of the ﬁve precepts, and accomplish the
excellence of the ten wholesome acts.112 He practiced like this kalpa after
kalpa. Even when he was tired, he never stopped. He completely understood
the ultimate state of things and clariﬁed that the three periods (i.e., past, present,
and future) are empty. Thereupon, he was able to liberate himself from the
illusory world of birth and death, and go beyond to the place of wuwei.

40

Fascicle One

“In counting the number of insects in the world, we cannot reach a calculation. [The number of] people who reside in China are like [the number
of] extremely small ﬁne hairs that grow on a horse’s body. How could it be
said that [animals occupy] nine-tenths [of the world]? ‘Of all [beings who
have] life between Heaven and Earth, human beings are the noblest.’113 The
reason Rong [Qi]qi was content with the three kinds of happiness is because
he thoroughly understood the clear distinction between the noble and the humble.114 Furthermore, if one does not depend on [the fact that] he is of the human
race and is not repulsed by animals, if he considers hay and water to be delicious
food and does not think [wearing] a bridle is a punishment, and if he is content
with [his circumstance], then there is nothing too difﬁcult for him.”
Again, the accuser said, “There is the Sequel Scripture of No Spirit (Wuling xiajing).”115
[I corrected this,] “The Sequel Scripture of No Spirit is merely a bizarre
book. It is not a book like those [written by] the Three Augusts and the Five
Thearchs, or words of instruction and admonition. It is something that people
of great talent and learning do not [consider worthy of] study and reading.
The words of the ancestors older by three or ﬁve generations [recorded in
the Sequel Scripture of No Spirit] are similar to those of the petition to the
Celestial Thearch. This itself nearly reveals a fabrication, without question.
I will now deal with it for the time being.
“Generally people of the world frequently say, ‘If a person dies, he will
perish without the numen (ling) and the spirit (gui).’ In that case, if there is
no numen, there is no Celestial Ofﬁcer; and if there is no spirit, then there
is no place where [the spirits] gather. If one’s descendant who believes in
the Buddha traces back to what his ancestor did and ﬁnds fault to reproach,
even if one’s ancestor was a wise person or gentleman, if he did not necessarily
do the same thing as his descendant (i.e., believe in the Buddha) while he
was alive, then the Celestial Ofﬁcer will take him into custody. [The Celestial
Ofﬁcer] orders the corpses of [virtuous people like] Yan [Hui] and Ran
[Boniu] to suffer the pain of slaying, and benevolent ancestors to have powerful poisons added to their esteemed bodies. How could this be done by an
intelligent, upright, and honest spiritual being (shen)? Then, if [such a thing]
could not be done [by an intelligent, upright, and honest spiritual being], it

41

8a

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

8b

must be done by a fox, a badger, an evil spirit of mountains and rivers, or a
lewd and ﬁerce ghost. How could such a being overpower the spirits of both
kindhearted and wise people, and trouble those who observe the Buddhist
precepts? In this way, [the Sequel Scripture of No Spirit] brings a false charge
against [Buddhism]. It is a shallow and disgraceful text!”
Again, the accuser said, “Buddhist monks exploit the common people
immorally, and build beautifully decorated Buddhist temples on a great scale.
This is extravagant and futile, and so on.”
I corrected this, “In teaching [people] there are both depth and shallowness. [The teaching should] be given in a timely manner and respond to
people. All of this was already stated completely in the beginning section.
Let me repeat it. No one surpasses Yao and Shun in being respectful to others
and humble about themselves. They had ﬁne hemp robes embroidered [with
a design of] a mountain, a dragon, a pheasant, and axes [to distinguish ofﬁcial
rank]. Therefore, the Spring and Autumn with Commentary (Chunqiu zuoshizhuan) by Zuo Qiuming states, ‘The bells of a carriage horse make [excellent virtue by the sound] known publicly. The banners and ﬂags patterned
with sun, moon, and stars make their brilliance known publicly. The images
comparable to each other by the ﬁve colors make the differences of things
known publicly.’116 Therefore, the residences of monarchs require the Gate
of Gold (jinmen, i.e., the gate for the emperor), the steps of white jade leading
to the throne (yubi), an astronomical observatory for the emperor (lingtai),
and a gate of the imperial palace (fengque) in order to distinguish them from
[the dwellings] of the common people and make clear [the difference] between
the noble and the humble.
“Regarding human feelings, affections of the mind arise following what
people see. Consequently, ‘when [the ruler] hears the sound of his drums
and tambours’ and sees the shape of a feather banner, ‘he thinks of his leaders
and commanders.’ ‘When [the ruler] hears the sound of the Chinese zithers
(qin se)’ and sees stately manners, ‘he thinks of his ofﬁcers of the court.’117
When we change standpoint and viewpoint, both our internal feeling and
external appearance become different. Now, of the fellows who spend days
in leisure, those who see forms and yet do not reach the Way all respect noble
status and disregard humble status. Therefore, all Buddhists admire and
respect [the Buddha’s] relics and try to keep the image of him in their hearts.

42

Fascicle One

“Consequently, they inscribe and display illustrations and images [of
the Buddha], extend respect to him, and donate curios of great value in order
to enhance the temple of worship. So when a person of the highest class goes
there, he disregards the adornments [such as the building, the illustrations,
and the Buddhist images] and experiences various unfathomable tastes. When
a person of the lowest class goes to the temple, he praises the beautiful decorations and amuses himself with the splendor. First his ears and eyes are
pleased, and gradually he may be led to the principles of justice. [Sentient
beings] are pulled out from the three lowest realms of existence, and no one
is left behind. It is just as when a container is ﬁlled with water; it adapts to
the volume [of water]. If a hole is bored into the bottom [of a container], or
if it has no bottom, it simply cannot hold [the water].
“Moreover, [the accuser] persistently makes a false charge that [the
teaching of] weal and woe was made by the Buddha. It should be said that
he does not understand the foundation [of the teaching]. I will again brieﬂy
explain it.
“[The relation between] good or ill fortune and virtue or vice is similar
to [that between] shadow or sound and form or voice. It is a natural consequence, from which no one can escape. To [choose your own] actions is up
to you; but from reason a profound response will arise. The Buddha, the
Duke of Zhou, and Confucius, however, all clariﬁed [the principles of] loyalty,
ﬁlial piety, truthfulness, and obedience. Those who follow these principles
have good fortune and those who go against them experience bad luck. When
the way to cross over water has been shown, [it is possible] by using a boat
and oars, but it is impossible to cross over [the water] by foot. The way to
instruct people and the skill to save people from distress and death are also
similar to [the facts that] Shen Nong ate grain to satisfy his hunger and the
Yellow Emperor hung down his garments in order to control coldness and
heat. If someone wishes to be sated while his mouth is closed, or if he asks
for warmth while he remains naked, we cannot grant [such favors] upon him
by force. The reason Bian Que was called a good physician is because he
prescribed medicine according to the disease, and simply did not lose the
proper way. No one blames him for causing people not to die. Furthermore,
Bian Que said, ‘I am able to cause people who ought to live not to die, but
I am unable to cause people who ought to die to live longer.’118

43

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

8c

“If the master (i.e., the accuser) were in the position of a son, he would
be impious to his parents, and if he were in the position of a vassal, he would
be disloyal. He has a serious disease but he is not aware of it. He is offered
good medicine but he does not take it. Accordingly, he experiences woes,
and on the day he dies he will further blame the sages and deeply resent the
good physician. [What he is doing] is just like ‘[an insane person] who runs
toward the east’ and through his own force throws himself into a trap.”119
Again, the accuser said, “Among śramaṇas, those who reside in the capital city and Luoyang are numerous, but I have not heard that they could
lengthen the emperors’ life spans. To a great degree, [Buddhists] cannot harmonize yin and yang in order to cause a year of abundance, enrich the people,
prevent calamities, cure epidemics, overcome and suppress disturbances,
and so on. To a lesser degree, [they] cannot avoid [eating] grain in order to
breathe pure [vapor], protect life, surmount difﬁculty, prolong life, stay young
forever, and so on.”
I corrected this, “That is not so. Zhuangzhou (i.e., Zhuangzi) says, ‘Those
who thoroughly understand the conditions of life do not strive after what
they cannot do in life.’120 This is a case of having ascertained that the life
span cannot be changed. If one’s lot in disposition and life could be sought
by means of wisdom and virtue, then that of the two sons Fa (King Wu) and
Dan (the Duke of Zhou) would have been sufﬁcient to cause their father
[King] Wen to live until a thousand years old. When Yanzi (i.e., Yan Yuan)
died, [Confucius] said, ‘Heaven is destroying me!’121 [Confucius] lamented
greatly over [Yanzi’s death]. He simply had nothing with which to prolong
[Yanzi’s life].
“Furthermore, the degree of yin and yang is governed by a turn of fate.
The misfortune that happens once every one hundred and six years will occur
whenever the time arrives. Therefore, [Emperor] Yao had a big ﬂood, as if
water had ﬁlled the sky.122 [King] Tang [of the Yin dynasty] had a drought.
In [the battleﬁeld of] Zhuolu there was bloodshed enough to ﬂoat a large
shield.123 In [the battle of] Banquan [the soldiers’] corpses covered the wilds.124
Why did [these monarchs] not dispel [the disasters] while sitting on their
thrones, and rescue [the people] before [such calamitous events] happened?
Moreover, people may climb up a tree like a bear, stretch their legs like a
bird, guide [the breath], expel [old vapor], ingest [fresh vapor], stop taking

44

Fascicle One

a variety of millet, use petals, and inhale wind and dew instead of food. To
anticipate a long life doing these things is a sort of ‘there was still something
for which he had to wait’ (i.e., necessitating resorting to a long life).125 Yet
even if [they practice] like this, it is still possible to die young when the time
comes. No one can live forever. From a śramaṇa’s viewpoint, [immortals
such as Chi]song[zi] and [Wangzi]qiao are just like infants who have not yet
become young boys.
“[Śramaṇas] are just extending their ambitions to the outer realm of the
two polarities (i.e., Heaven and Earth), and prolonging their life in the place
of eternal life. Why, for the sake of longevity, would they rack their brains,
perform [practices] at the common level, and compete with Juan[zi] and
Peng[zu, who enjoyed a long life]? The one who criticizes [Buddhism]
improperly wants to develop the debate by covering his fault. He stands on
an aggressive position and refuses to listen to counsel, [but] his words have
no constancy, and his memorial to the throne makes no distinction between
sovereign and subject. Alas! The Beili, [the amorous court music composed
by King Zhou of the Yin dynasty,] disrupted graceful [music]. I hate that [the
compound color] green takes over [the fundamental color] yellow.126 That
excessive noisy sound has never been arranged. I will exclusively follow the
example set by my late teacher (i.e., Confucius), who did not answer [questions
about life and death].”
Again, the accuser said, “At the end of the Han dynasty, there was Ze
Rong (?–195), who gathered an army and became a dependent of Tao Qian
(132–194), the governor of Xuzhou. Qian had him supervise the transportation.
Nevertheless, although Rong earlier believed in Buddhism, he dared to seize
government freight for his own proﬁt, he built Buddhist temples, and so on.
He gave away wine and food to all passersby, and so on. He was later attacked
by Liu You and killed, and so on.”
I corrected this, “This criticism does not need a rope to bind [the accuser];
he is bound by himself. The Buddha’s teaching leads [people] with benevolence and humanity, not killing; faithfulness and honesty, not boasting;
incorruptibility and virtue, not stealing, as the most important principles.
Laozi said, ‘Arms are ominous instruments.’127 Those who are close to them
are evil. [Ze] Rong relied on arms, committed brutal acts calmly, conspired
with others, and rose in revolt. He committed murders, [which is a violation

45

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

9a

of] the ﬁrst [precept]. He accepted a mission [from others], took advantage
of it, and did not repay [the kindness of] his master, [Tao Qian]. [These are
acts of] deceiving others, [which is a violation of] the second [precept]. He
seized government property in order to proﬁt himself. [This is] stealing,
[which is a violation of] the third [precept]. The Buddhist scriptures state
not to give wine as charity, but [Ze] Rong did so freely. [This is] drinking
intoxicants, [which is a violation of] the fourth [precept]. If one violates all
the precepts, he is working toward death. This can be compared to the case
where a [former] ofﬁcial, who perverts and tyrannizes without restraint after
resigning from ofﬁce, can be easily put down by a ﬁve-foot-tall boy. Ze’s
tragic death is just an appropriate and sufﬁcient example to help [our clear
understanding] that evil [people] incur misfortune.”
Again, the accuser said, “Shi Chong (249–300), [who was extremely
wealthy,] also strongly believed in the Buddha, but he could not prevent the
execution of his entire family and relatives [for his personal offense], and
so on.”
I answered, “I know all about Shi Chong’s nature. He was arrogant and
indulged in a luxurious life above his status. He was addicted to drink and
arbitrarily exceeded his authority without restraint. He amassed tremendous
wealth and collected much [property], but he did not offer relief to those
who were helpless, without kith or kin. Speaking of his natural abilities, he
had an average advantage. Regarding his virtue, he did not have any at all.
Although he acquired inﬂuence by making use of [the Buddha’s] name and
following [the Buddha], he observed no precept in the least. He is just like
a worldly person who appears virtuous and yet whose mind is wicked, whose
appearance is stern and yet whose innermost heart is weak, whose mouth
praises [the virtuous kings] Yu and Tang and yet whose acts match those of
[villains such as] King Jie and [the robber] Zhi. He brought disaster on
himself. Again, whose fault would it be?”
Again, the accuser said, “Zhou Zhongzhi believed in the Buddha and
was diligent, too. Nevertheless, he did not receive any fortune [in return]
after all, and so on.”
I corrected this, saying, “Now that I think of his words, [the accuser]
seems to rejoice in others’ calamities; [his words] are not logical. Even though
Zhongzhi had an inclination toward the [Buddhist] Way, he did not make the

46

Fascicle One

decision to receive the precepts and become a disciple [of the Buddha]. As
for his natural disposition, he was brilliant and fair. He had a superiorlevel
of talent but he also had a streak of obstinacy. He had not yet been united
with the Daoist principle of [returning to the state of] an infant.128 On this
account, it is reasonable that he was defeated and suffered a downfall when
he met a powerful man who was jealous of those better than himself. Even
if [the situation] were just as the accuser says, there are those who, even
though they are diligent, are still killed. How does this differ from the case
of Yan [Yuan] and Xiang [Tuo, a genius who at only seven years old was a
teacher of Confucius,] both of whom died young; or the case of [Bo]yi and
Shu[qi], who starved to death; or the case of Bi Gan, who was faithful to
[King Zhou of the Yin dynasty], yet sank to the misfortune of having his
heart cut out;129 or the case of Shen Sheng, who was very ﬁlial and yet ended
in the sorrow of [committing suicide by] hanging? Comparisons like these
are too many to mention. Confucius said, ‘The virtuous are long-lived130 and
people of justice are prosperous.’ Nevertheless, even they cannot escape
[from death]. Be sure to be aware of the testimony of your former lives. It
is the most revered! It is truthful!”
Again, the accuser said, “Families who serve Buddhism are pleased with
death and hate life. On the day when they place cotton [near the nose and
mouth of a dying person to determine when the breath ceases,] waiting for
his death, they all think that happiness and wealth will come [to the dying
person], no one looks sad and sorrowful [about his death], and so on.”
I corrected this, saying, “Can the accuser save up things without shutting
his mind? If he cannot, why does he speak conversely? A Buddhist scripture
states, ‘He who considers himself to have attained the [Buddhist] Way is
capable of abstrusely seeing that others are the same as himself, and of equalizing merits and demerits.’ When such a person experiences the change from
life to death, [everything] is indistinct and there is no emotional sign [for
him]. When he walks in the land of weal and woe, he remains calm and is
not distressed. He is delighted with the laws of nature, and he knows his life.
He is simply content with the time and comfortable with the place.131
“Those who have not realized this [state of mind] grieve over [death]
and have the thought to exercise caution in their last moments. This is why
[they try] to enhance their sincere [faith in the Buddha]. Therefore, [the

47

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism

Buddha] has the justice of the universal vow of great compassion. We feel
sympathy and sorrow even for an enemy’s death, recompense his enmity
with virtue, and forgive his past misdeeds. Could it be possible that there is
no sorrowful and mournful feeling, since the heartbreak of our own ﬂesh
and blood spontaneously ﬂourishes? Those who love their parents and relatives
do not dare hate others [because] they are deeply afraid to put others in the
same situation as themselves. Here we see that [the accuser’s words] go
against [our natural] feeling and are contrary to reason.”
End of Fascicle One of The Collection for the Propagation
and Clariﬁcation [of Buddhism]

48

Fascicle Two
The Discourse to Clarify Buddhism
(Mingfolun) by Zong Bing
of the Jin Dynasty

The most subtle Way must be assuredly revered in respect to leading people
[to virtue]. Many people of the world, however, see Buddhism as absurd.
Everyone thinks that he cannot examine himself [even in the present world],
and has no time to be concerned about himself in regard to a later existence.
[People think that] anything that is as far as ten thousand li from here or that
happens more than one hundred years from now is all uncertain; much less
certain are that Mount Sumeru is great, that the Buddha’s realm is extraordinary, that our spirits do not extinguish [after death], that people can attain
buddhahood, that the mind creates all phenomena, that all things of the world
are transient, and that the conditions created in former existences last for one
hundred million kalpas and cause retribution. [Nevertheless,] these are all
outstanding, wonderful, transcendent, clearly seen, true in reason, and real
phenomena. How could those who have become accustomed to hearing [a
folk song such as] “Yellow Flowers” enjoy the melody of “Cloud Gate,”
[which was composed by the Yellow Emperor]?
Moreover, people of the world value classical books written by the Duke
of Zhou and Confucius. From the time of Emperor Yao to the Han period,
[however,] the nine provinces (i.e., China) never inﬂuenced foreign regions.
What was it that moved Emperor Ming (r. 57–75) of the [Later] Han dynasty?
What virtue did he possess that he alone was illuminated by supernatural
light? All people’s feelings like these are entirely involved with long-established
custom, and people cannot be free of worries and petty notions and cannot
see by means of the profound eyes. Consequently, truth is not far away, but
people give rise to suspicions and sink in [delusions]. How sad it is!
Gentlemen of the Middle States (i.e., China) are versed in [the subjects
of] ceremony and righteousness, but they are inexperienced in knowing the
human mind.132 How then could they know the mind of the Buddha? Now
49

9b

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

9c

in worldly affairs and familiar matters—not to speak of in your spirit, the
self—if your plan is not good, you will still be visited by vicissitude. If you
are successful [in dealing with] the spirit, you will be ennobled without limit.
If you are unsuccessful, you will eternally fall [into the world of delusions]
without end. Shouldn’t you then seek [as cautiously as if] you were standing
on the edge of an abyss, or think [as carefully as if] you were stepping onto
thin [ice]? To plan one’s chances in the game of go ( yi) is easy, but has the
mind of the great go player Qiu ever been understood?
Moreover, [people of the world] want to follow the [narrow] view, [just
like] a frog in a well, and they recklessly repress the Great Way. They end
up only entrapping their spirits at the bottom of the heavenly snare. Don’t
you think this is too frightening? Now, with unenlightened knowledge, they
try to illuminate what is profound. Therefore, they cannot ﬁnd even their
own failure by themselves. How then could they clarify what they have to
attain? They should clarify the direction in which their dark spirits [are going]
and seek the wholesome way. They should ﬁrmly cultivate themselves, taking
Buddhist scriptures as their guide.
Those Buddhist scriptures contain the virtue taught in the Five Classics;
they are deeply enhanced with very promising reality; they include the void
(xu) [advocated] by Laozi and Zhuangzi; and they completely emphasize the
teaching that all phenomena are empty (kong). With lofty words and real
principles, [the Buddhist scriptures] reverently move one’s spirit. They shine
as brightly as the sun and they are as clean as wind. Except for a sage, who
can expound them? I will sincerely look into the views of people of the world,
juxtapose those views with the Buddhist doctrines, and clarify [Buddhism].
The Discourse states: Now if [the operation of] the mind leaves one’s
whole body from the heels to the crown of the head and goes up through the
air, it will go on without stopping. Then the four directions and the upper
and lower directions are all boundless. Life is not created all by itself. It certainly transmits what has been saved up. If we trace what is transmitted, there
is non-beginning. What is produced repeatedly without ceasing for successive
generations is non-ending. Regarding the body, every day we all make use
of the essence [of the body] that is limitless and came intimately from nonbeginning, and that will, furthermore, be ceaselessly transmitted into the
future. Then, into the immeasurable and boundless vastness for eternal time

50

Fascicle Two

from non-beginning to non-ending, people originally throw themselves one
after another and spread out. Thereupon, [the Chinese people] situate China
(chixian) in [the middle of] the whole wide world and they have no doubt
about it.
[Buddhists] declare that there are three thousand suns and moons, and
twelve thousand worlds arranged in the universe. They count as many countries as there are grains of sand in the Ganges River and put in order as many
kalpas as there are ﬂying particles of dust. They disperse widely what the
profound ediﬁcation contains, and [see] very small things to be the same as
inexhaustible things. Why do [non-Buddhists] doubt the other side (i.e.,
Buddhists), while being content with themselves? If a very tiny thing is
placed upon a blue sea, the two differ from each other [in size by a great
degree], but there is still limitation there. When the principles of human relationships [of Confucianism] are joined with the Grand Void (taixu) [of
Buddhism], how can we express the difference [between them]? Therefore,
what people of the world think great is what the [Buddhist] Way considers
to be minor. What people think is distant is what Heaven considers to be
near. What has been said, “The time before Xuanyuan (i.e., the Yellow
Emperor) is remote antiquity,”133 possibly seems like yesterday in the lofty
view of those who have mastered the Way of Heaven.
It is said [in the Liji] that [the teaching of] the Book of History is to know
distance, but it is not beyond the time of [Emperor] Tang [Yao] and Emperor
Yu [Shun]. Phrases composed in the Spring and Autumn Annals are limited
to kingcraft. There is piety in the Book of Rites, goodness in the Book of
Music, warmth in the Book of Odes, and cleanliness in the Book of Changes
(Yijing). Now, in inﬁnitude, if we display three thousand shining suns and
moons and correctly see the twelve thousand arranged worlds, then we will
know that what the Duke of Zhou and Confucius wrote are possibly just like
responses to the vulgar demand to rule over [the masses] in a region [as small
as a snail’s tentacles, where] Chu state and Man state [fought for hegemony].134
Moreover, [the responses] would be rather insufﬁcient and only about the
matters of one’s present life. What exists beyond [the present] life has been
left as it is, and never discussed. If this is not the case, why do they emphasize
having a physical body as the beginning and leave out being a spirit after
death? “[Confucius] climbed up Mount [Eastern] Meng when Lu state looked

51

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

10a

small [to him]. [He] went up Mount Tai when the world appeared small [to
him].”135 These [comparisons] mark the boundaries between [Confucianism
and Buddhism].
In addition, the [San] f en (i.e., the books written by Fuxi, Shen Nong,
and the Yellow Emperor) and the [Wu]dian (i.e., the books by the Five
Thearchs) have already been lost. Compilations by scholars of shallow
learning are exclusively comprised of tracts on governing [the nation]. If
there were transcendent remarks [in Confucianism], some were scattered
and lost in historical records, and some were destroyed at [the time of the
incident of] burning [the books on the Chinese classics] and burying [Confucian scholars alive]. The ways of Laozi and Zhuangzi and the arts of all
the perfected, such as [Chi]song[zi] and [Wangzi]qiao, can truly cleanse our
minds and nourish our bodies, but none of these are collected in the Six Classics, either. Accordingly, scholars merely stick to the incompleteness of [Confucian] literature, which relieves only triﬂes. They consider the Book of
History and the Book of Rites as the line to draw, and abstain from hearing
the lofty teaching to probe into the very root of the spirit over kalpas. They
are blinded by immediate matters and forever disregard [the lofty teaching].
This, too, is sad! Alas! They are just like those who, when walking under a
stratus cloud, do not believe that the sun and moon exist.
The expressions “[The successive movement] in alternating yin and
yang is called the Way” and “The unforeseen movement in alternating yin
and yang is called a spirit”136 possibly mean that the ultimate of nonexistence
is the Way, where both yin and yang are integrated. Therefore, it is said “[The
successive movement] in alternating yin and yang.” That which descends
from the Way enters into [the realm of] vigorous spirits, which exists beyond
yin and yang, and which is not examined by these two factors. Hence, it is
simply said that “The unforeseen movement in alternating yin and yang.”
[Yan] Junping’s theory that “‘one produces two’ refers to the spiritual intelligence” indicates this.137 If these two phrases do nothing to clarify [the spirit],
then with what is the vigorous spirit clearly deﬁned?
Moreover, although the spirits of all sentient beings are ultimately equal,
[each] transmigrates following the conditions they met, and forms a [correspondingly] dull or ingenious consciousness. In addition, [this consciousness]
and its root (i.e., spirit) are free from decay. Now, even though [the sage]

52

Fascicle Two

Shun was born as the son of [an ignorant man,] Gu, the spirit of Shun is certainly not something that Gu passed on to him. Nor is the spirit of [Shun’s
unworthy son,] Shangjun, what Shun gave to him, either. Before birth, there
is generally [the difference] of dullness or ingenuity [of the spirit]. Since the
root is established before birth, we know that [the spirit] is immortal after
death. Furthermore, if [the spirits] are immortal, they are different from each
other. Accordingly, the stupid and the sacred are distinct from each other.
We know that the distinctions between the stupid and the sacred and between
birth and death do not change the immortal status of the spirits. Therefore,
it is said that “The vigorous spirit receives a physical body and transmigrates
all over the ﬁve realms of existence while Heaven and Earth are formed and
destroyed innumerable times.”138
The physical body [of Shun] had the [auspicious] double-pupil eyes
when he was born [the son of] the ignorant man Gu. Unintelligent [Shang]jun
received his physical body from the gentleman (i.e., Shun) who had virtue
within. The stupid and the sacred naturally should separate from each other.
By what perceptible law, then, did [these two] incorporate? Wouldn’t it be
that the spirit of Zhonghua (i.e., Emperor Shun) was dull a long time ago,
but he established a [good] cause kalpas ago and consequently conditions
met [the cause] after a myriad of transformations? Now his [lofty] spirit solitarily separates from others, but in remote antiquity there was a chain of
transmigrations of the dull spirit. Accordingly, [Shun’s lofty spirit] is the
completion of the reﬁnement [of his formerly dull spirit]. These three issues:
the immortality of the spirit, the law that conditions meet [the primary cause],
and the sagehood attained through deep-rooted practice, are examined here.
If the formation of a physical body [corresponds to] the formation of
the spirit, and if the cessation of a physical body [corresponds to] the cessation
of the spirit, then when the body is injured, the spirit should be damaged as
well, or when the body falls ill, the spirit should also be fatigued. It is reported
that there are people whose bodies are perishing, or who are about to die,
and yet whose spirits and consciousnesses are calm and perfect. When [Confucius] took hold of [Ran Boniu’s] hand through the window,139 [Ran Boniu]
was extremely ill. Nevertheless, there was no change [in Boniu] as a person
of virtue. This is simply a testimony to the immortality [of the spirit]. If it is
certain that the spirit is produced with the body and it is originally not [what

53

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

10b

is produced by] conditions meeting [a direct cause], I am now engaged in
“taking examples from various things for distant matters, and then examples
from various human beings for familiar matters.”140
It is said that there is no spirit in the Five Sacred Mountains and the Four
Holy Rivers, but such a conclusion is premature. Even if we accept that there
is spirit there, the mountains are simply large piles of soil and the rivers are
merely accumulated water. How could “the spirit that attained the One” (i.e.,
the origin of all phenomena) be produced from such coarse materials as water
and soil?141 [The spirit] works upon rocks and streams and entrusts itself
there, and is solemnly united with them. If the mountains fall to pieces or
the rivers dry up, [the spirit] certainly does not go to ruin together with the
water [of the rivers] and the soil [of the mountains]. The spirit is not what
the form makes. It incorporates with [the form] and yet it is immortal. So it
is in the case of human beings. “The spirit is the word to express [something]
more ingenious than all things under the sun.”142 If [the spirit] is created
availing of the form and perishes following the form, the form is considered
to be the origin [of the spirit]. How could it then be called “ingenious”? “The
vigorous spirit goes forth in all directions, ﬂowing on boundlessly, reaching
to Heaven above, and wreathing round the Earth beneath.”143
Sages “search out exhaustively what is deep” and wise people “investigate
what is the minutest.”144 As for [virtuous] people such as Zai [Wo], Zi[gong],
Zhuang[zi], Ji [Kang], [Ji]zha of Wu, and [Zhang Liang] Zifang, wherever
the operation of their vigorous [spirits] directs their course, [their spirits go
fast even though] they do not hurry, and [they arrive at their destination]
without going;145 they penetrate the universe from their own place. [All these
sages, wise people, and virtuous people] are the same as common foolish
people in that their bodies rot and stink [after death] or that they delight in
tasty food. Could there be a reason why [their spirits] receive the bodies [of
common people] to be born, and perish following [the decay of their bodies]?
We must think of this, too.
The Duke of Zhou offered a sacriﬁce to Heaven and Earth for [Minister
of Agriculture] Houji, and performed a sacriﬁce to the ancestors for [his
father,] King Wen. Some people of the world say that this was a waste of
ﬁlial piety. If I were to ask those who say so why they understand that this

54

Fascicle Two

act was indeed a waste [of ﬁlial piety], there would certainly be no reason
for their understanding. If there is no reason for it, the spirits of King Wen
and Houji cannot be said to have perished. “If [gentlemen] perform puriﬁcation
for three days, they must see those for whom the puriﬁcation has been performed.”146 Can we conclude that the Duke of Zhou did not see [King Wen
and Houji], since ordinary people do not see them? When [Jizha of Wu]
buried [his son] between Ying and Bo, he said, “[My son’s] bones and ﬂesh
have returned to earth, but his spiritual vapor goes wherever it likes.”147 He
meant [by this] the immortality [of the spirit].
The most virtuous administration follows Heaven. Great turmoil ﬁlls
Heaven. This is essentially what the mind and the spirit do. Emperor Yao
discerned all principles, and he was completely free from avarice, since his
spirit was exquisite. King Jie indulged in all vices, since his spirit was contrary
to virtue. It does not mean that Jie did not know Yao’s virtue. He was aware
of his vice, which would ruin him. The desires of his physical body went
against his spirit. The consciousness capable of knowing [the virtue of] Yao
and his ruin from vice was always contained in his spirit. If [Jie] had not
taken the throne and lived a thousand years, when he did evil, he might be
visited by pain successively, or when he did a minor good act, he might
become somewhat magnanimous. Couldn’t he have overthrown his evil and
cultivated his virtue little by little? What his spirit contains, as [mentioned]
before, includes the consciousness to know [the virtue of] Yao, which must
have had at least a chance to be used. Moreover, if [Jie’s] life span had
increased to a thousand years and he had not ceased [cultivating his virtue],
it would be possible that his desires would have all been paciﬁed and his
spirit would have become as exquisite as that of Yao.
When an unusual movement of the sun, moon, or stars occurs, a sound
becomes off-tune. As the new moon and the full moon take turns, oysters
and clams respond to each of [these cycles] [by becoming lean or fat]. According to the seasonal days—the spring and autumn equinoxes, the winter and
summer solstices, and the ﬁrst days of spring, summer, fall, and winter—the
swallows, wild geese, dragons, and snakes nimbly appear and disappear. For
all these, mysterious changes come ﬁrst and later reveal themselves in phenomena. Generally all beings are equally created by mysterious changes.

55

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

10c

How could it be [possible] that only several matters are so, and myriad
changes are exactly not so?
Therefore, those who are put to death on the charge of murder, who are
punished on the charge of inﬂicting injury upon others, who are put in jail,
who do not commit a crime now, or who are guilty and yet are [as free from
punishment as those who are innocent], have all ﬁrst established conditions
in the unseen world and now the reason of the human world reveals [the
results of these conditions]. Hiding and revealing are one and the same. If a
sin is formed in hiding, an abomination reveals itself clearly. There is nothing
at all strange in this. He who has done evil evidently gets the worst of it in
hiding. Why is this strange?
With the immortal spirit that contains the consciousness to know [the
virtue of Emperor] Yao, [human beings] appear and disappear in countless
generations. Suffering initiates evil, and pleasure leads to good. In addition,
there is the foundation of the sun and moon that bestows light to shine brightly.
What reason would there be for a person not “to reach the Way by one
change,”148 effacing himself and studying intensively with respect? Rather
than being afraid of being [like] Jie and Zhou in remote antiquity, all people
should [strive to] gradually become [like virtuous kings such as] Tang and
Wu in the future, not to mention the young people of reﬁned taste who let
their minds ﬂoat on a limpid stream. When you see from this standpoint, it
is clear, too, that people are able to become buddhas.
Life arises entirely from the germination of feeling (qing).149 [The expression] “when a male and a female unite their essences (i.e., sexual union), all
creatures are incarnated” completely refers to [the fact] that their essences
are united through feeling.150 When feelings meet selves, various spirits
receive physical bodies. It greatly appears as if feeling is the foundation of
life. Even though [sages such as] the Five Thearchs and the Three Augusts
transcended feeling and probed into the spirit, they still have to follow all
principles. Even [sages] met the conditions a long time ago, and now they
have to condescend to enter [the realm of] incarnation through the essence,
be born mutually following [the principles], and produce numerous offspring,
to say nothing of [ordinary people whose] feelings are linked to their spirits,
and whose bodies become extinct. How would it be possible that they will

56

Fascicle Two

not receive bodies again and will not go through the transmigration of birth
and death innumerable times?
If the consciousness is able to clear the foundation of immortality, receives
the training of diminishing one’s actions from day to day, “diminishes it, and
again diminishes it, and certainly arrives at wuwei,”151 there will be no feeling
to lead to desire. Only the spirit will shine and then there will be nothing
equivalent to life. When there is no life, there is no body. There is no body
and yet there is the spirit. This is the meaning of dharmakāya.
The Yellow Emperor, Yu Shun, Duke Ji (i.e., the Duke of Zhou), and
Confucius are admired and trusted by the people of the world. When we see
that [the Yellow Emperor] ascended to Heaven [on the back of dragon that]
was given the reins, that [Emperor Yu Shun] was like a hidden dragon and
[later ascended to the throne] like a soaring bird, that [the sincerity of the
Duke of Zhou] raised a headwind that lifted up the fallen rice plants, and that
[Confucius] sang a song with stringed accompaniment while he had nothing
to eat, [we can see] that all [four sages] took their ultimate spirit as their essence,
and consequently became what the function of their spirits manifested as
responses of a free and easy manner. Even though the law of manifestation is
external, it just appears and disappears following the movement [of numinous
powers]. There must be also something beyond the human tether.
The chart emerged from [the Yellow] River, and writing came out from
the Luo [River].152 The bush of luck-tea grew vigorously without being
planted [in the garden of Emperor Yao when he ascended the throne]. The
mystic jade tablet was completed without being polished [in the time of
Yu].153 [During the reign of Emperor Wu Ding of the Yin dynasty], two
kinds of mulberry trees suddenly grew together in the garden. [Within one
night the trees grew so large around that] one could encircle them with both
arms, and then [they] suddenly vanished.154 [When Emperor Wu of the Zhou
dynasty was subjugating King Zhou of the Yin dynasty,] a ﬁreball ﬂew over
the palace and became a raven.155 A large three-legged caldron became light,
while a small one became heavy, [in accordance with the virtue of the
rulers].156 All these events suddenly happened and the changes occurred,
being affected by numinous powers. This is truly a group of evident [phenomena] of mystery.

57

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

11a

At the culmination of dharmakāya, numinous powers ingeniously touch
sentient beings and transform in order to manifest. [The dharmakāya] shines
upon the spirit and its achievement brightens all things. What wonder could
it not exhibit? What change could be limited? Why would it merely ascend
to the nine heavens, walk like a dragon in the underworld, inhale wind, or
abstain from grain? Generally, the greatness of [the dharmakāya’s] glorious
deportment and auspicious omen [can be found in instances of] the transformed bodies separated from a buddha and a bodhisattva, springing out
from the earth,157 moving the [great] world,158 and pouring the water of a
huge ocean into a [single] pore.159
Compared with [the instances of] the Yellow Emperor, Yu [Shun], the
Duke of Zhou, and Confucius, its mysterious changes have no set rules.
Regarding the obscure appearance and disappearance of various auspicious
omens, which were mentioned above, they have already left [the realm of]
form and entered into [the realm of] the spirit, and they are the same as the
profound metaphysical agency. Why do the people only believe in this (i.e.,
Confucianism) and restrain themselves from that (i.e., Buddhism)? The Dharma
King (i.e., the Buddha) who was deeply awakened is pure, just, lofty, and
bright. Truly there is testimony for this. He is just in front of you, without the
least distance, yet ignorant people are not aware of it. How sad it is!
The “various signs” stated in the Hongfan chapter [of the Book of History],
that is to say, the corresponding auspicious and inauspicious [manifestations],
are all derived from the mind. The sorts [of unusual phenomena], such as a
white rainbow piercing the sun, Venus entering into the Pleiades, a variety of
millet plants growing in a cold ravine, city walls [suddenly] collapsing, or
frost falling [in summer], are entirely caused by human feelings and remotely
presented as natural phenomena. Originally [human mind and natural phenomena] are mutually related, just as is a form and its shadow. And just as
there is no shape without shadow or no voice without sound, there is no human
feeling without reward or retribution. How could [the law of reward or retribution] apply only to the sorts [of unusual phenomena like a white rainbow]
piercing the sun or frost falling [in summer]? All minutely respond to various
human feelings; no one can escape from phenomena [that manifests due to
the law of reward and retribution].

58

Fascicle Two

Sometimes, however, [retribution] is formed over and above one’s physical body, and sometimes it is cast on incidents. [It manifests] directly or
indirectly in a confused manner, apparently or obscurely, and is endlessly
long or vast. Who can see the edge of [the manifestation of retribution]? Various extraordinary things ﬁll the world and numerous phenomena reach our
eyes. All these result from the movement of the numinous powers that have
gathered after countless generations. Therefore, the Buddhist scriptures state
that the forms of all existences are produced from thought. Moreover, [the
scriptures] say that the mind is the origin of existences; the mind makes
Heaven and the mind makes Hell. The meanings derive from those [mentioned
above]. Hence, those who have a virtuous mind and pure feelings will certainly
be reborn in the outstanding and magniﬁcent state. Those who have corrupt
feelings and who commit impure acts will be eternally deluded in the region
of the three lowest realms of existence. How far-reaching and subtle this
advocacy is! Isn’t this what has the law of truth yet is straightforward, cleanses
our spirits, uplifts our thoughts, and causes us to sincerely make up our minds
with awe [to pursue the teaching]?
Even though a myriad of feelings all mutually constitute conditions and
form consciousnesses that move and make phenomena, in fact the nature [of
feelings] is nonexistence. Since the time [the Buddha] opened the ferry for
enlightenment, his solitary voice enables us to extinguish worries in a ﬂash,
but no one has reached this point. I will further explain and clarify it.
Sacred spirits shine abstrusely and yet they have no consciousness for
thinking. This is because there is severance between the mind and things and
only the spirit exists there. Accordingly, the foundation that is void and intelligent remains permanently, and is never exhausted. Now, if the mind and
things interact and it is not the state of spirit only, even if you are as subtle
as was Yanzi (i.e., Yan Yuan), [a person usually free of avarice,] you will
certainly be intent on looking up to [Confucius], be fond of benevolence, be
delighted with mountains, “nearly attain to [perfect virtue], and be often
empty of avarice,”160 [but you will not be in the state of spirit only]. This is
all because the mind is exerted and gives rise to consciousness. For sure, the
functions [of the mind] subtly make contact with each other, and the consciousnesses cleverly follow one after another, just as ﬂames come together,
resulting in a big blaze.

59

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

11b

If by means of the realization of emptiness the mind is set at rest, the function of the mind ceases and feeling and consciousness become exhausted, and
the spiritual intelligence is perfect. Since feeling meets consciousness and new
[feelings and consciousnesses] cleverly follow the old, all this is not the state
of [the spirit] only. How could [the state of the spirit only] constantly exist?
[It is similar to the case of] the good cook Ding, who was shown an ox, yet he
certainly was not looking at the whole body of the ox [when he butchered it].161
It is what the Buddhist scriptures state: the law of changes and dispersions,
and the nature of phenomena and consciousness, are empty; [they are just like]
a dream, an illusion, a shadow, an echo, a bubble, or the [image of the] moon
reﬂected on water. Isn’t this so? Yanzi was aware of [laws] like this. Therefore,
he dealt with existence just as he did with nonexistence, he touched a real
thing just as he did an unreal thing, and he did not perceive existence to
offend him and consequently did not respond to it.162
Now, when we observe Yanzi’s “being often empty of avarice,” we see
that in fact existence is nonexistence. Moreover, those below the level [of
Yanzi] lose the truth further away. Although they go toward the Great Way
in haste, they are called insane, just the same as those who pursue a demented
person who is running toward the east.163 They all defy the principles, trespass
against the beneﬁcial activity [of unseen divine beings], go against Heaven,
and act recklessly. [Moreover, this] is not true existence, not to speak of
touch, taste, sound, and color and shape (se); they are also mere shadowy
apparitions falsely made by feeling. In addition, even if a boat is hidden in
a narrow ravine, [both the boat and the ravine] can be moved [by a person
of great strength].164 Changes happen more quickly than lightning. The future
has not yet come, the past has already vanished, and the present does not
stay. Even in the instant of the blink of an eye or an intake of breath, nothing
can be grasped. What are you going to abide by and consider as existence?
It is astounding that false existence covers up the spirit!
[Suppose] there is a mirror. When it is covered with dust, if there is only
a little [dust] [the mirror] shines fuzzily, but when [more dust] accumulates
it shines dimly; when [the dust] piles up more thickly [the mirror] still shines
but it is rather dark. Since [the mirror’s] original nature is bright, even if [the
mirror] is covered by dust it still shines. Although from dimness to darkness
the essential point (i.e., the function of shining) follows [the outer state of]

60

Fascicle Two

the mirror, it is not extinguished. When we discern things with [such a dusty
mirror], it is certain [that we will] lose [their original nature] more and more,
according to the amount of dust [on the surface of the mirror], and make
mistakes. The principle of the spirit of a human being is similar to this. When
the false existence implicates the spirit, exquisite or coarse consciousness
arises. The consciousness clings to the spirit. Consequently, although [a
person] dies, [the consciousness attached to the spirit] does not perish. If it
(i.e., the consciousness attached to the spirit) is permeated with emptiness,
the repeated permeation certainly leads to the exhaustion [of the consciousness], and then the original spirit is probed. This is the meaning of nirvana.
Therefore, wise sayings are as abundant as clouds. We follow [them],
and open [our minds] and clear them with emptiness. If rocks and forests are
beyond perception and wind and water are unreal, when we go [to such
places] full of thoughts, we will become free from worry and petty notions,
not to speak of the sages who are peaceful, respectful, and empty (kong) and
who teach the void (xu) to people. How could those people with pure minds
not be delighted by the exhaustion [of the consciousness]? Therefore, in
ancient times [there were many people who] took advantage of the void and
entered the Way. Even if those who have attained buddhahood are as numerous
as grains of sand in the Ganges River, [their number] has not yet reached the
point where they are too numerous.
A person asked, “The spirit is originally the acme of the void. Why is
it imbued with all things in the phenomenal world and why does it make a
relationship with them? Furthermore, [the spirit] is equal in being primarily
void. Why is it divided into the ignorant and the sacred? Again, it has already
been said that the mind makes all things in the phenomenal world. Before
all things in the phenomenal world were created, what implicated the mind
and made it move to produce them?”
I answered, “The spirit is subtle while the physical body is coarse, but
both make interactions. Since the subtle [spirit] forms a relationship with the
coarse [body], we know that the void establishes a relationship with existence.
Now, although an ignorant person is mean, he is essentially able to know about
the past in the present and to think of other places while being here. All this is
due to the fact that the spirit [related to the body] has functions, so if we can
completely train [our minds], we will know that [the spirit] is basically equal

61

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

11c

and void. I have explained that the mind makes all things in the phenomenal
world. When we observe reality based on this view, [we can understand] that
these three issues are assuredly true. The reason they are so is, however,
derived from non-beginning. How could there be the beginning of non-beginning? This is also ‘the deepest profundity.’165 Zhuangzi says that when Ran
Qiu asked [Confucius] if it could be known how it was before Heaven and
Earth came to exist, Confucius replied, ‘It was just like the present.’166 He
probably meant that although there was [an origin] before non-beginning, if
one makes inquiry into the very origin, from the ﬁrst it is just as indistinct
and indistinguishable as ‘Ran Qiu today.’167 The original creation of spiritual
intelligence and the ﬁrst ancestor of sentient beings are all indistinct, and
they are beyond our grasp. How could it be an issue whether or not those
who learn [Buddhism] understand?
“A sage is indeed a coagulum [of the spirit], who simply gives up [the
physical body], and who ‘is simply moved and later responds.’168 [The issue]
is beyond our comprehension, namely outside of the universe, where there
is nothing by which we are moved. Therefore, [sages] left it intact and did
not discuss it. How could ordinary people comprehend an issue about which
even sages do not speak?
“Now we live together, treading upon Earth under the canopy of Heaven.
Outside of [the Earth] upon which we tread and [Heaven] under which we
reside, could there be ﬁnality? The reason Yu assisted the ﬁve regions (i.e.,
Dian, Hou, Sui, Yao, and Huang) and governed no more than the nine
provinces probably means that [they are] simply the areas that are reached
by worldly inﬂuences. The region outside the farthest land, the land from
where the sun rises, and the land where the sun goes down, are not participated
in by the human principle, and were not clariﬁed by holy people and sages,
to say nothing of the place further away where it is chaotic and obscure. How
could such borderlands be discussed? Now, we inferred from [the Earth]
upon which we tread and [the Heaven] under which we reside, and have
ﬁnally reached what we cannot discuss. [Your question] is, therefore, the
same as this. In the case where we infer the function of the spirit of the
present, seek the beginning point in the past, and ﬁnally reach what the sage
left intact and did not discuss, an element of truth simply threads together,
too. How could we discuss it alone?

62

Fascicle Two

“All [phenomena] are derived from conditions made in the unseen world
and following [the law of] the universe they are eternal, but [we cannot comprehend all of them] because what people’s senses feel is limited. People’s
minds receive the sacredness by which they form the consciousnesses. It is
just as when people’s eyes meet with sunlight, by which they come to see.
The reason Li Zhu could examine a [very tiny] autumn hair on an animal’s
body a hundred xun away from him is because he just looked with his keen
eyes, availing of the sunlight. Now, if very tiny hairs are spread a thousand
steps away from us, weak-sighted people [among us] cannot see them even
availing of [the sunlight], yet they have no shortcomings in perceiving the
tiny hairs and avoiding danger. Why is the tiny hair a hundred xun away
questioned on the basis of the vagueness of a thousand steps away? Those
who do not master the foundation of conditions that give rise to phenomena
and who lack feeling have no chance to meet sacredness, but they have no
shortage in knowing and reaching the ferry that leads to the [Buddhist] Way.
Why is the teaching that was already clariﬁed questioned due to the vagueness
of the beginning of conditions that give rise to phenomena?”
A person asked, “People of today say that since they do not understand the
beginning of conditions that give rise to phenomena, they cannot believe in the
Buddha. Is this not affections of the mind? Why doesn’t the sage clarify it?”
I answered, “What is called affections of the mind is a state of harboring
[something in the mind] or of exciting [the mind], and there is still an incomprehensible point in reason. We ought to avail ourselves of the sacredness
in order to understand it thoroughly. This is real affections of the mind based
on reason. Therefore, if people enjoy themselves being impeded by existence,
then [the Buddha] clariﬁes [people’s minds] with the signiﬁcance of suffering
and emptiness. If [the teaching of] love without distinction is not propagated,
then he shows [the teaching of] benevolence [to save sentient beings] through
the act of diving into [the jaws of hungry tigers]. Those [who practice the
teaching] do not necessarily reach [the goal] all together. Accordingly the
three vehicles are established. Since acts [that cause reward and retribution]
vary, cultivations differ from each other. So the six pāramitās are elucidated.
There is not even a single lack in the [Buddha’s] responsive activity for the
ferry and the bridge to [enlightenment]. It can be said ‘[the Buddha] is simply
moved and later responds.’169

63

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

12a

“Consequently, the heavenly beings who listened to the teaching on Vulture Peak were entirely relieved. [Among them,] those who arrived at the
ultimate state were numerous. Would they have further questioned the beginning of conditions that give rise to phenomena and later (i.e., after they understood) arrived at the principle? The clear instruction is adequate. If you cultivate as [the Buddha] said, what would be deﬁcient? Otherwise, how different
are those who still certainly do not believe in [the Buddha] and in the end
have excessive doubts about what is beyond our comprehension from those
who get a fatal disease and yet do not take medicine that is offered, or from
those who are struck by a stray arrow and yet do not take the shaft out, bearing
the pain, and who demand to know the basics of the construction of the arrow
and the medicine, and so on, and end up in death?
“This is entirely because those who have cultivated [the Buddhist Way]
from ancient times and yet have not attained great good fortune (i.e., enlightenment) cause the people who believe in [the Buddha] today to absurdly
doubt [the teaching]. How could this be considered to be real affections of
the mind based on reason? The unreasonable movement of the mind [full
of] absurd doubt assuredly has nothing to move the sacredness and to be able
to elucidate. [The Book of Changes states:] ‘I do not [go and] seek [the youthful] and inexperienced, but he comes and seeks me.’170 We certainly ought
to efface ourselves, and our acts ought to comply with the profound teaching.
If we sincerely go with faith, awakening will come later in accordance with
the response. Once we attain awakening, what is aroused can ﬁnally reach
the acme of the unseen world. Those who stick to absurd doubt, who do not
return to purity, and who do not straighten themselves out will precisely fall
into the disaster of delusion for a long time. Can there be a tomorrow [for
them]? To turn one’s back on [the Buddhist teaching] differs slightly from
facing it, but to go up [to Heaven] is greatly separated from falling into [Hell].
Shouldn’t you be careful?”
A person asked, “Confucius teaches: ‘[People with lofty ideas] will not
seek to live at the risk of injuring their virtue. They will fulﬁll justice at the
cost of their own life.’171 [This is] the culmination of virtue. In the Buddhist
scriptures, too, the practices for bodhisattvas are prescribed. Laozi elucidates
the utmost of wuwei, that is to say, the culmination of nirvana. However,
[Confucius and Laozi] have never spoken about supernatural power and the

64

Fascicle Two

attainment of buddhahood. Could there be something Confucius and Laozi
have left out? By clarifying the [Buddhist] Way, do you want to stir up [trouble] among people and cover up the real [practices] for attaining the Way?
How can I stop giving rise to the question that there is no reality [in
Buddhism]?”
I answered, “In the origination of ediﬁcation, each teaching depends on
to what it responds. As people hoped for peace to reign in the world, [the
teachings of Confucius] promulgated in the region of the Zhu and Si Rivers
was the response [to the people’s entreaty] in order to govern the Way. When
the pure wind [of ediﬁcation] became becalmed, the two chapters [of the
Daodejing] were compiled in order to stop the movement. If Yan [Hui], Ran
[Boniu], Zai [Wo], Zigong, Yin Xi, and Zhuangzi were externally commended
in the conduct of Confucianism and the profound learning in order to lead
[the world] to the height of what people of the world feel, and they internally
received the learning of nonarising (i.e., Buddhism) in order to specialize in
seeking the principle of the spirit, who in the world would know it? As for
the class of people such as Ran Qiu, Ji Lu, Zixia, Zisi, Mencius, [Guo] Linzong, [Zheng] Kangcheng, Ge Gong, Yan [Jun]ping, Ban Si, and Yang
Wang[sun], some played their part within ethical education, some ended up
by themselves, living an easy life free from worldly matters, and they were
not delighted with the Buddhist teaching. All [of these people] stopped within
their scarce conditions and ﬁnally did not go any further. Therefore, Confucius
and Laozi spoke out and instructed. The objective sphere of affections of the
mind reached by these [people] was consequently neither beyond what they
asked for nor more than what they responded to.
“Confucianism promulgates benevolence and Daoism restrains activity.
[Confucianism and Daoism] have already affectionately taught and come to
the verge—[these teachings] have all arrived at their culmination. Even though
the benevolence and good [of Confucianism], the inactivity [of Daoism], and
what the Buddha spoke of are common, regarding the dharmakāya and nirvana
[both Confucianism and Daoism] express nothing. Therefore, [these terms]
are simply obscure. Moreover, generally it is said that ‘[The Way] does nothing
[always for the sake of doing it], but there is nothing that it does not do’172
and ‘The dharmakāya has no form and universally enters into all things.’173
Aren’t [these two] the same in tenor? Thereupon, even though the three teachings

65

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

12b

of Confucius, Laozi, and the Tathāgata are different courses from each other,
they are all of a piece in learning wholesomeness.”
A person asked, “From the time of the Three Augusts and the Five
Thearchs up to the time of Confucius and Laozi, there must have been people
who cleansed their minds by the Buddhist teaching. We, however, have heard
no trace of the exchanges [of their discussions]. Why is this?”
I answered, “I have already made clear my intention about this in my
previous discussion. Scholars of shallow learning exclusively compiled the
vestiges of political affairs. If there were otherworldly statements, some were
dispersed into historical records, and some vanished at the time of burning
[the books on the Chinese classics] and burying [Confucian scholars alive].
Now I will repeat and express what I have in my mind.
“[It is stated in Kong Anguo’s preface to the Book of History (Shangshu
xu) that] the writings by the Three Augusts are called the Three Ancient
Books, which speak about the Great Way. At that time ﬁlial piety and benevolence were fully practiced. Why would they have had to teach humanity
and justice [to the people]? The people did not leave behind simplicity and
honesty. How could [philosophers] such as Laozi and Zhuangzi incite them
to do so? If it is not clariﬁed that the foundation of the spirit is nonarising
and the nature of all things is empty in order to illuminate the culmination,
what is considered to be the Great Way? This writing [of the Great Way] has
disappeared. Who in the world could know about it?
“The historian [Sima] Qian talks about the Five Thearchs. In all [his
remarks], he says, ‘[The Yellow Emperor] was a born genius,’ ‘He was able
to speak as an infant,’174 ‘[Emperor Gaoxin, a born genius,] spoke his own
name (i.e., he named himself),’175 ‘[Emperor Gaoyang] was serene and profound and well versed in all things,’176 and ‘His (i.e., Emperor Yao’s) intelligence was just like that of spirits.’177 [These remarks] are already similar
to those about the birth of the Mahayana bodhisattvas who manifest in various
kinds of transformations. [The Yellow Emperor] resided on the hill of Xuanyuan, climbed up Mount Kongtong, and ascended Mount Wan and Mount
Dai.178 [Emperor Gaoyang] went to Youling and Panwu,179 and his outstanding
vestige is beyond waves (i.e., the secular world). How could we know that
[their activities] were not derived from the Way of the Tathāgata?

66

Fascicle Two

“During the long-lasting period of the Five Thearchs, Yao reigned for
one hundred years and Shun for only seventy years. In the style of Guang
Cheng, Dawei, Hong Yai, Chao[fu], Xu [You], Zhifu, the northerner [Wuzhai],
and the four immortals of Mount Gushi, the profound manners were accumulated and brimmed over at that time. Of the books by the Five Thearchs,
however, there are only two compositions extant: the Tang[dian] and the
Yu[dian] (i.e., the Canon of Yao and the Canon of Shu in the Book of History),
which are not complete. Furthermore, in Zichang’s records (i.e., the Shiji,
compiled by Sima Qian) it is said that ‘Thinkers of the various schools wrote
about the Yellow Emperor, but their writings were neither elegant nor instructive. Even government ofﬁcials do not easily express in words about [the
writings].’180 The historical records only adopted the vestige of bloody matters
of rule, and did not record even a single [word about the truth] in a million
[words]. How can we accept that it is entirely false [that there were Buddhist
practitioners in ancient times] just because the ﬂourishing of the highest path
(i.e., Buddhism) is not found in these incomplete compositions?
“Now, here we see the ruler of spiritual intelligence who roamed in the
great and vast world, the seven sages who all together went to Mount Juci,181
and a holy man seen on Mount Gu Ye.182 They were beings in transformation.
Why do we have to explain much about them? How could we know that
what [these] sublime words elucidate is not [the manifestation of] the spirit
that went to extremes beyond numerous kalpas? Guang Cheng said, ‘The
essence of the ultimate Way is deeply obscure.’183 He means [by this] the
‘heroic valor concentration’ (shoulengyan sanmei; Skt. śūraṃgama-samādhi).
[His statement] ‘He who attains my Way will be the August at the highest,
or a king at the lowest’ means that one can ascend or descend according to
the ediﬁcation; he is similar to the Flying Emperor, [that is to say,] the wheelturning noble king (Skt. cakravartin). [His statement] ‘He who fails in attaining my Way will see the light for the highest, or he will become the earth for
the lowest’184 refers to those who transmigrate in Heaven and in the human
realm.
“[When the Yellow Emperor met a herder,] he sensed the great lofty air
[of the boy], called him the Heavenly Master, and withdrew from that place.185
[The Heavenly Master] is also [one of] the ten epithets [for the Buddha].

67

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

12c

This is probably the teaching of nonarising (i.e., Buddhism). The [Buddhist]
Way was deeply practiced at that time. The practice spread among [people
of] profound and distinguished [knowledge], but this fact went into oblivion
in ancient times, and the [Buddhist] doctrines were concealed behind writings.
Thereupon, what the various schools of thinkers collected seems understandable
but it is obscure. Furthermore, the learned among government ofﬁcials do not
say that [their writings] are elegant and instructive. Consequently, the result
is that those who follow the worldly way and who do not deeply master the
Way depend on history books that restrain them from reaching the [Buddhist]
doctrines, disregard the profound ediﬁcation complying with immediate feelings, and put their vigorous spirits in eternal trouble. Isn’t this sad?
“Boyi said in the Book of Mountains and Seas (Shanhaijing), ‘In the
country of Tiandu the people are very dear to others and love each other.’186
In Guo Pu’s commentary on the book it is said, ‘The country we formerly
called Tiandu is Tianzhu (i.e., India) where Futu (Buddhism) originated, and
the expression “to be very dear to” means “to love.”’ [This is] also a model
of the Tathāgata’s great benevolence. Originally [Buddhism] was known in
the times of the Three Augusts and the Five Thearchs. Although the national
statute records do not impart [this information about Buddhism], this is insufﬁcient to cause doubt.
“Generally, how can we surmise things that happened from the three
dynasties (i.e., Xia, Yin, and Zhou) to the time of Confucius and Laozi, which
were not recorded in books of history? Confucius asked about rites and Laozi
responded to [his questions]. [Complying with] the request of the Prefect of
the Pass Yin [Xi], [Laozi] elucidated the Way for him [by compiling the
Daodejing].187 If the two chapters [of the Daodejing] had disappeared and
his words remained only in the Book of Rites, people of later ages would
have said that the old man of the imperial censor (i.e., Laozi) knew only
about rites. Wouldn’t this old scholar have mastered what is profound? Now,
when the existence of various writings for a hundred generations is uncertain,
[with some being extant and others having been lost,] there is nothing fully
complete in reason. How could we judge solely by our observation that Confucius and Laozi had no exchange [with Buddhists]?
“Replying to a question of Emperor Wu of the Han dynasty, Dongfang
Shuo advised him [to ask a man from Central Asia about the black ashes he

68

Fascicle Two

had obtained, which, Zhu Falan later said, were the remains] burned in ﬁre
at the time of the exhaustion of a kalpa.188 Liu Xiang’s Biographies of Arrayed
Transcendents (Liexianzhuan) states that seventy-four men [of the Transcendents] are found in the Buddhist scriptures. These are [views of limited scope]
of scholars. Again, it was not [during the reign of] Emperor Ming of the
[Later] Han dynasty that [Buddhism] began [in China]. Nevertheless, those
who exercise their spirits and stick to mundane matters are many and evident,
while those who form sincerity in the tranquil and subtle state are rare and
inconspicuous. Therefore, the fact to secretly be grateful [for the Buddha]
is simply not exposed in sentient beings.
“The eminent Buddhist monk Fotudeng was a kindhearted sage at the
time of Shi Le and [Shi] Hu. [Fotudeng] told Shi Hu that ‘In the city of Linzi
county (in present-day Shandong province) there is the old site of the King
Aśoka Temple where there is still a [buddha] image, and the dew basin is
buried in the earth, twenty zhang under a big tree in a deep forest.’189 An envoy
of [Shi] Hu looked for them, relying on the illustration, and found everything
[Fotudeng] had mentioned. Recently, when Yao Lüe’s uncle was a king of
Jin, he saw a bright light at the site of the King Aśoka Temple, so called by
the elders, in Puban of Hedong. Seeking [the origin of the light], he had [his
men] dig there and obtained relics of the Buddha in a silver case inside a stone
container. The brightness was extraordinary. Following [Yao] Lüe, [the king
of Jin] came out onto the bank of the Ba River to see [the relics arrive]. Today
bhikṣus live in a new temple [where the relics are worshiped].
“From the observation of these facts, [we can see that] a long time has
passed since Buddhist practices were transmitted to the land of Qi and Jin.
The reason [the transmission of Buddhism] was not mentioned in the three
commentaries [on the Spring and Autumn Annals] (i.e., the Chunqiu Zuoshizhuan, the Gongyang, and the Guliang) is similar to the reason why in the
history books written by Gan Bao and Sun Sheng (i.e., the Jinji and the
Jinyangqiu) there are no remarks about the Buddha. The subtle [Buddhist]
ediﬁcation is, however, really obvious. During the Jin period, [Buddhism]
ﬂourished in the Jiangzuo area (present-day Jiangsu province).”
A person asked, “If all buddhas actually exist, understand thoroughly
all phenomena, and are able to do all things freely with their awesome supernatural powers, why do they not brightly manifest themselves today? Why

69

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

13a

do they not cause those of exquisite [faculties] and those of weak [faculties]
equally to have faith and awaken them to the truth? Why do they not disperse
their spiritual functions over [people] in distress in order to remove them
from the fate of being accused with a false charge? Why do they not make
the class of gentlemen see Buddhism?
“Accordingly, people do not equally believe in [Buddhism], and they
fall down together into the suffering of an icchantika. Among the people of
the states of Qin and Zhao, six hundred thousand were buried by Bai Qi and
Xiang Ji in a day.190 Actually, all people of good ethics of all ages, and all
those who were buried neither necessarily have the conditions from previous
lives for great wholesomeness, nor do they accumulate great evils without
any [good] conditions. Nevertheless, [the buried people] had no chance to
see the Buddha’s mercy and were buried together on the same day. Sadly,
this misery is completely equal [for all of them]. [All buddhas] watched this
extremely cruel [incident] from their seats, and never responded. What can
be considered to be their mercy?
“The condition [advocated in Buddhism] does not overturn one’s fate,
and [Buddhist] virtue does not cause people to leave the [miserable] world;
that is to say, [Buddhism] cannot save people. On what basis can it be considered that [the Buddha’s] supernatural power is free and wonderful? Marquis
Yang of Lu state put off the sunset [by guiding the sun with a spear when he
fought Han state].191 Geng Gong [of the Later Han dynasty] welled out water
[by adjusting himself and vowing twice in the land of the Xiongnu].192 Song
[Jun of the Later Han dynasty, the governor] of Jiujiang, [governed well].
[Therefore], tigers [who had harmed the people there] kept out of Jiujiang
and locusts were held back at the state boundary.193 Since they all thoroughly
employed the power of their minds freely, they could mysteriously move
non-human beings [and phenomena, such as the sun, water, tigers, and locusts].
It goes without saying that the Buddha’s supernatural power to pacify [Bai]
Qi’s mind and tame [Xiang] Ji’s mind is in order to save the lives of a million
people. [To save their lives] is much easier than to put Mount Sumeru into
a poppy seed and much more benevolent than to sacriﬁce one’s physical
body for [a hungry] tiger and a dove.194
“Nevertheless, if we think this now and yet it is unrealizable, if we
relate this and yet it is not complied with, or if we entreat and yet there is

70

Fascicle Two

no salvation, then it is desolate, no different from a bare, empty sky. Moreover,
among Buddhists, there are those who become śramaṇas and burn their
bodies, those who renounce moral laws and cut the six feelings, and those
who suffer from labor, or squander their fortunes in order to serve a temple
and [buddha] images. It is pitiful that their present [existence] is promptly
carried away and they do not see what they have attained. Alas! It is a pity!
“If it is said that the response (i.e., retribution and reward) will come in
the future, [this does not make sense because] the six hundred thousand
people mentioned previously were different [in terms of] the goodness and
evil of their actions, and yet they were equally killed through injustice. Even
if good and evil acts differ from each other, why is there difference only in
what they undertook after death? Differences between good and evil acts
made in the present life become one and are not graded. The future is vast
and restless. What are we supposed to expect there? Are we supposed to be
afraid that there is really no future?
“A sutra says: ‘As [the Buddha’s] toes touch the earth, all triple-thousand
buddha lands appear, and all people, even to the extent of the blind, the deaf,
the dumb, prisoners, and those who are suffering, attain peace.’195 Regardless
of distance, life or death, and observance of the precepts (i.e., Buddhist or
non-Buddhist), the Buddha is equally benevolent to everyone. If [the Buddha]
has the benevolent mind, he should see people’s suffering, and he should give
peace to them in the same manner as [is related] in this [passage of the sutra].
Moreover, Buddhist scriptures have many words like this, to make us happy.
In fact, somewhat unexpectedly there is no immediate response. How can we
know that this is not the case of an outstanding person in a foreign land whose
ability was superior to his contemporaries, who made this ﬁctitious teaching,
who used threat and conciliation, whose words had subtle and profound tastes,
and who [expounded] matters that have the gracefulness of clarity and solemnity, and consequently [those of a simple heart] easily believed in him, submitted themselves to [his teaching], and then undertook unfathomable matters
one after another, and the situation does not stop?”
I answered, “You do not see the path [of the Buddha]. That is why you
take a smooth path to be rocky. If you actually look at the path from above,
you will not see anything difﬁcult. Nothing, in its regular course, is the Way.196
The Buddha simply established the [Buddhist] Way by means of the spirit.

71

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

13b

Hence, virtue and the Way are one. The spirit and the Way are two [different
issues]. Since they are two [different issues], they illuminate [sentient beings]
in order to lead to [myriad] transformations. Since [virtue and the Way are]
one, they always have causality and yet nothing to create.
“Each of myriad transformations certainly follows causality, and is created
in the Great Way. The reason we call him the Buddha is because he is free
from all existing things and is beyond comprehension; it is not because he
can save people absurdly, apart from [the causes and] conditions they created
in their previous existences. Sentient beings are innumerable. Guidance of
the spiritual function entirely pervades, just like complying with [the unevenness of the surface of] a precipice. What part is illuminated is simply unthinkable. For instance, [the great] ﬂood and the four villains [during the reign of
Yao], the ignorance of [Shun’s father] Gu, and the haughtiness of [Shun’s
brother] Xiang are entirely the true aspects of nature, which even [the sage
kings] Yao and Shun could not change. Nevertheless, it is certain that in each
case [the problem was solved] complying with its precipice (i.e., case): [Yao
and Shun] controlled the ﬂood and exiled the [four] villains. This is as sufﬁcient
as being able to meet their virtue. Wouldn’t it be great?
“The [Way of the] Buddha is probably none other than the Way of sages.
[The Buddha] does not only accomplish salvation for sentient beings but
also expounds the teaching for those of the realms beyond this mundane
world. It is just as with Yao’s distinguished corresponding manifestation that
when causality is ripe, even without doing anything, his achievement spontaneously manifested [in phenomena]. The reason the tones of a bell move
non-humans, [just as the tunes of Zou Yan’s music caused a variety of millet
to grow in a cold ravine,] is because the [human] mind profoundly corresponds
[to the non-human’s],197 not to mention [how every being is moved by] ingenious sages who consider the principle of the spirit as virtue.
“Generally, all those who have encountered each other in a far buddha
land have a strong will and a pure spirit that have increased in brightness
through many kalpas. Thereupon, they are able to take in [the Buddha] and
understand him thoroughly. The result is that Śākyamuni emits light that
shines throughout the ten directions, Prabhūtaratna [Buddha] caused a [seventreasure tower] to spring up [whenever the Lotus Sutra was expounded],198
and the world of Merupradīparāja Tathāgata was moved into Vimalakīrti’s

72

Fascicle Two

[ten-foot-square] room [in an instant].199 How could the Buddha manifest
himself alone [without causality]? [Those who are capable] can see [the
Buddha].
“As for people like the gentlemen here today, they were not born in the
fortunate [world] of the Arhat (i.e., the Buddha) but live within the land governed by Yu (i.e., China). Since in sincerity they all went against [the Buddha]
in their former [existences], they meet perversity in their present [existences].
Even if a person is as upright as [Bo]yi and [Shu]qi, or as dutiful as [Hui of]
Liu[xia] and Ji[zha], as long as what he sets his mind on is against [Buddhism],
how can he feel and see the Buddha? It is even [more difﬁcult] for those who
are presently called gentlemen or those below them [in status]. Although
these people perfume their bodies with decorum and emit the fragrance of
fame in the world, they have strong sensual desires and their ambitions do
not adhere to the [Buddhist] Way. ‘The gentleman among men is, in fact, the
small man of Heaven.’200 On what basis could one who contains the highest
spirit respond to the affections of their minds? How could there be a case
where the Buddha unfairly hides from them? They themselves do not see
[the Buddha].
“If some people were born following [a cause and] a condition and have
the sincerity to practice the six pāramitās due to acts made in their previous
life, they feel and see [the Buddha] brightly by themselves. There must be
such people time after time. If so, and if there are Buddhist clergy and laypeople
side by side, how do we know the difference between them? In this case,
coarseness and excellence lie in oneself. Hence, whether or not one sees [the
Buddha] is due to the difference in the response [they would receive]. How
could you doubt the existence of the Buddha because you are not clear about
the glorious appearance [of the Buddha]?
“There are numinous beings between Heaven and Earth. It is clear that
the vigorous spirit is not perishable. Now, the spirits of the [buried] people
of the states of Qin and Zhao arose together with the universe. Even if Heaven
and Earth are settled and corrupted, [the spirits] are imperishable. How could
the two generals [Bai] Qi and [Xiang] Ji destroy six hundred thousand spirits
at once? Spirits are unable to be exterminated; what are exterminated are
physical bodies. Just as the Buddha says, what is usually perishable are the
physical bodies of sentient beings. Since the bodies [of six hundred thousand

73

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

13c

people] perished, wouldn’t they all have used up their natural life spans
[when Bai] Qi and [Xiang] Ji [buried them]? How can we make this clear?
“[The Book of Changes states:] ‘The method of Qian (i.e., Heaven) is
to change and transform, so that everything obtains its correct nature as
appointed [by the mind of Heaven].’201 All lives, extending to those of birds,
pigs, dogs, and sheep, are treated equally in the hexagrams (six-line diagrams)
and the six diagrams for divination [in the Book of Changes]. People eat
other living creatures in order to support themselves. They are as cruel as spiders that spin their webs [in order to catch and eat other insects]. Hawks and
tigers cannot survive unless they catch and eat [other animals], but people
can [subsist] on cooked grain and vegetables. Even so, [people still kill and
eat other living creatures]; they are very ferocious. The Way of Heaven is
extremely fair; what it disseminates is life. How could it allow people to
oppress the lives [of others] and suppress a response from the unseen world?
Even though the [buried] six hundred thousand people must have been dissimilar to one another in character—some were good and some were bad—
I am afraid that they did not differ in mercilessly eating other sentient beings.
The good is different from the bad. Therefore, [the reward and retribution]
they received in their lifetimes should have certainly been dissimilar. [However,] they were all equal in harming sentient beings. Consequently, they
should assuredly have received detriment on the same day.
“Daoist sayings and what people of the world say are nothing new. Regarding Lord Yu [of the Han dynasty, a virtuous man who administrated fair justice,]
and Bing Ji, [who rescued and raised Emperor Xuan of the Han dynasty,] their
virtuous conduct of rescuing and making others happy was later rewarded.202
On the other hand, Yan Yannian [of the Han dynasty], Tian Fen [of the Wei
dynasty], and Emperor Xuan of the Jin dynasty murdered [innocent people]
and received retribution in turn. These [examples] are all found in books of
history of the Han and Wei dynasties as what was believed in the world.
“[One’s acts] to save the lives of others will pass on blessings to his
descendants, not to speak of the case where one’s vigorous spirit becomes
the subject to save or destroy others’ lives; he will have reward or retribution
in his later existence. If we destroy or save others’ lives, we ourselves will
certainly receive retribution or reward. Needless to say, if one satisﬁes or
frustrates the spirit of others, he will ascend or fall in his own spirit. Those

74

Fascicle Two

killed by [Yan] Yannian were all ordinary small people, while Dou Ying, [who
was killed by Tian Fen,] and Wang Ling, [who was driven to commit suicide
by Sima Zhongda, who later became Emperor Xuan,] were talented people;
[the former was] a prime minister and [the latter] a loyal ofﬁcial [of the Wei
dynasty]. [These victims] were dissimilar in their intelligence and social status,
but [their killers] were equal in receiving retribution.
“In respect of receiving retribution, it is [meted out] regardless of excellence or humbleness; there is no difference between a general, a minister,
and an emperor of the Jin dynasty. Isn’t it the case where the Way of Heaven
is extremely fair, [all people are equally] the children [of Heaven] regardless
of the distinction of their mental faculty, or where the principle lies in a person’s life, not in their nobility or humbleness? Even though a hog and a ﬁsh
are humble, each of their lives is correctly based on the Way of Heaven.
When we observe a large bird circling in the air, a small bird chirping, the
ox whose lowing Gelu [of Jie state] recognized,203 and the deer who moved
Xi Ba [of Qin],204 [we know that each of these animals] is deeply affectionate
toward the fellow animals of its kind.
“[Suppose] there are a pregnant woman and a young child. If a person
cuts open [the woman’s belly] and scoops out [the fetus], or roasts [the young
child], this is called an unjust and grievous offense, one at which Heaven
shudders. To hunt pregnant animals in spring or to roast or salt down a lamb
and a young bird are the same [as the case mentioned above] in the Way of
Heaven. How could there be no retribution? Nevertheless, following the
proper [ancient way of living] in which people drank blood, we now cannot
suddenly stop hunting and ﬁshing.
“Therefore, a sage king educated [people] by ‘keeping away from the
slaughterhouse and kitchen.’205 This is probably because he tried to lessen
the harm, submitting to the fact that people slaughter [animals for food]. If
one walks into a slaughterhouse and hears [the animal’s dying] cries, he
cannot bear [to eat the meat]. To set up hunting [and ﬁshing] seasons in accordance with the wolf, [who sacriﬁced its prey in the ninth month,] and the
otter, [who sacriﬁced its ﬁsh in the ﬁrst month,] is done because it is hateful
to injure pregnant animals [by hunting] at the inappropriate time. To hunt
[in spring] without a net shows clearly that the lives of living creatures are
important. Mencius showed great appreciation [for King Xuan of Qi state,

75

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

14a

who could not bear to see an ox, a large animal, killed] in order to anoint
bells with its blood [for worship, and who ordered the use of the blood of a
sheep, a small animal, instead].206 It is because Mencius knew that the king
was so virtuous to abandon destroying life.
“Since the former kings relieved the masses and helped meet an urgent
need, they had very deep benevolence, but they could not exercise strict
control over [the destruction of life] immediately. The Tathāgata traced to
the very source of spirit and elucidated its apex. Therefore, he values equally
the lives in the ﬁve realms of existence, and set forth the abandonment of
the destruction of life as the ﬁrst of many precepts. King Bimbisāra received
retribution [for killing] a white hare. [King Liuli of] the Śākya clan was
ruined because [he had killed] yellow ﬁsh.207 [These] indicate the natural
features of retribution. [The law of causality] is entirely deep, profound, and
inconceivable, yet evident.
“If [the people who were buried] had been able to listen to the [Buddhist]
Way and had cultivated the teaching and the precepts with respect, they would
certainly not have fallen into a pit at Changping and been buried alive [as
were the soldiers of] Lord Mafu (i.e., Zhao Kuo) [of Zhao state].208 Even after
falling into the pit, if they had believed in the teaching [and had been able to
practice] thoroughly, they would have surely transcended their impending
difﬁculties. If the sin caused by the condition [one created] in a previous
existence is heavy, it is hard to receive the reward for his former [good conduct], but the virtue he earns by observing the precepts arrives later, and he
will surely not be buried alive again in his next existence. What you said
about dispersing the spiritual function over the distressed in order to remove
them from suffering injustice is just such a case as this. It is the highest benevolence. If one who is good in secular values and yet who does not have faith
in the [Buddhist] Way destroys the lives of many living creatures, retribution
exposes him to danger. This is just as it should be.
“The Buddha avails himself of the principle [of causality], lives up to
the very nature of things, and saves people through the Dharma. He cannot
unreasonably save those who do not follow the Dharma and the principle.
How could the Buddha be unreal? This can be compared to the case of Bian
Que, [a great doctor of ancient China]. Even though he tried to cure a sick
person with medicine, if [the sick person] did not trust him and did not take

76

Fascicle Two

the medicine, the disease would not be cured. Wouldn’t Bian Que still be
considered an excellent [doctor in such a case]?
“The reason [Marquis] Yang of Lu state put off the sunset [by guiding
the sun with a spear when he fought Han state], Geng Gong [of the Later
Han dynasty] welled out water [by adjusting himself and vowing twice in
the land of Xiongnu], and the distant ancestor [Song Jun of] Jiujiang had
virtue by which locusts and tigers were kept out of the area, is entirely because
their strong sincerity moved [the Way of the Spirit]. That the Way of the
Spirit is moved is precisely the same as that the Buddha is moved. If [those
who could have moved the Way of the Spirit] had been in the states of Qin
and Zhao, they would surely not have fallen into trouble. That is to say, all
those who fell into trouble had no sincerity. By what [force] could they have
moved the Buddha and harmonized and softened [the minds of Bai] Qi and
[Xiang] Ji?
“Since those who possessed supernatural power congregated at the hall
of a thoroughly educated one (i.e., Vimalakīrti), it was possible to see Mount
Sumeru in a mustard seed. Moreover, although they were now a tiger and a
dove, they might have been human beings in their previous existences. They
had once had the formation of a [good] condition. Therefore, they met the
Buddha and received the good fortune of [the Buddha] sacriﬁcing his physical
body to save the [starving] tiger and cutting off a piece of his thigh to give
[to a hawk] instead of [letting] the dove [be eaten by the hawk]. If it were
not that [the Buddha] was moved and able to take action to sacriﬁce himself
for them, how could the miracle to harmonize and soften [atrocious beings]
recklessly happen? ‘The cessation of blowing sounds from the myriad apertures completely attributes to each of their own causes.’209 Why do you doubt
the Buddha?
“If your determination [to take refuge in the Buddha] is ﬁrm, when you
think of him, you will see him, and when you speak to him, he will listen to
you. Confucius met the Duke of Zhou in a dream.210 [Emperor Gaozong of the
Yin dynasty] saw the ﬁgure of Fu Yue [in a dream,] and [after a search] Fu Yue
in fact came to him.211 [In the former case] there is a long interval between the
time of the Duke of Zhou and that of Confucius, and [in the latter case] Fuyan,
[where Fu Yue was found,] is a long distance away [from the capital]. [The
separation in time and distance,] however, did not obstruct these profound

77

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

14b

meetings. When we presume from this point, we should believe that if we
purify our thoughts and perceive [the west], we will see Amitābha Buddha
beyond myriad worlds without any effort. Why do you say that there is no
difference [between the Buddhist teaching] and the bare, empty sky?
“The Way lies in training the spirit, not in having the physical body exist.
Hence, śramaṇas shave their heads, burn their bodies, encourage their spirits,
and cut off association [with the secular world]. The spirit is imperishable,
and it is capable of traveling quickly to wherever it is going. Is there any
contradiction?
“[People of the secular world] strive for principles of human relationships
and are distressed with their six feelings. What can they ﬁnd within themselves
seeking agitation in their spirits? If they sincerely take the tonsure by themselves and cut off [association with the secular world], they will diminish
[their actions] from day to day, and through the puriﬁcation they will actually
draw close to the Way. Even if they made strenuous effort to make a good
reputation for themselves or expended all their fortune to build a fabulous
residence, if they die soon after that, what they receive in name and reality
does not go beyond ‘robbers and boasters,’ [just as is stated in the Laozi
Daodejing].212 If they construct a mansion where images of deities are placed
and where it is profound, tranquil, and solemn, their physical bodies will
comply with its subtlety and their spirits will follow the profundity. If [the
physical body] is subtle, the response [they receive] will be pure. If [the
spirit] is profound, the bliss [they receive] will be wonderful. Which is better:
to be ‘robbers and boasters’ or to be close to the Way? ‘Their present existence
is promptly carried away,’ [as you said previously,] because they rise to
[Heaven upon death]. If they go secretly and are united with the spiritual
intelligence, happiness and prosperity will manifest in their later existences.
How can we see what they will obtain [in the present existence]?
“Activities in human affairs are certainly linked to the Way of the Spirit.
In the phenomenal world nothing exists irrationally; everything must have
a reason to exist. If profound and unseen reward or retribution is not like
what I have said above, for what reason were the six hundred thousand people
buried alive? Since they were buried alive due to retribution, there must have
been people who escaped from being buried alive due to reward. Now, among

78

Fascicle Two

people of the Warring States period, there were those as ingenious as An
Qi[sheng], those as profound as the four white and bright men [of Mount
Shang], and the man who became an emperor by having a noble face and
who became a monarch by giving a part of his ﬁefdom to feudal lords (i.e.,
Emperor Gaozong of the Han dynasty). People of fame and talent were innumerable. They were as equally [in danger as] if they were within the target
range of the skillful archer Yi,213 but why would they alone be so [famous]?
Wouldn’t this be a corresponding manifestation of reward from each person’s
previous existence?
“Inasmuch as happiness in this existence is the result of actions made
in a previous existence, it is clear that the actions one makes in this existence
will result in reward and retribution in his next existence. Now, the difference
of personality (i.e., good or evil) in this existence is made clear by the previous
existence, so why is only what one accepts in his next existence allowed to
be exceptional? According to what a sutra expresses, ‘To take the chance to
see the Buddha’s ediﬁcation is entirely due to the fact that there was originally
an excellent condition [in the previous existence]. Therefore, when one meets
[the Buddha], he feels as if he has met [the Buddha] before.’214 [Nevertheless,
you said that] there has been no sudden corresponding manifestation of
response and all faults have nothing to do with [retribution]. On the contrary,
you falsely accuse that the highest teaching [of the Buddha] is a ﬁctitious
idea. Alas! Divine examination is very evident. You should fear the offense
of disgracing the Sage. I venture to ask you: Is the one who made up the ﬁctitious idea a sage, a wise person, or a small person?
“The Sage does not have an invariable mind of his own. It is probably
because he educates the masses, following their natures, and has them fulﬁll
[what they have been taught]. If the spirit perishes when the body dies, [people]
should just devote themselves to do their best with the Confucian teaching to
the ends of their lives. Again, what is the matter? [Buddhists] try to delude
people by saying that the spirit is immortal, and deceive them by telling about
the attainment of buddhahood. [Buddhism] induces people to take the tonsure
and burn the skin, and causes married couples to divorce. There are innumerable
people who have refrained from having offspring. Moreover, distinguished
sages have no ﬁxed place to educate [people]; some are hiding and some are

79

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

14c

isolated [from the world]. What are these ﬁctitious ideas good for? The harm
they cause is much more painful. We know that this is not what sages and
wise people did.
“If the person [who founded Buddhism] belongs to a group of [small]
people like Fan Xu, [about whom Confucius lamented,]215 he restrains himself
out of fear that the Duke of Zhou and Confucius may consider him a heretic
and does not venture to act recklessly. If he is below the level of that group,
he is merely one of the good-for-nothings. How can such a person found a
school, in addition to the nine schools, be more honorable than Laozi and
Zhuangzi, and illuminate [the world of] a thousand years later?
“Five hundred years [after Śākyamuni passed away], people like Nāgārjuna, Āryadeva, Aśvaghoṣa, Kātyāyanī, Dharmaṣresthin, Vasubhadra, and
Dharmatrāta respectfully explained the teaching of the [Buddhist] Way in
the Dazhidulun, the Zhonglun (Skt. Mādhyamaka-śāstra), the Bailun, and a
group of the Abhidharma discussions. These people had a genius for supernatural powers. The eight wise men, such as Jīvaka and Jiantuole,216 about
whom Sun Chuo (d. ca. 370) recently composed a hymn, and those whose
portraits Zhi Daolin (314–366) drew together with a eulogy, such as Dharmarakṣa, Yu Falan, [Yu] Daosui, and Que Gon[ze], have the spirit that shines
over the Chinese nation. Zhu Faxing of China (i.e., the Western Jin dynasty)
was compared to the Director of the Imperial Secretariat Yue [Guang] (d.
304) by his contemporary [Sun Chuo]. Śrīmitra of the Jiangsu area [during
the Eastern Jin dynasty] was highly evaluated for the outstanding and lofty
state of his mind by all the princes. Guo Wenju was broadminded, profound,
and sincere, and he had faith only in Buddhism.
“Generally [speaking,] since the time of Nāgārjuna, could there be people
who entirely incur danger caused by the deceit of those good-for-nothings
mentioned above? In that case, wouldn’t the matter of Master Yellow Face
(i.e., the Buddha) be undoubted?
“The image, relics, teeth, hair, other articles, and remaining footprints
of the Buddha are still luminous in his homeland. This fact is also evidence
of the [Buddhist] Way. There are many people in the foreign land (i.e., India)
who have keen natures for examining things and who are intelligent. In addition, their sensual desires are generally deep. Since the time their ancestors
stood in front of the Buddha, all of them have accumulated [faithful] acts,

80

Fascicle Two

intimately transmitted [Buddhism] in the world, and relied on the [undeniable]
facts. The image, the relics, and the legacy [of the Buddha] brightly educate
the people, and their harmonious relationship [with the Buddha] is clear. Hence,
the descendant kings bade the whole nation to observe the precepts. The four
kinds of Buddhist disciples devote themselves wholeheartedly to ascetic [practices]. They will have no regret even if they were to die [from these practices].
If the [Buddhist] doctrines are peculiar and vague, and if there is nothing real
and wonderful in these events, would [the people of India] be willing to exert
themselves to control their carnal desires in order to respect the Invisible One?
If the image and the articles [left behind by the Buddha] are not real, and if
[groundless] rumors are circulating, why do people, both of the past and of
present times, torment themselves to leave behind carnal desires in order to
make progress toward the goal? [Some people] must be discouraged in the
process of cultivation, but almost everyone becomes more serious. We can
brieﬂy infer [from this point that the Buddhist Way is indubitable].
“I would like to argue [the following]. The reason why from former times
[the fruition] is not evident for those who study the [Buddhist] Way is because
[their intention] lies in holding onto life, but suffering arises from [holding
onto] life. Ignorant people are not aware of this. Therefore, all buddhas
enlighten them by means of [teaching the causes of] suffering, and lead them
by means of [teaching] non-birth. [The idea of] non-birth cannot be quickly
realized. Then the people are led by means of reward and retribution in their
existences. If one collects merit and sublimates himself more and more, he
can be led to the clear, serene culmination. For this reason, the [Buddhist]
Way is as vast as a blue sea. No matter how small, there is nothing that is not
ferried across, and no matter how large, there is nothing that is not led.
“Even though [the Buddhist Way] is very much opposed to [the teaching
of] striving after making a living and holding onto life, it also teaches the
ﬁve cardinal duties and induces people to practice and assist ethical education.
The reason why people of the world say that weal and woe are not well timed
in the Way of Heaven is similar to the reason why the historian [Sima] Qian
had deep emotion about [the unhappy death of] Boyi.217 First of all, why
would the sage Confucius have made a reckless statement? Confucius said,
‘If one accumulates enough good deeds, his family will have more than
enough blessings to spare, but if he accumulates enough evil deeds, his family

81

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

will have more than enough misfortune to spare.’218 Nevertheless, Yan [Hui]
died young and Ran [Boniu] had a disease. We have never heard about their
descendants. [On the other hand,] Shangchen (i.e., King Mu of Chu state)
died a natural death in old age, [even though he had murdered his father,
King Cheng,] and his son King Zhuang was sagacious and assumed the hegemony. Generally these matters cannot be entirely understood in reason, but
could there be anything that is not understood in reason?
“We cannot help believing the teaching that [if one accumulates enough
good deeds,] he will have blessings in his later existence, and [if he accumulates enough evil deeds,] he will have misfortune in the three lowest realms
of existence. Even though the physical body has life and death, the vigorous
spirit will certainly receive responses (i.e., reward and retribution) to [what
one has done in his lifetime]. How is this different from the case where the
responses to one’s conduct manifest in their present existence? Causes and
conditions, however, have a sequence. Therefore, the manifestation of reward
and retribution has timing: early and late. It is just as there are early or later
manifestations of fortune or misfortune in one’s lifetime. In this case, the
Confucian teaching supports the Buddhist [teaching] and both meet on common ground. [The Buddhist teaching] can really be said to be the extremely
profound and unalterable Way.
“Human beings are just like dust ﬂoating in the air; life and death are
illusory. If [life and death] are encompassed within the framework of one
hundred years, there is no one, wether young or old, who is not included.
Even [elderly people] whose hair has faded and turned to yellow and whose
back is hunched over [with age] and covered with spots, like the blowﬁsh,
still feel that the time they have lived is ﬂeeting, not to mention those who
have lived for a shorter time. Moreover, time never stops and the movement
[of heavenly bodies] is everlasting. The time that has already passed is incalculable and limitless. Each moment is as brief as the blink of an eye or a
glance, and it has simply come down to the present time. Why is it difﬁcult
to come up to one hundred years by accumulating moments that are as brief
as the blink of an eye? There are, however, few people who are able to reach
even half [of one hundred years].
“People’s attachment to their physical bodies, which are [as short-lived
as] morning dew, has mostly nothing in the reality of the clean and remote

82

Fascicle Two

[world]. Why do they content themselves [within the brief period of time of]
a water clock with [the physical body, which will eventually] become rotten
and stink, abuse the eternally existing (i.e., immortal) spirit, and not themselves
cast obstructions to the remote wind? Although the Nominalists and the
Legalists are statesmen, why would they alone have nothing to do with [this
fact] in the Great Way? Since they merely wander in the realm of human
beings, and are noisy on the worldly path, they simply feel that the human
way is prosperous and belittle the idea of spirits. If we turn ourselves around
in the center of the world and ascend a high mountain, we have wonderful
views far away: the clear spaciousness of the universe and the wonder of the
sun and moon shining through. Could it be possible that there is no dignity
of awesome numinous beings of various sages there, and there is only a multitude of people who busy themselves with worldly matters? Certainly, we
will think of the eternal [world] in order to open the thought of the Way of
the Spirit, and feel tranquility in order to elucidate the corresponding manifestation of numinous beings.
“In the past in Lu state Confucius wrote the Five Classics, by which he
educated the people of the world. When he looked down from the top of
Mount Tai and Mount Meng, both the world and Lu state appeared small [to
him].219 Doesn’t this indicate that his spirit united with the universe and consequently he transcended this world? If this is so, the Five Classics were
probably written merely to respond to trivial requests [of the world] for a
momentary lifetime. How is it possible that the people of the world block
the Buddhist Dharma and do not believe in it?
“I would like to ask you: Is the reason you do not believe in [the Buddhist
Dharma] because [you think] there is no spiritual intelligence but the multitude,
or because [you think] that there is spiritual intelligence but there is no
buddha? If there is no spiritual intelligence at all but the multitude, then who
ordered the swallow to cause [Xie, the founder of] the Shang dynasty to be
born into the world?220 Who left the footprints of a giant that caused [a lady]
to have a feeling and give birth to Qi (i.e., Houji)?221 The Han, Wei, Jin, and
Song dynasties all had an auspicious decree from Heaven [for the establishment of the dynasty]. Therefore, we know that beyond the world of visual
and auditory senses the Way of the Spirit brightly exists. If there are the principles of spirits, there must be the subtle zenith. If ‘he who is marvelous since

83

15a

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

15b

he has gotten the One’ is not the Buddha,222 who else could he be? The spiritual
being profoundly responds according to each case. It does not respond in
predetermined ways. Following a fact, it offers teaching. Why are you worried
that it is not complete? Why is it necessary to deceive the people and later
teach them? In that case, it is not open to question that the Dharma is real
and the teaching is truthful.
“I would like to discuss and say that all sentient beings take the vigorous
spirit to be primary. Therefore, by [natural] law all beings respond to the
spirits who have reached the profound culmination. In the case of Yao, various
kinds of animals that lived far away danced, being impressed with his virtue.223
Isn’t this the manifestation of moving [and responding between Yao and the
animals]? The Buddha is the foundation of various manifestations of moving
and responding. For the sun, moon, the seas, and the high mountains, there
are the morning and evening rites and the signiﬁcance of the worship of
viewing the mountains and rivers from a distance, not to mention the Buddhist
Way that many people cultivate; those of high rank trace to the very source
of spirits beyond the realm of arising, those of middle rank receive a physical
body in the subtle realm of arising (i.e., the realms of heavenly beings and
human beings), and those of low rank can be exempted from the three lowest
realms of existence.
“What the worldly teaching propagates is to attain peace and order in the
whole course of one’s life. Those who deeply master [the Way] are rare, while
those who [chase after] the world are numerous. How could they have ever
participated in [the Buddhist Way]? They just follow worldly trends and say
that if one dies his spirit perishes. Consequently they do not strive for a lofty
aspiration in the pure and distant [world], and utilizing every spare moment,
many people comply with worldly trends. Therefore, the way of gentlemen
is seldom practiced. If we examine with the Buddhist Dharma, our physical
bodies are not ourselves; probably they are only like an inn in which to rest
for awhile. The spirit is the part of ourselves [that remains permanently]. It
exists boundlessly and eternally, and has no end (i.e., is immortal).
“The virtue of those who have the best virtue pervades over them limitlessly. Those who are good in the middle rank are slowly led to purity, are
promoted, and attain the exhaustion [of deﬁlement]. Those who are least virtuous in the low rank just have a chance to reform their evil acts, and they

84

Fascicle Two

may make up for mistakes they have made to move to an upper rank. Therefore, from ancient times, regardless of sharp and dull faculties, there are innumerable people who keep themselves pure, hold a lofty aspiration, behave
prudently in the present existence in order to shape karma in the next existence,
and go on to supreme virtue. This is the efﬁcacy of the Buddhist Dharma.
These are all what worldly customs and traditions block and what the Buddha
opens up. As for the category, isn’t it the vast bright way to the wondrous
existence? Why do you disregard it and not uphold it?
“Wind, after passing through a ﬂame, is warm, and it is assuredly fresh
when it blows through a forest. Water becomes muddy in a rapid stream, and
when it becomes puriﬁed the rocks can certainly be clearly seen. Gains and
losses in the function of the spirit also lie in to what the spirit entrusts itself. Not
having faith in the Buddhist Dharma is not necessarily due to one’s temperament
but is probably because of one’s frame of mind. If you try to keep your mind
away from worldly affairs and move what is projected [in your mind] to the
pure and subtle [state], the Buddhist doctrine will be clear and all matters can
be believed. It is really wonderful to frame one’s mind [in this way]!
“If you avail yourself of this clear token of [what the Buddha taught] in
the past, you will eventually be able to become a ruler in the Way of the
Spirit. Since you can eternally save all the karma of your ancestors, both evident and hidden, up to a hundred past generations, it is the great ﬁlial piety.
Since all sentient beings beneﬁt from benevolence, it is the highest mercy.
Since the spirit concentrates and becomes subtle, it is the culmination of the
Way. Since it penetrates brightly without hindrance, it is the completion of
brightness. If what began even in the mind of an ordinary person is placed
on the right track at the beginning, even if many kalpas pass, for sure it will
directly gather at the profound culmination [of the Way] in the end.
[Buddhism] is wonderful like this. Equally, if the same [ordinary] person
fails to get onto the track [of Buddhism] and goes astray, he will aimlessly
go a long way and eternally sink into the nine realms [of the transmigration
of birth and death]. How sad it is! If what I said above is not true, why in the
world do virtuous sages suddenly appear, why are stupid and humble people
born and brought up, and why are there all buddhas in the upper stratum and
ﬂying and wriggling insects at the bottom? All of these are the natural features
of the gains and losses of the spirit.

85

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

15c

“People have a physical body of seven chi and grow old and die in several
tens of years, of which half is entirely occupied by nighttime. Since there
are many days to go into mourning or to get sick, [people] suffer for half [of
their remaining time, not counting nights]. Even if someone has prosperity
in his life, or if he attains his aim in enjoying prosperity, how [valuable] is
this? In addition, the prime of life passes [quickly], and when one has honor
and fame he is certainly afraid of being disgraced. Pleasure really comes
together with distress, and there is no perfect peace. [People,] however, strive
with each other in entering the steep path of popular custom, and hate to
advance on the spacious path of the Buddhist Dharma. What do you think
of their intelligence? There are really many people in the world who are troubled about the Buddhist doctrine since they cannot understand the beginning
of the conditions that give rise to phenomena. [The realm of] conditions that
give rise to phenomena is vast and limitless, and it is not reached by our recollections. What gains and losses are concerned with cannot be perceived
through [understanding] the doctrines; namely, it is beyond the universe.
Therefore, the Buddha left it intact and did not discuss it, as I have already
presented in my previous discussion. I would like to repeat and explain this.
“‘The sage created the Book of Changes.’224 [Consequently we] can practice divination by interpreting the sun, moon, and heavenly bodies that hang
down from the sky, and know good or bad luck, peace or upheaval. Nevertheless, when we investigate why it results in such a situation, [we ﬁnd that]
we are unable to know anything, since the sage did not clarify it. Now, if we
give up what we can know because we do not know [why it results in such
a situation], and take actions contrary to divination or against the signs of
the sky, would anything be lost? To go against the Buddhist Dharma because
the beginning of conditions that give rise to phenomena is not clear is similar
to this. Moreover, people say that the spirit originally does not exist since
they do not remember what they thought in their former existences.
“If a person [does not remember anything] from the time he was a fetus
to the time his milk teeth were replaced with permanent teeth, it cannot be
said that he had no spirit. This happens only within his [present] life. When
he thinks of this he has a vague feeling and remembers nothing, not to mention one who has experienced the transmigration of birth and death and who
has gone through different bodies. Why wouldn’t the memory of his former

86

Fascicle Two

existence have faded away? Even if his memories fade, it does no harm to
the eternal existence (i.e., immortality) of the spirit. If he does not understand
about the beginning of conditions that give rise to phenomena, why is it an
obstruction to its doctrine that is continually clear?
“When Zilu asked about death, the Master (i.e., Confucius) said, ‘While
you do not know life, how can you know about death?’225 When he asked
about serving spiritual beings, [Confucius] said, ‘While you do not know
about serving men, how can you know about serving spirits?’226
“Wouldn’t it be that although [Zhong] You (i.e., Zilu) was completely
fond of bravery and sincerely served his master, he should have originally
asked questions about matters within his lifetime? Even though [Zilu] had
questions about birth and death and the origin of spiritual beings, they are not
from real affections of the mind based on reason. Therefore, [Zigong said,]
‘[The Master’s discourses about] man’s nature and the Way of Heaven cannot
be heard.’227 In Buddhist statements there is the phrase ‘The fourteen questions
regarding the issue of [permanency] of sentient beings or the issue on whether
or not [the world] has boundaries are entirely left intact and not answered by
all the intelligentsia.’228 If answering [such questions] indeed has no beneﬁt,
[it causes people] to fall into viciousness. Then the Way to respect sages and
to believe in the Buddha should decline what it renounces and should take
what it is granted, just as when a thirsty man goes to drink water from a river
and scoops up water from the stream [with his hands] to satisfy himself. Would
it be necessary for him to trace the very source [of the water] on Mount
Kunlun? Generally, in the Buddhist Dharma, unreasonable things like disobeying Heaven and hindering the principles can be doubted. Now, [in
Buddhism,] there is no unreasonable hindrance and there is truth to follow
the mandate of Heaven and purify the spirit. Wouldn’t this really be so?
“When a person is born, he is born with anxieties. Trouble and misfortune
happen in events every now and then. Natural disasters rise in force imperceptibly. Even reﬁned and noble people or those who have a million followers
spontaneously have a physical body and a spirit at the beginning, and wait
for impermanence (i.e., death), just sitting there. Even though ‘the members
of the household are with stern severity’ or ‘the wife and children are to be
smirking and chattering,’229 they suddenly become downcast and absentminded. How much less can we rely adequately on people’s minds? Therefore,

87

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

16a

in as brief a time as [a man glimpses a white colt as it] passes by a crevice,230
people just compete with each other. They wastefully slander the profound
teaching and indulge themselves in wanting to harm it uselessly, but the spirit
is immortal. Even if they desire its morality, they cannot have it, and they
must receive a body because of a sin they have committed. Sentient beings
who have no redeeming features and various kinds of insects of the present
time are all examples of this. Those who try to seek [a better rebirth] should
consign themselves only to sincerity, believe in the Buddha, rely on the mind,
and observe the precepts in order to reinforce their vigorous spirits.
“If you receive the aid of numinous beings in your lifetime, you will be
pure and peaceful after death. If you are pure and peaceful endlessly, then
you will directly attain buddhahood. The Buddha is originally said to be this
state, but people disparage it. On what basis do you judge that people are
better than the Buddha? They are not better [than the Buddha]. They cannot
stop falling into the evil realms where they eternally receive intense suffering.
Alas! It is beyond our control in the secular world that there are people who
are born into the six extreme evils. Those who are diligent in what they hear
and see, when they are about to die they mostly have a stable mind on their
deathbeds. Even if those in urgent and desperate situations chant the name
of Avalokiteśvara with wholehearted devotion, there is almost no one who
will not be favored with salvation. I mentioned previously that these are all
an auspicious omen: ‘If you receive the aid of numinous beings in your lifetime, you will be pure and peaceful after death.’
“The emperor and feudal lords [are busy with administration and] have
no time to eat leisurely even in the early afternoon, [but] the masses depend
on [these people’s hard work] only within their lifetimes. How can they
increase [the strength of] their spirits and manage myriad cycles [of existence]?
If you rely on the Duke of Zhou and Confucius to educate the masses, and
taste the Buddhist Dharma to nourish the spirit, you will be an intelligent
ruler in your lifetime and a bright spirit after death, and you will always manage [myriad cycles of existence]. How could the Tathāgata deceive me?
[What he says] does not lead to wasting money and harming people by worshiping a pagoda, making luxurious images, and supporting incapable monks
with tolerance.

88

Fascicle Two

“Those who do not see the profound reality of things and yet look at
immediate disadvantages will unrestrainedly insult the Dharma. If, however,
you revere the Way, believe in the teaching, become aware of impermanence,
empty the realm of form, have benevolence, set in order the ediﬁcation, do
not take people’s lives easily by abusing a position of nobility and power,
and do not let a good-for-nothing person secretly avail himself of treatment
beyond his lot, wouldn’t it be possible that leading the masses by means of
virtue and setting them in order by means of decorum would result in a world
whose prosperity is attributed to benevolence? Why do both people of a rank
with which they feel self-satisﬁed and those of low status who work in the
ﬁelds and marshes value it highly enough, by which they can not relieve their
vigorous spirits by themselves?
“Formerly Master Huiyuan puriﬁed his karma on Mount Lu. I went there
and stayed for ﬁfty days. [Master Huiyuan] was lofty and virtuous. His study
of the [Buddhist] doctrine was exquisite. It was certainly a noble style. His
teacher, Master Daoan, had spiritual virtue that was spontaneously wonderful.
He was a bhikṣu such as is rarely encountered. They both kept purity themselves.
Both were originally of wide knowledge in the [Buddhist] Way, and later lived
in isolation on a mountain. Hence, [Huiyuan’s] spiritual teaching is more profound than a solemn forest. [Master Huiyuan] often talked with me under the
trees on a cliff or in a valley. [His words] were philosophical, but there was
spontaneously something to admonish people in their expression.
“Generally, my discussion up to now is only what Master [Huiyuan]
spoke in accordance with the tenor of the Buddhist scriptures. What is well
conﬁrmed refers to that [Cang Jie] created a written language on the basis
of bird’s footprints, that he who traced the very source of the spirit could
hear people’s songs, [which led him to truth,]231 or that [Emperor Wen of the
Han dynasty] who recovered the power took Tiying’s word (i.e., petition) and
consequently corporal punishment was permanently abolished.232 Certainly
phenomena suddenly come out of the affections of the delicate mind and
ﬁnally shoot up into the sky. With my confused, ignorant, and humble words
I have warned of affections of the mind. If I suddenly die, how could I not
know that I am transcending to [Heaven]?”
End of Fascicle Two of The Collection for the Propagation
and Clariﬁcation [of Buddhism]

89

Fascicle Three
The Discourse to Explain the
[Buddhist] Way (Yudaolun)
by Sun Chuo

There was a person who was doubtful of the highest Way (i.e., Buddhism).
I explained to him thus. The universe is immense and abundantly full of various kinds of things, in which a multitude of things abundantly exist and
kaleidoscopic changes endlessly form a harmonious whole. Hence, those of
limited knowledge expect what emerges within what they each view. [For
instance, aquatic animals such as] ﬁsh and mollusks do not understand anything on the land near marshes, and those animals that have fur and feathers
are not aware of the force of a stream and waves. Those who feel satisﬁed
even while [caught] in a snare are suspicious about the capability of those
who swim around in an ocean. Those who can ﬂy only to a height of several
ren doubt the ability of those who can soar high into the sky.
People bound by the worldly teaching and who indulge in looking at the
traces of the Duke of Zhou and Confucius say that the highest virtue reached
its culmination with Yao and Shun, and that sublime words were completed
in the Laozi [Daodejing] and the Book of Changes. How could they see the
excellent tenor of that transcended world and what profoundly illuminates
the darkness? It is sad! The [Confucian cap called] zhangfu is abandoned by
people who customarily wear almost nothing, and [Emperor Shun’s musical
composition] Dashao and [Emperor Yu’s] Daxia are ignored in rural areas.
The highest truth is declined in unsystematic practices, and the Great Way
is discontinued by scholars of limited views. If these people are extremely
deluded and cannot be improved, they will not be moved by words and explanations. [Nevertheless,] I will try to clarify the tenor [of Buddhism, hoping
that] there may be someone who will come to be awakened in due course.
The Buddha is the one who has realized the Way. The Way is what leads
sentient beings. It responds to the affections of their minds and leads them by
means of following them. “It does nothing, but there is nothing it does not
91

16b

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

16c

accomplish.”233 Since it does nothing, it is free from preoccupation, peaceful,
and spontaneous. Since there is nothing it does not accomplish, it spiritually
educates all beings. In what all beings seek, there is the variety of low and
high. Therefore, of the methods to transmit the teaching, some are precise
and some are less exact. The foundation of the teaching is given to those of
superior faculty. Misfortune is visited upon those who do not follow [the
teaching]. Those who indulge in wine are imposed with a penalty. Those who
commit adultery are punished heavily. Those who steal are meted out appropriate punishment [for the crime they committed]. There are the criminal laws
established by the three dynasties, [the Xia, Yin, and Zhou,] and the ﬁve penalties.234 People who violate the law are not pardoned. This is the rulers’ common
institution, of which prime ministers and governors take charge. If a sage king
rules over the world and ofﬁcials are intelligent and broad-minded, the criminals
mentioned previously will certainly be thoroughly inspected, and there will
be no hope of avoiding punishment. If vicious people are not allowed [to
indulge] their self-interest, there will be no violators in the state, and wise
and virtuous people will certainly be cited and evaluated for reward.
Moreover, when the ruler is bright, his vassals are honest, the world is
pure, and the law prevails; we can especially distinguish good and bad from
each other and not be confused about right and wrong. Needless to say, in
the place where deities are present, regardless of distance and obscurity, they
are intelligent, upright, and honest in punishing the evil and helping the good.
Hence, reward and retribution will visit even an extremely small merit and
a very small demerit [respectively,] without the slightest aberration.
When we go over the testimonies of weal and woe of all ages, they all
have derivations and are recorded in evidence. How could they be concealed?
The reason [they cannot be concealed] is because in a family that has plotted
a crime, its descendants will not ﬂourish.235 Daoists clearly proscribe that a
family can inherit the position of general beyond three generations.236 Isn’t
this because weapons are evil, and warfare is a perversion that leads to killing
many people? Wei Ke followed [his father’s] initial will and attained [the
reward of] the grass trap.237 [Bao] Zidu was faithful and received the conferment [with the help of] a very fast horse.238 After Prince Xiang of Qi state
pinned the blame on [Pengsheng], the disaster of falling from a vehicle befell
him.239 Prince Hui of Jin state ignored courtesy. Consequently, he was at a

92

Fascicle Three

disadvantage and had difﬁculties [at the battle of] Hanyuan.240 This is all corroborative evidence that the dead retaliate against or reward the living.
With regard to [the stories] that Xuan Meng had pity for a starving man,
[Ling Zhe,] at Yisang241 and an old lady who beat cotton in water sympathized
with the weariness of [Han Xin, the Marquis of] Huaiyin,242 these all show
that with a meal one who had suffered from starving was saved. Moreover,
Zhao [Dun] (i.e., Xuan Meng) received help from [Ling Zhe,] who betrayed
his master [to save Xuan Meng’s life], and the old lady [who beat cotton]
received the reward of a thousand pieces of gold. These are [examples] of
obtaining a large return by doing a minor favor. The reward did not go beyond
their lifetimes. Therefore, when you achieve virtue secretly, blessing is
revealed in all things. If you make an action implicitly, [the response to the
action] shines explicitly. This is the natural course of events. It is compared
to sowing grain seeds in the soil, and then reaping a harvest one hundred
times greater [than the original quantity of seeds]. The earth and the grain
have no feeling toward human beings, yet a natural advantage comes to them
[from the earth and grain].
A person criticized this, saying, “If the issue of reward and retribution
indeed entirely has signs, why does the teaching of the Duke of Zhou and
Confucius not proscribe killing? Why was Shaozheng Mao executed [by
Confucius]?243 Why did [the Duke of Zhou] put his two younger brothers
[Guan and Cai] to death?”244
I answered, “I can say that you understand the words of the teaching but
you have not mastered the heart of the teaching. Do you think that the sages
had the intention of killing [from the beginning]?”
The person answered, “No.”
I continued, “You are really aware that they had no intention to kill.
However, they killed [the three men] because it was simply the intention of
the masses.”
“As the times go and the world changes, insincerity and simplicity arise
in human beings. Prior to the time when records were made by tying knots,
the world was happy and very peaceful. In the time of Tang and Yu, decorum
occurred for the ﬁrst time. Accordingly, in the three dynasties, the net of
criminal law became more evident. Even though executions were strictly
carried out, this still did not prevent [crimes] as heinous as a ruler and his

93

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

17a

vassals exterminating each other, or fathers and sons killing each other. The
law of the jungle was more violent than in the case of jackals and tigers.
Sages were aware that the people’s feelings were indifferent to killing and it
was impossible to swiftly put an end to it. Therefore, they gradually restrained
the people [from killing] and had them seek the appropriate manner.
“This is compared to the case where a viper bites a man’s leg and he must
have the leg cut off in order to save himself from death, or a man who has a
malignant tumor in the body must gouge it out in order to save his life. To lose
one in order to keep ten is to weigh the signiﬁcant over the less signiﬁcant.
Hence, the reason criminals are executed in fall and winter is because they take
life according to the seasons [when all things wither and decay]. The reason
hunting is performed in spring and summer is to select and leave out pregnant
animals and nursing baby animals. In the politeness of providing a way of
escape,245 if a bird or beast [unwittingly] comes toward [a hunter], he sheathes
his bow [and does not shoot]. If you have heard the cries [of animals] or seen
them alive, when their meat is served to you, you will not eat it. ‘If you go
ﬁshing, you will not use a net. If you hunt birds with bow and arrow, you will
not shoot those at roost.’246 You have compassion for each and every insect.
“As for discussions of lawsuits, you will reprieve the death sentence,
and in a time of natural disasters you will grant amnesty. If [the application
of punishment] is open to question, you will apply the less harsh one; you
would sooner acquit someone of a charge [than mete out unjust punishment].
If you must pass a sentence of death, you will do so with tears in your eyes,
feeling sympathy and never joyful. This shows that one’s gratitude for having
been given birth and raised is deep. It is the utmost in the way of humanity.
This is what is called ‘It does all and yet does not rely on them; it excels and
yet it does not preside over all.’247 This virtue covers [all things] and yet one
does not think its merit lies in oneself. It is exercised daily and yet [all beings]
are unaware of it.248 When we take these points into consideration in order
to seek [veriﬁcation], it is sufﬁcient for us to comprehend what [the teaching
of the Duke of Zhou and Confucius] returns.”
A critic said, “The Duke of Zhou and Confucius taught people to take
life at the proper time, but the Buddha would like to stop [all killing] at a
stroke. How can we punish brutal men, restrain wicked people, and exercise
control over the masses?”

94

Fascicle Three

I answered, “This is not so. The Duke of Zhou and Confucius are nothing
other than the Buddha; the Buddha is nothing other than the Duke of Zhou
and Confucius. Probably, they are simply different names for non-Buddhism
(wai) and Buddhism (nei). Thus, one who holds the reigns of the August is
the August, and one who is on the throne of a king is a king.
“‘Buddha’ is a Sanskrit term; the Chinese translation is Jue. The meaning
of the term jue is to enlighten people. It is compared to Mencius, who considered sages those who are ﬁrst awakened [and then later enlighten others].249
The purport is the same [in the Buddha and sages]. In responding to [the
demands of] the world and serving as a [good] model for people, they probably
comply with the time. [The teaching of] the Duke of Zhou and Confucius
relieves the extremely corrupted world, while the Buddha’s teaching simply
clariﬁes the fundamental law [to save the corrupted world]. Both [teachings]
are consistent; they do not differ as to the goal. Namely, it is just as the sages
of non-Buddhism differ in the depth of their deeds. At the time of Yao and
Shun, the world was peaceful. Hence, the two rulers nobly abdicated from
the throne. Since the time of King Tang and King Wu was difﬁcult, both
rulers led troops into battle [for the throne]. There is a big difference between
these people’s actions, keeping silent [about handing over their reigns] and
using force in their wrath.
“Nevertheless, as for the essential qualities of these actions, how much
difference would there usually be? Therefore, those who consider retrogressively see one as two always, while those who understand properly have
nothing to go to other than one.”
A critic said, “In the teaching of the Duke of Zhou and Confucius, ﬁlial
piety is considered to be the root. Filial piety is the culmination of virtue and
the foundation of all actions. ‘When this foundation is established, the way
[of human relations] arises’250 and ‘[utmost piety] reaches to spiritual intelligence.’251 Consequently, in cases where children serve their parents, they
attend to their parents with devotion while [the parents] are alive, and they
offer worship to their parents after [they have] passed away. Among three
thousand offenses, there is nothing heavier than having no offspring.252 Our
bodies are [received] from our parents, and we must not presume to injure
or wound them.253 Thus, Yuezheng [Zi Chun] was injured in the leg and was
overwhelmed with shame for the rest of his life.254

95

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

17b

“However, the way of the śramaṇa is to leave his native place recklessly,
to abandon his parents, to stay with strangers, to shave his beard and hair, to
damage his natural appearance, to have no sign of supporting [his parents]
while they are alive, to discontinue the rite of ancestor worship after [his parents’] death, and to consider his parents by blood to be the same as mere
passersby. In going against good conscience and hurting human feelings, nothing is worse than this. Nevertheless, [Buddhists] say we should propagate the
[Buddhist] Way, spread benevolence, and extensively save all sentient beings.
How is this different from mowing down the roots [of a tree], trimming the
branches and trunks, and then saying that [the tree] will be distinguished and
grow tall and thick? I have neither heard nor seen such a thing. If skin did not
exist, how could hair attach to it? This greatly contradicts the worldly teaching.
How are you going to reassure us about this matter?”
I answered, “This is really a serious delusion of the extremely vulgar
and a great error caused by your wrong view. Alas! I cannot remain silent.
“Parents and child are one body, and they cast their lots together. Therefore, if a mother hurts her ﬁnger, her child feels a ﬂutter in his heart [even if
he is away from her]. It is because their common vapor causes him to feel
and respond to it. Their unity leaves no space between them. Therefore, to
curry favor with one’s parents is the utmost of ﬁlial piety. If a father is prosperous, his son will rise to a high position. If a son attains high rank, his
father will be respected. Therefore, ﬁlial piety is valuable. It is valuable
because we can rise in the world, practice the way [of humanity], and glorify
our parents for a long time.255 Even if we were to prostrate ourselves before
our parents, cherish them, and offer them a feast of the three different kinds
of meat (i.e., beef, mutton, and pork) every day, we would still not be able
to cause all people to respect us. [On the other hand, if we have an achievement
of] being relied upon by the whole world, this is close to the glory of nourishing our parents.
“‘To be in accordance with the central element [of our nature] is the regular path.’256 ‘To maintain gentleness is considered to be unchanging [teaching].’257 Both the physical body and fame should be renounced. We should
dismiss from our minds both our parents and ourselves. These are the ways
to nourish our parents. I have already elucidated the foundation [of ﬁlial
piety]. I will talk to you further about the next issue.

96

Fascicle Three

“The two types of fame, being loyal [to one’s country or master] and
ﬁlial to one’s parents, are incompatible with each other. [Kao] Shu of Yin
opposed the ruler, [Lord Zhuang of Zheng state, and organized a meeting
for Lord Zhuang and Lord Zhuang’s mother, who had had a conﬂict with her
son,] yet [Kao Shu] was praised as faithful and ﬁlial in a history book.258 Shi
Que killed his son [because he had kept company with Zhouxu, who had
ascended the throne by killing the heir of Wei state], and displayed integrity
as a loyal military man.259 The [Chunqiu] Zuoshizhuan states that when a
son [reaches the age when he] can enter government service, his father teaches
loyalty to him; once [the son’s] name is recorded on the orders of appointment
and he is commissioned, it is considered an offense to serve two masters.260
In this case, those who tie the chin straps for holding the cap at court have
to give up the way of ﬁliality. Why? Because if he sees [that his master] is
in danger, he will sacriﬁce his life [to save his master] but will pay no attention
to his parents.
“All these people’s names are recorded in history books and their services
are gloriﬁed as the highest of the teaching [of human ethics]. How could the
recorders of history consider their impiety to be a sin? Therefore, as the
proverb says, ‘When you look for a loyal subject, you must go to the clan
that produces ﬁlial sons.’261 This indicates that even though there is a minor
fault on one hand, there is a great favorable aspect on the other hand.
“Moreover, Gun was exiled to a border region, but [his son] Yu did not
ask for permission to leave ofﬁce.262 If [Yu] had abandoned Yao’s decree in
order to look for his father, he would have placed the highest government
affairs [below] his personal sorrow. This is mere minor wholesomeness,
neither great nor lofty.
“Taibo of the Zhou dynasty left his relatives in the distance, sought
escape in a strange land, cut his hair, and tattooed his body, [complying with
the customs there,] and never returned to his homeland in his lifetime or even
after his death.263 Nevertheless, he is praised for having the highest virtue in
Confucius’s Analects,264 and recorded as a man of great morality in the history
books. This is actually because he was indifferent to the honorable throne
and maintained the nobility of effacing himself; the merit he made by trying
to give the throne [to his brother] three times is lofty, and the fault he committed by damaging his body [through cutting his hair and tattooing his skin]

97

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

17c

is minor. Consequently, he was able to make great changes to the barbarian
customs and leave his teaching to history.
“[Bo]yi and [Shu]qi, who starved together on Mount Shouyang, did not
consider the fact that [their father,] the lord of Guzhu, would lose his heir, yet
Confucius considered them to be benevolent and wise.265 Could there be critics
who would say that these two people were immoral? Gao Xing of Liang state
damaged her [good] looks and kept her chastity. Princess Bo of Song state
followed righteousness and neglected her life. Both their names are ranked
among those women who died to defend their chastity, and their virtue is considered a model for all women. If you keep in mind the morality of these two
ladies, you will simply escape the charge of being stupid and immoral. When
we speak in accordance with these points, we can see that [our judgment] is
in order of the importance of the [standard] by which we abide.
“Formerly, the Buddha was a crown prince, but he abandoned his country
and studied the way [to enlightenment]. He wanted to keep the original feature
completely and enter the Way. [Nevertheless,] he was afraid that he would
not be able to escape from being detained [in the palace]. So he cut his beard
and hair and changed his court dress of a crown prince [to a common robe].
He showed [his will] to not return [to the secular world] outwardly and tried
to govern himself in simplicity internally. Thus, he gave up the palace and
stayed in a vast forest. He took off the clothes of imperial emblem in order
to put on a [hermit’s] robe of deerskin. Then, he took as his dwelling a place
where tree branches hung down and a mat of grass as his cushion. He saved
himself the trouble of combing his hair. He avoided the nuisance of taking
a bath. He tightened the reins of running after [empty fame, power, and
wealth], and closed the gate of carnal desires. His eyes were restrained from
[the ﬁve colors such as] black and yellow. His ears were closed to lewd
sounds. His mouth forgot [the ﬁve tastes such as] sweet and bitter. His thought
was released from joy and sorrow. His mind left behind nuisances.
“He stuck to the One (i.e., truth) and controlled his wandering spirit. He
entered the breath-counting meditation (Skt. ānāpāna): (1) counting [from
one to ten], (2) following [the breath on inhalation and exhalation], (3) abiding
in tranquility (i.e., stopping mental activities), (4) contemplating [the breath],
(5) transferring [the fruition to the wholesome faculty], and (6) becoming
pure [and entering the way of insight]. He let his mind play in the three groups

98

Fascicle Three

of the four stages of meditation, and he went in and out of the twelve gates
of meditation. While he meditated, he folded his hands over the navel, was
silent, remained still like a mountain, and was as serene as deep water. His
spirit was just like cold ashes and his body was like a withered tree. He sat
upright for six years. Then, enlightenment was achieved and he was called
the Buddha.
“He is equipped with the three transcendental knowledges and the six
supernatural powers. He attained right, perfect enlightenment. His graceful
body, which is [one] zhang and six [chi] tall, has a golden glow. Its light suppresses that of the sun and moon. His voice is in harmony with the winds
that blow from the eight directions. His body has the thirty-two [major] and
eighty minor marks of physical excellence. He surpasses all beings. His spirit
is completely free. Thus, he saunters beyond the three realms of existence,
transforms freely in boundless realms, and makes the sky revolve, the earth
dance, the mountains ﬂy, and streams meander. He appears and disappears
suddenly. His supernatural transformation is unceasing. Wherever his mind
is directed, nothing can hinder him. By the great doctrine, he reformed a
great number of evil beings to correct their courses. None among the numerous
demons and those who had followed minor teachings did not adhere to [the
teaching of the Buddha].
“At this point in time, Heaven became pure and Earth was made prosperous.
‘The various things obtain their full development.’266 Living creatures, even
wriggling [insects], were immersed and nurtured in mysterious liquid. Withered
and dry [trees] were refreshed and bloomed. [The Buddha] returned to his
native country in glorious radiance, where he extensively expounded the teaching. His father, the king, was moved, became awakened, and ascended to the
place of Buddhist practice, too. In this way, [the Buddha] brought honor to his
father. What [ordinary] ﬁlial piety can be compared to this?
“Thereupon later generations receive and propagate the teaching. They
resolve to revere the lofty path. They all follow their parents; they hold
nothing other than what [their parents] esteem. They simply please their parents and then take the action [to become a monk]. If they have brothers, their
parents’ support is not abolished. Since they are able to cultivate the great
work immensely, their gratitude to their parents is not neglected. Moreover,
[Buddhist monks] enable the dead to attain happiness in order to be reborn

99

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

in Heaven. They do not have to be concerned about offering ancestor worship.
Isn’t this the way to the Great Pervader (datong) that concurrently holds
wholesomeness?267
“[The Book of Changes says] that the neighbor of the east side butchers
an ox [in order to make an offering to a god], while the neighbor of the west
side offers [simple] sacriﬁces to a god.268 In [the religious rites of] the Yin
dynasty, a variety of millet was considered to be good [for offering], but in
[the rites of] the Zhou dynasty, the highest virtue was more esteemed [than
offerings]. On this point the period of the rise and fall [of these two dynasties]
is apparent.
“There are twelve kinds of scriptures in Buddhism. Four among them
exclusively hold that exhorting people to be ﬁlial is important. The attentive
intention [of these scriptures] can be said to be perfect. Nevertheless, ordinary
people do not know the details of their origin. They have not gotten involved
in the place concerned with [the Buddhist teaching], but then make wild talk
and reckless speech; they wholeheartedly attack and criticize [Buddhism].
With a view as small as the light of a ﬁreﬂy or candle, they doubt [the teaching]
that is as abundant as the light of the sun, moon, and stars. With [knowledge
as shallow as] a drop of dew on the tip of a blade of grass, they doubt the
quantity of water in a deep ocean. They consider false accusations to be eloquence and having [unreasonable] determination to be an honor. They can
be said to be those who are disrespectful to great men and disgrace the ordinances of Heaven.”269

Response to He Chengtian’s Letter
by Layman Zong Bing:
The Criticism on the Discourse on Buddhist
Laymen and Clergy (Baiheilun)

He’s Letter to Zong
Recently I received a letter from you, virtuous Gentleman for Palace
Attendant, which says that you are diligent in Buddhist rituals for [rebirth
in] the Western Paradise. The determination of a person of virtue and talent
[like you] is great. How could I regard [a lifetime as long as] ten thousand
kalpas to be extravagant? However, I regret that our life span is short and

100

Fascicle Three

we have nothing to measure [the life span of the tree called] Mingling.270
Huilin, a monk of Zhicheng Temple, wrote the Discourse on Buddhist Laymen
and Clergy, and he was expelled from the sangha. Fortunately, he had the
chance to gain the benevolent help of the brilliant sovereign (i.e., Emperor
Wen of the Song dynasty), and he was able to escape from [permanent expulsion due to one of] the four gravest offenses (Skt. pārājika). Since those who
become monks ought not to clarify this issue, why do we, lay Buddhists,
keep silent? Could you please try to determine which is better, the clergy or
lay Buddhists? I am very ignorant, but I hope you will have good ideas to
enlighten me.
Sincerely yours,
He Chengtian

Zong’s Response to He’s Letter
Monk [Hui]lin’s Discourse on Buddhist Laymen and Clergy, which you
sent to me, is clear in writing and excellent in its points of argument. I am,
however, in the dark about the explicit principles and I have not yet understood
thoroughly the intention of [his discourse].
[The Discourse on Buddhist Laymen and Clergy] already states: “The
principles of the unseen world are not based on human affairs alone. The
Duke of Zhou and Confucius were doubtful of them, but they did not provide
an explanation. Śākyamuni gives an explanation, but it is not true.”
In this case, [which standpoint does Huilin take regarding his advocacy
of] the principles of the unseen world beyond human affairs—are they vast
and simply empty, or is there still the spiritual intelligence? If they are vast
and simply empty, why do all sages, including Zhuangzi and Laozi, say that
there are spirits? If there is the spiritual intelligence, on what basis did [Huilin]
judge [that the principles of the unseen world are vast and simply empty] is
really not like what the Buddha says?
Now we are altogether within the conﬁnes of ordinary people. Even
when we infer familiar matters, we still make many errors and mistakes,
through which we fall into disaster. Even in crude games like go and encirclement chess, we pay attention and examine them. Sometimes we think that
it is alive but it turns out to be dead; or that it is dead but in fact it is alive.
In all of our familiar matters, we have never seen those who always gain and

101

18a

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

never lose. On what basis does [Monk Huilin] determine [matters] outside
of Heaven and Earth, beyond hundreds of million of kalpas, and of the imperceptible [world], and say with certainty that what [the Buddhists] debate is
not true? If we infer according to facts and are not allowed to obtain the
reality, then we may have doubt.
The physical body of a human being is very coarse while the spirit is
quite subtle. If the physical body follows the spirit, how could both equally
die? [What happens when the nature] responds to the affections of the mind
is [seen in these historical facts]: the city wall collapsed [when the wife of
Qi Liang cried], frost fell [when Zou Yan cried out toward Heaven], a white
rainbow pierced the sun [when Jing Ke attempted to assassinate the First
Emperor of the Qin dynasty], and Venus went into the Pleiades [when Bai
Qi sent provisions to King Zhao]. [Furthermore,] when a doctor [practicing
the medical science] of admonishing the vapor makes water or ﬁre in the
mind, [the patient’s body] always responds to it by becoming cold or warm.
Needless to say, if we are exclusively sincere and ingeniously cultivate with
the most brilliant wisdom and the highest energetic will, [the Buddha] is
moved and responds, and we will receive a body; moreover, we will be reborn
in the land of the seven treasures. How could this be not true?
Furthermore, [the Discourse on Buddhist Laymen and Clergy] states:
“Even if we try to reduce the existence of a tree by analyzing it into smaller
pieces, nothing harms the luxuriant [growth of the tree that] hangs down its
leaves to make shade. Even if we try to separate materials from a room and
empty it, nothing damages the majestic beauty of the room. Precious brocade
produces splendor by various colors. Good thick soup attains deliciousness
by seasonings such as salt and plum (i.e., vinegar).”
By means of this, [Huilin] tries to block the tenet of fundamental nonexistence (benwu), but this is not so, either. What is called fundamental nonexistence stated in the Buddhist scriptures does not mean that everything,
[including phenomena in which] various conditions come together in unity,
is empty. Existing things such as [the luxuriant growth of a tree whose] leaves
hang down and make shade and [the majestic beauty of a room] can simply
exist as they are. Therefore, this is called the truth of existence (youdi)271 [in
Buddhism]. Since nature is fundamentally nonexistence, it is called the truth
of nonexistence (wudi).272 Although I do not know the Buddhist doctrines

102

Fascicle Three

completely, I think that this advocacy is explicit and very stable. Ever-changing
existence from ancient times suddenly ends up in emptiness. Just at the time
of its peak of efﬂorescence, wouldn’t it be in permanent existence? Since its
nature is inevitably empty, it suddenly becomes empty, doesn’t it? This can
be also compared to Huizi’s (i.e., Hui Shi’s) expression, “All creatures may
be born and may die at the same time. The sun in the meridian may decline
at the same time.”273
The fact of death and decline is constantly clear prior to the time before
its birth and the meridian. Ignorant people do not see the reason; they merely
see its existence. Hence, the Marquis of Qi state who usurped the place of
[the legitimate ruler of] the Shuangjiu family wept falsely and longed for
their happiness.274 Wise people have the mind that is one with truth. Thus,
Yanzi often was nearly empty[-minded]; he appeared to have no [ability]
although he had it, and seemed lacking although he had real [capacity]. Everyone under the level of Yanzi appreciates emptiness according to the depth
[of their competency]. Additionally, if we look at those in the level further
below, even if they are not capable of purifying themselves with the most
virtuous words [of the Buddha] in order to exhaust the delusion of attachment
and competition, how could there be nothing similar to a little bit [of this
appreciation of emptiness]? Why should it be to the contrary, like ﬁre that
increases coldness, and further cause [people] to have the desire to feel persistent attachment to their preferences?
Moreover, [the Discourse on Buddhist Laymen and Clergy] says: “To
clarify [the tenet of] impermanence increases the feeling to crave for the
shelter [of the Buddha]. To speak of suffering and falsehood deepens the
people’s anxiety to compete with time.” This statement is a mistake.
Furthermore, [the Discourse on Buddhist Laymen and Clergy] states:
“Arguments such as that of a boat hidden in a ravine [that is taken away by
a man of great physical strength]275 or an empty marketplace [where one
searches for a horse to buy]276 are already fully heard in the Middle Kingdom,
[but] they are not the main theme of the truth. Consequently they were not
adopted for the foundation of the teaching. I think that we can analyze the
reason for this as easily as pointing to the palm of our hand.”
“The boat that was hidden in a ravine and was secretly carried away”
means that the present time does not stay, as it is stated in the Buddhist

103

18b

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

scriptures. If this [truth] can actually be clariﬁed, [we will know that both]
things and self are permanently unreal. How could it not be the main theme
of the truth? Probably there were not many who understood it. Therefore, it
was simply not considered to be the fundamental teaching. The eminent Zhi
[Dun] was not yet the same as the Buddha, as it is said. Why does [Huilin]
slight these most virtuous words just because they have frequently been
spoken in the Middle Kingdom?
In addition, it is said [in the Discourse on Buddhist Laymen and Clergy]:
“If mysterious light is examined, there is no light as small as one cun in diameter. If mysterious transformation is analyzed, there is not even a very small
amount of reality. If you repeat the word ‘the immeasurable life’ in vain, who
has seen a hundred-year-old man? All these kinds of things are entirely said
to be inconsistent with actual facts.”
Supernatural light, mysterious transformation, and immeasurable life all
derive from sincere faith, which is profound and wonderful. Hence, people
[of sincere faith] are simply going to be reborn in the buddha land, and to be
closely illuminated by [the Buddha’s] light, and their life will be immeasurable.
Those who sink in evil views and who are absurdly disrespectful to mysterious
transformation are indeed widely separated in the principles from [those who
have sincere faith]. How could they see auspicious omens in the actual phenomena [such as supernatural light and mysterious transformation]?
The mind without greed is the foundation of the ten wholesome acts.
Thus, we can cut off Hell facing down and be reborn in Heaven looking up.
This is also what [the Discourse on Buddhist Laymen and Clergy] means by
saying, “If you obey righteousness and follow the Way, the principles correct
your mind.” Since we hold sincere reverence in mind, we worship and repent
our sins. Since we are aware of impermanence, we have no stinginess in the
mind, abandon wives and children, and make donations. How could there
be [the case stated in the Discourse on Buddhist Laymen and Clergy that]
“to ask for one hundred times [more than one gives]”? Moreover, how could
it be said without going through the intention to be respectful “to not take
advantage of the feeling to not be stingy”? Nirvana is considered as having
no happiness to be happy. The dharmakāya is considered as having no body
to be the body. If you neither long for [happiness and the dharmakāya] nor
determine [to pursue] them, it can be “to increase the thought to indulge in

104

Fascicle Three

idleness and give rise to the mind of curiosity.” If you sincerely praise and
revere [Buddhism], indulgence in idleness will gradually be removed, and
you will obtain the beneﬁt in no [secular] beneﬁt. Would this be concerned
with “the custom of competing for a beneﬁt” [as is stated in the Discourse]?
Again, [the Discourse on Buddhist Laymen and Clergy] says: “The Way
lies in freedom from avarice, but [Buddhists,] being avaricious, demand
[things]. Even in a very short time if [something] is not beneﬁcial [to themselves], they do not move.”
How serious a false charge against Buddhists does this bring? In the
great purpose of Buddhists, the eight kinds of sufferings derive entirely from
craving. They clearly express the twelve causations, and simply have lofty
people clarify the spirit in nonarising. Those who hope for this path can be
said to have desire for non-desire. With regard to instructing and leading
ordinary people, Heaven and Hell have the reality [of reward and retribution,
just as] shadow [follows a form] and sound [responds to a voice]. Similarly,
because of Yu Gong’s benevolent work, [his descendants] were invited to
ofﬁcialdom and given a ﬁef.277 Yan [Yannian] was fond of killing people and
consequently he was executed.278 Those who are afraid of being executed
and who want to be given a ﬁef will certainly reject killing and cultivate
benevolence. Even though those who practice with wonderful determination
in order to hope for [rebirth in] Heaven and who attentively [observe] the
ﬁve precepts in order to keep away from Hell have desire for necessary desire,
they practice the pure path to reduce themselves day by day [until they attain
wuwei]. This is also like heading west in order to seek Ying (i.e., the capital
of Chu state), [which is in the south]. Why would you worry that they will
not arrive there?
Furthermore, [the Discourse on Buddhist Laymen and Clergy] shows
dislike [and says that] “The red and blue colors dazzle the eyes that appreciate
colors. Buildings [like a Buddhist temple] cause the mind that likes splendor
to boast of them. [Buddhists] build up private power and organize sectarian
inﬂuence. They demand the fame of pursuing cultivation with determination
and dedication and indulge in the desire of excelling and competing.”
This is assuredly the ugliness of a black locust; or it can be merely said
that even if the [tax] law was set at a low [rate], by the misapplication [of
the law] a higher tax [than the proper rate] is demanded. How could the

105

18c

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

19a

Buddha then be treated rudely and said to have created the law for greed?
Wang Mang (45 B.C.E.–23 C.E.) stole the Six Classics in order to seize the
emperor’s throne. The First Emperor of the Qin dynasty built Afang Palace
under the pretext of having an audience. Would we put the blame [for these
actions instead] on the ethical education given by their predecessor kings?
Again, [the Discourse on Buddhist Laymen and Clergy] states: “We
should reject the tracks of the exoteric and esoteric [teachings], but keep
their important purposes. It cannot be helped that what indicates one’s next
existence was concealed and treated unfairly in Daoism and Buddhism.”
Please tell me what importance [Huilin] wants for the purposes. Certainly
he wishes for people to pursue their advantages and reform their minds in
order to reach their natures. The sage has no invariable mind of his own; he
simply accommodates himself to others’ minds, which he takes to be his own
mind. If it is the true nature of living creatures that the body dies and the
spirit perishes, in conformity with the nature of mortality [the sage] would
have surely just transmitted the teaching in cooperation with the Duke of
Zhou and Confucius. Then, if people have received nothing [like the teaching
of the immortality of the spirit], the reality of reforming their minds would
have been pure.
Why is it necessary [for Buddhists] to deceive [people] by [speaking
of] the immortality [of the spirit] and imposing the Buddhist doctrine upon
them, [to indulge in] shaving their hair and burning their skin, and to cut off
the marriage relationship? The number of [potential] descendants extinguished
by them is incalculable. If they harm themselves like this and injure the virtue
of fulﬁlling their natures, why wouldn’t Śākyamuni prevent them from doing
such things? Fellows who lack faith are not willing to cultivate their advantages and reform their minds. Those who have faith are indeed the peers of
Jīvaka, Jiantuole, Gītamitra, Zhu Fasheng, Bo Fazu, Dharmarakṣa, Yu Falan,
Zhu Faxing, Yu Daosui, Que Gongze, Fotudeng, Śrīmitra, Guo Wenju, Shi
Daoan, Zhi Daolin, and Master [Hui]yuan. In spiritual operation, character,
and behavior, these people do not seem really to fall behind Bhikṣu [Hui]lin.
Why should they have recklessly damaged human principles and taken the
tonsure [merely] for the ediﬁcation of the insincere man (i.e., the Buddha)?
These are all simply because the reality of spiritual wonder attracts [people’s]

106

Fascicle Three

minds from a distance and achieves the enterprise of supernatural power and
pure truth.
You sent this discourse [to me] from afar on the pretext of your lack of
faith [in Buddhism]. Moreover, people of the world who doubt [Buddhism]
all think [the Discourse] to be wonderful, too. Therefore, I have tried to
answer by myself in order to offer some help for people [to understand
Buddhism]. The issue that people of the world judge whether or not Buddhism
is good is entirely a great [question affecting] the destinies of human beings.
Why can we take a noncommittal position on it? Therefore, I have exhausted
my ignorant thoughts and composed the Discourse to Clarify Buddhism in
order to present what I have in my mind. It has just now been completed. I
am having copies made, [but] a copy is not yet ready to send with this letter.
When I write to you again later, it will be included.
Sincerely,
Zong Bing

The Elucidation of the Criticism on [the
Discourse on] the Equality of Good
(Junshanlun) (i.e., the Discourse
on Buddhist Laymen and Clergy)
by He Chengtian

I formerly sent you the Discourse on the Equality of Good together with an
inquiry about your opinion. I received your thoughtful response. You think
that the purpose of this is [a great question affecting] the destinies of human
beings and we should clarify it, but we cannot take a noncommittal position
on it. Although I cannot submit to all [of your opinions], I do not hold fast
very much to biased views, either. I am, however, seeking a jade that glows
in the night in a vast sea and I have simply not yet obtained it.
I think that the Buddhist scriptures are from a school that is a good branch
of the nine schools, including Daoism and Mohism. In benevolence and
giving alms, [Buddhism] is no different from [the teaching of] the Middle
Kingdom. Great people and gentlemen consider benevolence to be their duty.
They have nothing to bear in mind. They just harmonize ordinary people’s
ears and eyes by images and adornments. If it is still a slight that [Buddhism]

107

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

19b

wastes and harms [our country], the beneﬁt it propagates will probably be
apparent. Thus, [Buddhism] exists together with [the nine schools]. People
of fantastic taste having appeared, [Buddhism] is then considered to be better
than Confucianism, to surpass [the teaching of] Laozi, and to alone be noble.
This [indicates] that people have not been able to seek the foundation of the
worthy words left [by the Buddha] and yet they are misled by a nonessential
theory. To know [the true meaning of] the words, you must wait for one who
understands beyond words. If you have faith only because of the reward and
retribution of Heaven and Hell and the testimony that causes and conditions
are not destroyed, control your feelings, take coarse food, are completely
diligent in worship, and hope that you will probably be sheltered under the
jeweled canopy [offered by Ratnaśikhi] or that you will ascend to the [lion]
seat of Merupradīparāja [Tathāgata], this is just nothing but Chunyu Sheng’s
big joke.279
Your discussion says, “[If they are vast and only empty, why do] all the
sages, including Zhuangzi and Laozi, say that there are spirits? [If there is
the spiritual intelligence,] on what basis did [Huilin] judge [that the principles
of the unseen world are vast and simply empty] is really not like what the
Buddha says?”
I would like to respond to this. There are rites and music in the world in
which we live, while there are spiritual beings in the netherworld. What sage
kings consider to be the teaching is not obscure about its existence from the
beginning. If there are reward and retribution in the next life, could it be the
case that the Duke of Zhou and Confucius just keep silent and do not have
even a few words about it? If an infant is approaching a hole in the ground,
ordinary people are frightened by this. Wouldn’t sages still be merciful?
Moreover, you said, “The physical body of a [human being] is very
coarse while his spirit is really subtle. If the physical body follows the spirit,
how could both equally die?”
I answer: The body and the spirit mutually support each other. People
of ancient times compared them to a torch. When ﬁrewood burns down, the
ﬂame becomes weak. When the ﬁrewood completely burns, the ﬂame dies
out. Even though [the spirit] is subtle, how could it alone be transmitted?
Again, you said, “[What happens when the nature] responds to the affections of the mind is [seen in these historical facts:] the city wall collapsed

108

Fascicle Three

[when the wife of Qi Liang cried], frost fell [when Zou Yan cried out toward
Heaven], a white rainbow pierced the sun [when Jing Ke attempted to assassinate the First Emperor of the Qin dynasty], and Venus went into the Pleiades
[when Bai Qi sent provisions to King Zhao]. [Furthermore,] when a doctor
[practicing the medical science] of admonishing the vapor [makes water or
ﬁre in the mind, the patient’s body] always responds to this by becoming cold
or warm. If we are exclusively sincere and ingeniously cultivate, [the Buddha]
is moved and responds, and we will receive the body; moreover, we will be
reborn in the land of the seven treasures. How could this be not true?”280
I will respond to this. [The events of] the city wall collapsing, frost
falling, [a white rainbow] piercing the sun, and [Venus] going into the Pleiades
are not examples that elucidate the next life. They should not be referred to
in the present discussion. Furthermore, to see [the medicine of] admonishing
[the vapor] with water or ﬁre and to wish to be able to be reborn in the country
of the seven treasures can be compared to the case of having observed a
blacksmith decorate with gold, [the gold] then wishes to be able to mold and
cast itself [into a sword like the Moye].281 You will know at last that this is
impossible.
Again, you say regarding the truth of existence and the truth of nonexistence, “[Although I do not know the Buddhist doctrines completely,] I
think that this advocacy is explicit and very stable. Ever-changing existence
from ancient times suddenly ends up in emptiness. Just at the time of its peak
of efﬂorescence, wouldn’t it be in permanent existence? Since its nature is
inevitably empty, [it suddenly becomes empty, doesn’t it?]” and “Ignorant
people do not know the reason; they merely see its existence.”
I will answer this. If, as you say in the discussion, just at the time of its
peak of efﬂorescence it already inevitably has the reality of emptiness, in that
case, things are permanently empty, and emptiness and things are the same. If
emptiness and existing objects are no different from each other, why are the
wise and the ignorant so called in different ways? The Way, so called, in former
times has no form in shape and no [worldly] affairs in function. It is peaceful,
undisturbed, empty, and perfect. It nourishes wisdom and inspires peace and
harmony in one’s mind. Would it alone be afraid of conditions from former
lives, [just as Buddhists are,] before removing clinging and attachment? You
say, “[Ignorant people] merely see its existence,” but are they superior to

109

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

[Buddhists] in this point? To laugh and sneer at the Marquis of Qi state [who
was satirized by Chunyu Sheng] is just like the case where those who retreated
ﬁfty steps [in a battleﬁeld] laugh at those who retreated a hundred steps.282
Furthermore, you say, “‘The boat that was hidden in a ravine is secretly
carried away’ means that the present time does not stay, as is stated in the
Buddhist scriptures. If this [truth] can actually be clariﬁed, [we will know
that both] things and self are permanently unreal.”
I will respond to this. Regarding the issue that leaving secretly means
not staying [in Buddhism], wouldn’t it mean to enter death from life, or to
enter nonexistence from existence? There is a passage [in the Zhuangzi]:
“[Mengsun] will be frightened in his body [by death], but there will be nothing
to harm his mind. He takes [his body] as a temporary dwelling, so he has no
resentment of death.”283 Jia Sheng (i.e., Jia Yi) also said, “We simply transform
to the dead. What further worry do we have?”284 This is one who has achieved
awakening of the change from life to death. Nevertheless, [Buddhists] act
frivolously. While they are alive, they are anxious about the afterlife. They
attach their minds to immeasurable life and have ambition to be reborn in
Heaven. Our permanent void (changxu) is different [from their emptiness]
on this point.
Moreover, you say, “Supernatural light, mysterious transformation, and
immeasurable life all derive from sincere faith, which is profound and wonderful. Hence, people [of sincere faith] are simply [going to be reborn in the
buddha land, and to be closely] illuminated by [the Buddha’s] light. . . . Those
who sink in evil views and who are absurdly disrespectful to mysterious
transformation indeed are widely separated in the principles from [those who
have sincere faith].”
I will now respond to this. I do not follow [your opinion on this], either,
because those who are disrespectful to the wonderful ediﬁcation are seeking
the light of [the Buddha], but you simply seek it in sincere faith. When we
ponder the teaching of Śākyamuni, [we see that] it delivers people by means
of expedients. If there is the corresponding manifestation [of the Buddha] like
this, why does he not show its mysterious transformation in order to cause
people of evil views to understand? Why doesn’t he value several tens of millions of talks [of the teaching] and yet is sparing of momentary supernatural
light? He speaks eloquently with the voice of the phenomenal world in vain,

110

Fascicle Three

and he has come to an end without clarifying the true wisdom. [Sentient
beings] are exhausted throughout life and do not know in what to take refuge.
Isn’t this sad?
Again, you say, “Since we hold sincere reverence in mind, we worship
and repent our sins. Since we are aware of impermanence, we have no stinginess [in the mind], abandon wives and children, and make donations. How
could there be [the case stated in the Discourse on Buddhist Laymen and
Clergy,] ‘to ask for one hundred times [more than one gives]’?”
I will answer this. To be complicated and skillful in order to begin a
matter is not as good as to remove greed and cease competitiveness. To
observe the precepts in order to cleanse [the mind of] penitence is not as
good as annihilating a glorious hope in order to accomplish simplicity, to
say nothing of inviting what one prefers and praying for a beneﬁt or forgeting
one’s blood relations and desiring fame. If you say there is no [case] of asking
for [a hundred times more than one gives], I do not believe it.
Furthermore, you say, “Nirvana is considered as having no happiness
to be happy. The dharmakāya is considered as having no body to be the
body. . . . If you sincerely praise and revere [Buddhism], indulgence in
idleness will gradually be removed, and you will obtain the beneﬁt in no
[secular] beneﬁt.”
I am responding to this. Nirvana is considered as leaving behind suffering to be happy. The dharmakāya is considered as taking the suffering
[of sentient beings] to be the body. That is just the reason people who praise
and revere [Buddhism] are unable to cut off [hope]. If it results in no [secular] benefit, what do those who diligently cultivate it attain, and why do
you say they attain it in no [secular] benefit? This is the testimony that both
the body and the spirit are exhausted. I am afraid that this is not what you
should articulate in your discussion.
Moreover, you say, “Those who hope for this path can be said to have
desire for non-desire. With regard to instructing and leading ordinary people,
[heaven and hell] have the reality of [reward and retribution, just as] a shadow
[follows a form] and sound [responds to a voice]. Similarly, because of Yu
Gong’s benevolent work, [his descendants] were invited to ofﬁcialdom and
given a ﬁef. Yan [Yannian] was fond of killing people and consequently he
was executed. Even though those who practice with wonderful determination

111

19c

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

in order to hope for [rebirth in] Heaven and who attentively [observe] the ﬁve
precepts in order to keep away from Hell have desire for necessary desire,
they practice the pure path to reduce themselves day by day [until they attain
wuwei]. This is also like heading west in order to seek Ying, [which is in the
south]. Why would you worry that they will not arrive there?”
I would like to answer this. It is very good that you mention that ordinary
people are instructed and led and you compare reward and retribution with
shadow and sound. What was caused by shadow and sound, however, must
be matched to the original form and voice. How can a form of usual [length]
produce a shadow of eighty thousand yojanas? To be stagnant, just like to have
desire for non-desire, is still usually to stagnate in the object of desire. The
ears and eyes preside over different [senses]. Engineering and art craft are different kinds of work. Even in such minor ﬁelds, thought and faith are not on
the same level with each other. Thus, even if the [sounds of] metal and stone
are able to harmonize,285 Mount Tai would not be able to reveal its height. Even
if wild geese and swans get together, the deep autumn is not able to transmit
its intention. [This is because they originally have nothing to do with each
other.] Accordingly, you want to achieve non-desire by means of having desire,
and you hope to undergo reducing day by day [to reach wuwei]. Even though
you say to head west [in order to seek Ying, which is in the south], you have
traveled this far from Ying. What can you do about it?
Furthermore, you say, “If it is the true nature of living creatures that the
body dies and the spirit perishes, [in conformity with the nature of mortality
the sage] would have surely just transmitted the teaching in cooperation with
the Duke of Zhou and Confucius. . . . Why is it necessary [for Buddhists] to
deceive [people] by [speaking of] the immortality [of the spirit] and imposing
the Buddhist doctrine upon them, [to indulge in] shaving their hair and burning
their skin, and to cut off the marriage relationship? If they harm themselves
like this and injure the virtue of fulﬁlling their natures. . . .”
I am responding to this. Chinese people and non-Chinese people naturally
have differences. What are [these differences]? Chinese people receive the
vapor that is pure and peaceful, and they have benevolence and righteousness
in their minds. Therefore, the Duke of Zhou and Confucius elucidate the
nature [of the Chinese] and the teaching in which they learn [their natures].
People of foreign countries receive a nature that is tough and strong, and

112

Fascicle Three

they are greedy, angry, and perverse. Therefore, Śākyamuni was strict with
the rules of the ﬁve precepts. In the discussion you sent to me, this is called
“the sage has no invariable mind of his own; he simply accommodates himself
to other people’s natures.”286 In the admonition to chastise cruelty, there is
nothing more painful than Hell. In the exhortation to lead to good, there is
nothing better than Heaven. It is not the meaning of the golden mean (zhongyong) to exhaust the root of heartlessly causing injury. The Duke of Zhou
and Confucius do not do so. They follow its natural temperament and leave
behind its very [evil elements].
Misconduct in sexual behavior and stealing are set forth in the ﬁve penalties. The crime related to wine is clariﬁed in the section called the Announcement about Drunkenness (Jiugao), in the history of the Zhou dynasty (a chapter of the Book of History).287 “[The ruler of a state,] in the spring hunting,
will not surround a marshy thicket” [in order not to harm young animals].288
When we see living creatures, we cannot bear their death. [We established]
the laws for the ﬁve offenses in hunting and chasing game from only three
directions [so that the animals have a chance to escape].289 We ﬁsh without
a net. Hence, benevolence is extensively diffused, and beneﬁts reach even
to pigs and ﬁsh.
For a gathering on a happy occasion, there is always [meat] on a cutting
board. Even old people are able to have meat [because there is enough]. We
till land in spring and gather the harvest in fall. Sericulture and weaving are
done in a timely manner. The three numinous beings have come,290 and a
hundred deities are all worshiped. When we compare these with what they
(i.e., Buddhists) do, wouldn’t these be [considered] great?
Furthermore, we make clear the praise of offering a libation in worship,
while we are strict in the punishment about dubious laws. To give an account
of the questions asked by the chief magistrate of Pu (i.e., Zilu) is the foundation
to exhort the teaching.291 To expound [Confucius’s] answer, “the fume rising
as the vapor,”292 clariﬁes the testimony of our next life. Those who wear a
black [monk’s] robe and stare in anger, and who are emulous of me in this
discussion, have a wrong frame of mind.
In addition, you state in your discussion, “people like Jīvaka,
[Jian]tuo[le], and Śrīmitra . . . do not fall behind Bhikṣu [Hui]lin in spiritual
operation, character, and behavior.” You have already clearly mentioned that

113

20a

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

we, ordinary people, are not able to infer familiar matters. On what basis do
you now conclude the superiority or inferiority of people who lived a hundred
years ago or who live several thousand li away? One such as Bhikṣu [Hui]lin
is a monk in appearance, but has [the mind of] disinterestedness like Heaven.
He seems to discern truth or falsehood profoundly. Particularly, he is not
willing to fear the scriptures, to protect his master, and to garnish illusory
remarks. For this reason, I respect him. It is said in Sun [Chuo] Xinggong’s
Discourse [on the Way and the Wise] that Dharmarakṣa is erudite and intelligent and Yu Falan is sincere and knowledgeable. With whom of the Middle
Kingdom do you want to compare these two people?
Moreover, Ying, the king of Chu, built a Buddhist temple. Ze Rong
offered relief to starving travelers. How could they have pure character and
behavior? Formerly when I was in the eastern capital city (i.e., Jiankang),
Śramaṇa Daohan visited me from Wuzhong and exhorted [Buddhism to] me.
He was very earnest and sincere. Because of this, he stayed for three nights.
He talked for my sake about the [causes and] conditions of reﬁning the body
and purifying the spirit, and the testimony of the arising and extinguishing of
sin and merit. All of this makes sense. I folded my hands before my breast and
listened to his outspoken remarks without sleeping from night till morning.
I withdrew and thought. The reason a person rises in the world, becomes
famous, has faith, and practices the Way really relies on the teaching of the
Duke of Zhou and Confucius. Zilu says, “When I hear [well-intentioned
advice], if I cannot carry it out in practice, I am concerned only that there is
[something else] I have yet to hear.”293 I have to do many things. Why should
I suddenly abandon this and attend to that (i.e., Buddhism)? In addition, I
sought [the reason why] the written form [for the three-year mourning],
which is well matched to human feelings, had been established, and I came
to know that the next life is above my means. Having investigated thoroughly
the endless grief [about death] throughout our lifetime, I have realized that
it is difﬁcult to receive this body again.
Sages are my teachers. How could the Duke of Zhou and Confucius
deceive me? As I was overcome by your generosity, I have fully presented
the ins and outs [of my opinions]. Hoping that the aged and respected person
of great intelligence instructs others without being wearied, I have simply not
yet kept silent here. You said formerly you had already sent the Discourse

114

Fascicle Three

to Clarify Buddhism. I am looking forward to receiving it. I hope you will
be clear in your thinking.
Sincerely,
He Chengtian

Response to He of Hengyang, the
Criticism on the Elucidation of the
Discourse on Buddhist Laymen
and Clergy by Zong Bing

I have respectfully read the discussion you sent to me. You repress the ediﬁcation of Buddhism and set forth your aspiration in the teaching of Confucianism. [In your discussion,] signiﬁcant matters are collected and expressed,
and your talent in literature and argument examines and clariﬁes [these issues].
It may very much be a key writing that enlivens people of the world’s feelings,
and it is really an instructive discussion of the central region (i.e., China).
Having observed your intention, I see that you do not mean that the one
who established Buddhism is not a sage, but [you say that] the teaching is
an expedient [way], without truth. I, [however,] have not completely appreciated on what basis you base your belief that [Buddhism] has no truth. Now,
when we determine and see a long-range plan of things together, the gains
and losses are about on par. The marvelous ediﬁcation [of Buddhism] arose
outside the acme of profundity and its cause is bound together with the unseen
world. Couldn’t it be that we have had holy people who talk to each other
[as easily as] pointing at their palms? You vainly believe in the incomplete
historical records [compiled] after the incident of burning books [carried out
by the First Emperor of the Qin dynasty], and then, with [these incomplete
records,] you want to reject and stop the supernatural ediﬁcation [of
Buddhism]. It makes my blood run cold.
Sages “make an exhaustive discrimination of what is right, and effect
the complete development of every nature, till they arrive at what is appointed
for it [by Heaven].”294 If there are those who do not attain [the appropriate]
points, [sages feel] as if they have cast those people into a moat. Now
[Buddhists] delude people [by the tenet of] the immortality of the spirit, and
deceive them [by the tenet of] the attainment of buddhahood. They indulge
in shaving the head, wearing red robes, and burning their bodies and ﬁngers.

115

20b

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

In addition, they do not employ their natural gifts in order to support their
parents and the way of husband and wife or father and son. From the time
Buddhism was introduced to the thirty-six states west of the Sha River (near
Turfan) prior to the time of its introduction to China, those who cut off [familial] relations [of husband and wife or father and son] number in the hundred
millions or hundred billions. It is quite possible that there are sages and wise
people among the eastern and western barbarians. If we think of those [who
were born in barbarian tribes] and who came to [China], such as You Yu and
Jin Ridi, there were more people who were about to be born and yet who
could not [be born]. If Buddhism has no truth, wouldn’t the cruelty of casting
people into a moat, [just as Bai Qi and Xiang Wu did,] be unspeakable?
Regarding the expedient [stated] in the Buddhist scriptures, what kind
of way do you think it is in accord with? Do you say you want it in order to
exceed the proper limits in righting a wrong, or in order to govern foreign
people whose natures are “tough and strong” and who are “angry and perverse”? The sort of people who are angry and perverse will still not believe
and will not be frightened if you bind them with the three-article [provisional]
law [promulgated by Emperor Gaozu of the Han dynasty], or punish soon
after rewarding. Would it be possible to rule over them by means of the tenets
“[emptiness is] nothing other than form,” fundamental nonexistence, nirvana,
the dharmakāya, the twelve causations (Skt. pratītyasamutpāda), and kalpas
as numerous as the minutest particles of dust?
Those who receive this instruction are what you call people who “receive
the vapor that is pure and peaceful, and who have benevolence and righteousness in their minds.” Since we avail ourselves of [the vapor that is] pure
and peaceful in order to explicate the sublime words, and encourage the righteous nature in order to learn the subtle practice, we are consequently able to
purify our illumination and contemplate the Dharma. When [we realize that]
the Dharma and illumination are all empty, we reach the [Buddhist] Way
(i.e., awakening). These are entirely stated in the Buddhist scriptures, and
are what you believe. As to people in modern times who are superhuman
and have excellent virtue, such as the eight wise men for whom Sun [Chuo]
Xinggong made eulogies and the ﬁve thinkers praised by Zhi Daolin, they
are all considered to be lofty by their contemporaries. Therefore, the two

116

Fascicle Three

(i.e., Sun Chuo and Zhi Daolin) could make a composition about them. How
can this be called wild talk?
Sun [Chuo] praises Dharmarakṣa as erudite and intelligent, and Yu Falan
as sincere and knowledgeable. I do not have relationships with the sophisticated and the simpleminded. [Therefore] I have no idea with whom I should
compare these bhikṣus. [Yu] Falan’s disciple, [Yu] Daosui, however, has not
yet caught up to his master. When Sun [Chuo] comments on him, [Sun said,]
“[Intelligent people] equate him with noble people.”295 I would say that I
think [one of these noble people] is Yu Wenbing. The two eminent monks,
Dharmarakṣa and [Yu] Falan, must have been even more outstanding than
this person. I do not know of Bhikṣu Huilin at all. Moreover, I have no idea
about public opinion. If you say that [Bhikṣu Huilin] is as good as [Yu] Wenbing, he may not naturally fall behind [Yu] Daosui, but he must still be below
Dharmarakṣa and [Yu Fa]lan. The comment I made previously is not an
impropriety of speech. If [Huilin] has the appearance of a Buddhist monk
who is sincere and capable, [the mind of] disinterestedness like Heaven, and
profound knowledge [to discern] truth and falsehood, why is it not certain
that Śakra-devendra will transform and willfully urge him to attain buddhahood? The Discourse on Buddhist Laymen and Clergy cannot yet be considered upright.
In the discussion I received, you express a doubt: “If there really are reward
and retribution in the next life, why did the Duke of Zhou and Confucius keep
silent, without even a few words about it?” This is indeed a common question,
based on prejudice. This is truly something we should clarify together.
The sacred spirit originates profoundly. As it is moved, then it responds.
It is not something that leads people prior to a necessity. During the declining
years of the Shang and Zhou dynasties, the people fell into great misery, and
regicide was rampant. The reason the masses moved the sages to action is
[because the world was in] disorder. Consequently, the responses found in
the Six Classics are only about governing [the state]. Therefore, there is no
word of the Buddha.
Liu Xiang says that the nine provinces mentioned in the Yugong (i.e.,
the earliest known book of the geography of China) probably follow what
is recorded in the Book of Mountains and Seas, which states: “The people

117

20c

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

of India (Shendu) are very dear to others and love each other.”296 Guo Pu
says that India (Tianzhu) is the place where Buddhism originated. Even
though this is a barbarian region [from the Chinese point of view], countless
domains spread out like stars in the sky. Somewhat to our surprise, we do
not know which domain [is the center of] glory. Since the people extend their
feelings of dearness and love, the ediﬁcation of Buddhism [was founded]
responding to this. The coarse people of that region (i.e., India) are petty and
numerous. Some of them are confused and ferocious and the relations between
sovereign and subject are not controlled properly.
The exquisite people of this region (i.e., China) used to cherish the Way
at all times, and Buddhist services existed, too. Even though they might have
received the Dharma-nature [as a natural endowment] near the Yi and Luo
Rivers, or they might have experienced the ultimate reality near the Zhu and
Si Rivers, Shi Yi, [the historiographer of the Zhou dynasty,] carelessly did
not record [these events] because they had nothing to do with the way of
governance, and Bu Shang (i.e., Zixia) did not compile them because they
go against the Confucian way. Even if there were some [Buddhist documents]
in the non-Buddhist canon hidden in the double wall [of Confucius’s house],
they would have also been burned by the king of Qin (i.e., the First Emperor
of the Qin dynasty). It is not yet necessarily known whether or not the Duke
of Zhou and Confucius kept silent about [reward and retribution in the next
life]. There is no case where the way of the profound absolute vacancy and
issues of the mysterious immortals have not been mentioned in worldly
books. The words of Confucius regarding the Way are found in chapters of
Zhuangzi’s book, [the Zhuangzi,] of the remote age. [The record of] the feast
[of the Queen Mother of West] at Yaochi was discovered from a high grave
of Ji county (in present-day Henan province). In that case, through the Five
Classics that are concerned with state administration, we cannot yet ﬁll in
the wonderful ediﬁcation beyond this world [due to the lack of records].
You also say in your criticism, “Things are permanently empty, and
emptiness and things are the same. If emptiness and existing objects are no
different from each other, why are the wise and the ignorant so called in different ways?” What Buddhist scriptures state is that form is empty; there is
nothing other than emptiness. It is not said that there is no existence. There
is existence but it is simply empty. There is existence, so there are two different

118

Fascicle Three

appellations: the wise and the ignorant. It is empty, so all differences are altogether empty. Form is naturally not form. Even though form is empty, conditions join together and become an existence. From the beginning, existence
is naturally not existence. All [phenomena] are just like those things that are
produced by illusion, or revealed in a dream. They exist, but they do not.
The future has not yet come, the past has already gone, and the present does
not stay. There is no ﬁxed existence, either. Generally these several principles
are the laws all profound sages attained ultimately. It is really difﬁcult to
make them clear by indicating them with language. When I observe things
from this point of view, I truly realize it is evident. Therefore, I feel free from
worries and petty thoughts, and so I increase purity [of mind] by washing
away [deﬁlements]. How can you be content with it?
Furthermore, you say, “The body and the spirit mutually support each
other. People of ancient times compared them to a torch. When ﬁrewood
burns down, the ﬂame becomes weak. When the ﬁrewood is completely
burned, the ﬂame dies out. Even though [the spirit] is subtle, how could it
alone be transmitted?” Well, ﬁre is produced from ﬁrewood, [but] the spirit
is not made from the body. Of thoughts, there are both exquisite and coarse
ones. They are moved and obtain the bodies that follow them. When the
[exquisite] spirit reaches its acme, it transcends the body and becomes independent of it. There is no body, but the spirit exists. This is called the eternality
of the dharmakāya. Hence, we begin as an ordinary person, and will become
a tathāgata at last. Even though our life is coarse until now, if we have a view
that turns upward for countless kalpas without exhaustion, we will certainly
learn [Buddhism] in order to ascend to the pure world. [It is said in the Book
of Odes that] “A mulberry insect has a child, which a wasp carries on its back
[as its adopted child].”297 If we compare [this unusual matter] to those in the
spiritual world, where we “will be sheltered under the jeweled canopy [offered
by Ratnaśikhi], or we will ascend to the [lion] seat of Merupradīparāja [Tathāgata],” why would we have no hope?
In addition, you have doubt and say, “[The teaching of] Śākyamuni delivers people by means of expedients,” “Why doesn’t he value the several tens
of millions of talks [of the teaching] and yet is sparing of momentary supernatural light?” and “[Why] does he not show its mysterious transformation
in order to cause people of evil views to understand?”

119

21a

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

Although it is called “expedient” as a term, [the degree of manifestation]
of people’s receptivity and the Buddha’s response, either dim or apparent,
complies with evil acts and meritorious deeds variously. In former times the
Buddha expounded [the Dharma] and emitted light for sentient beings,
[because] they all usually accumulated wonderful sincerity. Consequently
they could make a spiritual journey [to the world of buddhas]. In addition,
at that time the Buddha’s words were already evidently expedient. Therefore,
even negligent people could hear them. The light is emitted and it illuminates
us through contemplation. People of wrong views do not have the conditions
to look at [the light] even if it envelops them. Now if we see Buddhist scriptures and yet do not repent of our negligence, even if we are enveloped [by
the light] in advance, how beneﬁcial would it be? People such as wise men
of sincere faith are able to clearly perceive supernatural illumination by themselves. On what basis do you know this and always say that [supernatural
light] is simply wild talk? [It is stated in the Chunqiu Zuoshizhuan that] “The
regular stars are not visible, yet it is a bright night.”298 When I examine what
year and month [this happened], I see it corresponds to the night when the
Buddha was born and emitted a light. Guan Youan set sail on the sea on a
windy night. All his companions sank [with the boat], but Youan saw a light
in the darkness. Heading toward the light, he [and his family] reached an
island, and only he and his entire family were saved.299
The Buddha has no discrimination. He responds only to good. There are
too many cases to mention in which the Buddha’s responses were given to
people like Wang Xiang or Guo Ju.300
These are also auspicious omens of seeing the light. Couldn’t there be
the Buddha even if you have not seen [the Buddha’s response]?
In addition, you explain the prosperity [of the teaching] of the Duke of
Zhou and Confucius, which you compare to and consider to be greater than [the
teaching of] the Buddha. The regime of this country is, however, merely the
prosperity of sovereigns. But the exquisite spirit still never perishes and transmigrates in the unseen world. Our life is as short as a breath, in which the eight
kinds of suffering are abundant. Even though we strive for the Confucian teaching
in order to rectify ourselves momentarily, we will soon die. In the disaster of
the three superintendents, the uncle and nephew distrusted each other, and the
brothers killed each other.301 Even though among the seventy-two of disciples

120

Fascicle Three

[of Confucius] some “ascended to the hall and some passed into the inner apartments” (i.e., attained mastery),302 those who lived until the age of ﬁfty were
few. Yan [Hui] died young, Ran [Boniu] was afﬂicted with disease, [Zhong]
You (i.e., Zilu) was cut apart [as a punishment], [Zai] Yu was executed together
with his relatives, and Si (i.e., Zigong) lost his beard. Was not the suffering [of
Confucius] in the Kuang and Chen regions unspeakable?303 He spread the teaching abroad while suffering hunger, and wandered from state to state. How many
people could he save after all? When we observe this alongside the Buddhist
teaching, we see only his lament there. Isn’t this the result of the congregation
of causation from the previous existences of people of the world?
Moreover, the truth spread by [Confucius] has not yet been deep and great
at this point. If we outwardly act in accordance with [Chinese] rites and music,
and cultivate inwardly with [the teaching of] nonarising (i.e., Buddhism), purify
the spirit in the state of nirvana, and consider thousands of millions of kalpas
to be bygone years [of our lifetime], wouldn’t it be really great? Events are not
transmitted [accurately] to later generations and we have not been able to know
the principles [sufﬁciently]. I hope you will not say that based on crude evidence
the Duke of Zhou and Confucius were not so. All people say that the Buddha
makes wild talk, but the Book of Mountains and Seas says that those who died
and who were reborn are very numerous.304 In the immortal realm such as Mount
Kunlun, the ﬁeld of Guangdu [where Houji was buried], and the mound of
Xuanyuan, the weather is neither cold nor hot, phoenix’s eggs are eaten, sweet
dew is drunk, the inhabitants are sheltered by jade trees, they sip the water of
the Zhu fountain, and they do not die even though they reach a thousand years
of age. Regarding such stories as [the spirit of Gun, Emperor Yu’s father,] being
transformed into a yellow bear and entering an abyss under Mount Yu,305 [the
spirit of] Shen Sheng, [the crown prince of Jin state, talking with Hu Tu, his
former attendant,]306 and Boyou [of Zheng state becoming a ghost and avenging
himself on the people of the state],307 not a few [of these stories] are found in
what [Zuo] Qiuming related.308 All of these can be inferred from the crude
[traces] of this [country] (China) in order to believe the exquisite [talk] of that
[country] (India).
I was told that in former days you had [a chance to hear] the [Buddhist]
Way. I can see that one who hears the Buddhist Dharma and straightens himself is indeed [equal to] a daring soldier of Pucheng (in present-day Shanxi

121

21b

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

province).309 Is it because what you have heard is not yet lofty? If what you
heard is lofty, it is still possible [for you] to change your mind, just as a
leopard changes [its spots]. Human beings are creatures of exquisite spirit.
If we, however, take refuge in the culmination of numinous beings (i.e., the
Buddhist Way) and roughly receive the teaching and precepts, it is enough
to move even an insigniﬁcant amount of [the Buddha’s saving power]. If we
move it, we will rise higher. Wouldn’t it be an eternal good plan to leave
behind delusions?
In former days, the fact that the spirit is immortal was just as the Buddha
says, but the spirit casts away, the mind is wounded, and we go against the government of the unseen world by ourselves. How could we know that suffering
and difﬁculties in this existence would not be due to [sins we committed in]
previous existences? If we imprudently despise the teaching of the respectful
spirit with our own view, I am afraid that we may pass on this difﬁculty to [our
next existence]. A Buddhist scripture states: “Once when Śākyamuni was a
bhikṣu of the Hinayana, he slandered the Mahayana. Because of this, even he
fully underwent hardships, passing through hells for a very long time.” [Even
Śākyamuni fell into Hell,] to say nothing of those who have no faith at all. Moreover, on what basis can we determine that this Buddhist scripture must be false?
The words used in your previous letter rebuking me are merely in accordance with Bhikṣu [Hui]lin’s chapters and sentences. My intention has already
been roughly told. I could not reply to each [of your questions], but everything
has already been thoroughly covered in my composition, the Discourse to
Clarify Buddhism. Now I will attach it [to this letter] and send it to you. I
ask you to please do your best, make a thorough investigation properly, and
tell me completely whether I am right or not. I am old and about to die. I
would like only to continue this until my last day. When you have received
this letter, please write your frank response to me.
Sincerely,
Zong Bing

21c

He’s Second Response
to Zong

I read your second letter together with your great discourse. The tactical
deployment you took up [for the discourse] is just like what Xiang Ji (i.e.,

122

Fascicle Three

Yu) [of Chu state] did [for his campaigns]. You have already made [his rival,]
Emperor Gaozu, [the founder of the Han dynasty,] look humble, not to speak
of a less capable person [like me]. The testimonies and examples [you showed]
are solid and clear. The language and expressions [you used] are erudite and
rich. You really wish to spread your beneﬁt and kindness and your instruction
is extended to even ordinary people. I deeply acknowledge that this is due
to a gentleman’s consideration. [Nevertheless,] you just intend to make the
teaching mysterious by means of [abstract discourse, just like] shadow and
sound. Therefore, I had better keep silent and help fulﬁll your cherished
hopes. I, however, always think that foreign matters may not be what the
Chinese are engaged in. Thus, I simply made the previous statement. If China
and foreign countries should now surely be the same, I am simpleminded. I
venture to apologize for my slowness. In spite of it, I still have a thought.
Those who are versed in the nature of Heaven and Earth are not misled by
unrealistic, peculiar matters. Those who discern the way to prosperity or
decline do not employ their minds for unreasonable, illogical matters. Otherwise, if your discussion is not on the basis of an expedient, and the general
instruction is entirely expressed from your feeling, wouldn’t this be the ignorance of a well-read, experienced person? I have not yet had a chance to meet
and talk with you. I send my letter in lieu of a meeting with you.
Yours truly,
He Cheng[tian]
End of Fascicle Three of The Collection for the Propagation
and Clariﬁcation [of Buddhism]

123

Fascicle Four
The Discourse on the Full Understanding
of Life (Daxinglun)
by He Chengtian

The two polarities (i.e., Heaven and Earth) were already positioned, and a
sovereign joined them. In the universe, there is nothing nobler than [these
three]. [The Way of] Heaven has two divisions: yin and yang; Earth has two
functions: toughness and gentleness; and human beings have two foundations:
benevolence and righteousness. People are born only when there is Heaven
and Earth, while Heaven and Earth become supernatural only when there are
people. The three powers (sancai) are a single and interdependent unit. Consequently, the one who can receive the vapor that is pure and peaceful, whose
spiritual intelligence is particularly prominent, whose feeling is in overall
charge of all ages, whose wisdom encompasses all things, whose ingenious
thought traces to the very source of the deep and dark world, whose production
is equal to that of Nature, and who results in benevolence and capability, is
a sovereign. When he nurtures the common people and helps Heaven in propagating virtue, the sun and moon are clear and bright; the four kinds of supernatural animals (i.e., kylin, Chinese phoenix, turtle, and dragon) appear; the
auspicious wind has the same tune; the four seasons are harmonious; various
types of foods, including the nine kinds of grains, animals that feed on grass
or grain (i.e., cattle, sheep, and dogs), products of the soil, aquatic products,
and foods of various ﬂavors such as sour or salty are served at the table; and
a house, a boat, a vehicle, things decorated with gold, pottery, and dark yellow
fabrics made of silk or linen are supplied for equipment, implements, or
clothes. The culture follows rules of decorum and entertainment follows the
eight kinds of musical sounds [produced from the calabash and musical
instruments made of earthenware, stretched hides, wood, stone, metal, silk
strings, and bamboo]. All things are protected, and living creatures reproduce.
There is nothing that is not provided.

125

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

22a

If people are careful in spending, it is easy to be sufﬁcient. If it is easy
to be sufﬁcient, there will be a surplus of power. If there is a surplus of power,
the people’s will and feeling will become extravagant. Then, the mind
delighted with governance will arise. If things are concise, nothing will be
disturbed. If nothing is disturbed, the spiritual intelligence will be sharp. If
the spiritual intelligence is sharp, one will make plans carefully. Then, the
business to save and govern [the people] is accomplished. Therefore, Heaven
and Earth instruct the people with [the virtues of] thrift and simplicity. [The
two diagrams] qian and kun, [the opening sections of the Book of Changes,]
teach the people with [the way of] ease and concision. This is why instructions
are attentive and generous like this. How can [human beings] be sentient
beings on the same level with birds, ﬁsh, snakes, and insects?
Sentient beings have appropriate seasons in which to be caught and [pertinent means] of employment. To start a ﬁre [in a ﬁeld for a winter hunt], we
wait for a gale to blow. For hunting and ﬁshing, we inquire into [the activities
of] the wolf and otter.310 This is because we follow the seasons of nature. A
real man neither hunts a fawn nor takes eggs. The common people do not use
a ﬁne-meshed net [for ﬁshing]. The song “Rushes” (Xingwei) was composed.311
We bestow good inﬂuence even upon the ﬁsh. This is because we love what
we human beings use. [Gentlemen] stay away from the kitchen. We are cautious
not to commit the ﬁve offenses in hunting.312 Emperor [Tang] of the Yin
dynasty took a new prayer.313 When Confucius ﬁshed, he did not use a net.
This is because we deﬁne the way of benevolence.
All living things must die. The physical body is destroyed and the spirit
scatters, just as [all things] become luxuriant in spring and decay in autumn,
and the four seasons change, one after another. How could there be further
[rebirths] to receive another body? The Book of Odes states that “Happy and
easygoing gentlemen seek a blessing by no crooked ways.”314 This means
that the propagation of the Way lies in oneself. [The Book of Odes also says:]
“The three sovereigns (i.e., Dawang, Wang Ji, and Wen Wang) reside in
Heaven.”315 This denotes that the exquisite spirits ascended far to [Heaven].
Nevertheless, one harbors sensual desires in the mind while outwardly fearful
of the expedient teaching (i.e., Buddhism), or one deeply considers his present
life while giving donations in hopes of a reward in the next life. Our predecessor Confucian masters in former times said nothing about these issues. I

126

Fascicle Four

am originally deﬁcient in intelligence and vigor, and I do not know how to
make it my business to practice [this teaching].

The Expatiation of the Discourse on the Full
Understanding of Life of He of Hengyang
by Yan Yanzhi (384–456)

I formerly obtained your discourse, in which with deep views and extensive
thought you take the human way to be lofty and degrade other living creatures.
The content is clear and subtle, and the subject does not lose signiﬁcance. This
is really helpful for the [Confucian] teaching, and good enough to wipe out
the heretical school. There is no need to speak of those who seek [the Confucian
teaching] equally. How could they forget what they rely upon? I am merely
concerned that if [music played only with] Chinese zithers is monotonous, it
will lose the clear harmony. Thereupon, I will brieﬂy and broadly write several
articles, and take all your responses, [which I expect to] receive later.
You say that he who is in one unit together with the two polarities and
who becomes the three powers with them must be a name of the virtuous
one, but this is not a category of people in general. Generally, however,
various species [of living creatures] are equally called sentient beings; this
is the name for those who bear consciousness. How could it be the title for
sages and wise people? In that case, to comment on the three powers has
nothing to do with the masses. How does calling them sentient beings abuse
sages and wise people? Even though I have the feeling to depend upon [the
importance of] order, I am not worried that [calling them sentient beings]
causes disorder. If both registers (i.e., sages and ordinary people) can be
taught and all can be lifted up, understand the principles thoroughly, make
a restriction to leave language behind, adopt this, and share reality, then it is
possible [to be harmonious], just as when the notes of beilü and the note
gong naturally harmonize, or just as two separated pieces of a tally join
together.316 Why do you discontentedly stick to lü [of the yin notes] and
slander lü [of the yang notes]?317
Moreover, [it is said in the Book of Changes that] “the great virtue [of
Heaven and Earth] is called life.”318 [In life,] there is a common feature of
all things, which is the same as what differentiates all things. How could it
be distinguished to attain life? The life that is not different for each living

127

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

22b

creature should be [known as] sentient beings. In the ranks of sentient beings,
however, there are a great many differences between the ignorant and the
wise. People employ other living creatures in order to nourish themselves,
and other living creatures are put to work in order to support people. Even
though at the beginning [people] may follow [the law of Heaven], they come
to kill [other living creatures] at last. Various causes sprout. Sensual desires
are not repressed. Life is harmed in increasing and miserable ways. The law
of Heaven will be pent up and destroyed.
Emperors and sages lament this situation, but they cannot suddenly take
away [the habits that] remain entrenched [in the world]. Therefore, they set up
the teaching to plan seasonal hunting and the scriptures to prudently follow the
seasons. It is simply to nourish those who bear consciousness by opening up
[the way of] benevolence and to gradually return to the cessation of extremities.
Those who take the Way to be the mind will probably stop [evils] before
they come to [the worst] like this.
Furthermore, you understand that in the great law of Nature the life and
death [of all creatures] are equal in rising and falling. Various existing things
are really suitable for this. In the truth of spirits, however, the issue of remaining
in existence or not might differ from the issue of the withering of grass or
the fading away of [living creatures]. If [the spirit] is the same as trees and
plants, then it will disappear like smoke. Moreover, you say that the three
sovereigns ascended far and their exquisite spirits reside in Heaven. If the
exquisite spirits indeed exist, and they are surely different from trees and
plants, then there is nothing to support your opinion regarding the doctrine
of receiving a body. Is it that because the three sovereigns were purely good,
they were rewarded and reborn in Heaven? You intended to denounce [the
doctrine of] future life, but on the contrary you established [the concept of]
ascending far [to Heaven]. Since you undertook to denounce [the doctrine
of the future life] and yet established [the concept of ascending far to Heaven],
I understand without doubt that this is not what is removed by the power. If
there is merely the exquisite spirit, which does not have any form and appearance, I have no idea what it relies upon to establish itself in Heaven. I am
too cowardly to make a conclusion. Therefore, I strive for and depend on
your opinion. So, [my thoughts go] back and forth, but I have not yet attained
contentment.

128

Fascicle Four

Generally, within [the realm of] fate there is nothing that does not move
[others] without response. Actions and the way of reward and retribution
inevitably tally with each other. Even if it is said that they inevitably tally
with each other, why do you suspect we have hope [for a reward]? Consequently, those who forget kindness have no demand [for a reward] and those
who keep merit have hope [for a reward]. Cherishing merit while hoping
[for a reward] is not yet wholesomeness. When kindness is removed, this
will be the highest level [of virtue]. There are wise people and those who are
not so wise among human beings, and then there are public and private in
our thoughts. In this physical world it cannot be said that since some people
expect rewards, those who establish their virtues all wish for [a reward].
Moreover, according to the common talk of those who reign over the world,
people who value giving donations have no recollection [of their act of
giving], and when government ofﬁcials conduct righteousness, they still
show kindness to others without thinking [that what they are doing is wholesome], not to speak of those who listen to the essentials of the [Buddhist]
Way. Wouldn’t it be possible for them to be disinterested? Would they never
fail to have sensual desires when they take actions? Wouldn’t they be afraid
of the expedient teaching at every chance? You have never been able to promote [Buddhism], and you always put it down. Even though you deeply
reproach, correct, and upbraid [Buddhists], please cease your arrogant speech
and do not attack them. You usually ﬁrmly entrench yourself in a castle, and
it is difﬁcult to send a letter [to convince you]. Furthermore, I have been
cooped up with worries and distresses in my house, and I had no chance to
entrust my feelings and reasoning to you. Recently I received a graceful and
great letter from you. I wanted to express my intention and judge your former
explanation. I worry that it may not be worthy.
Sincerely yours,
Yan Yanzhi

Response to Yan of Yongjia

I respectfully read your esteemed letter and examined repeatedly your deep
intention. You draw a line between each of the three powers. Your inference
of testimonies is reﬁned and pure. You declare your aspiration for the
[Buddhist] Way and praise and admire Buddhists. You take account of all

129

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

22c

through this world (ming) and the other world (you). You act in sincerity and
reach out to [all] things. When you practice it in yourself, it is excellent.
When you expound it in the teaching, it is magnanimous. It is faultless.
[Nevertheless,] when I take a step backward and seek what your good instruction came from, [I feel as if] you want me to inspect the Big Dipper and the
North Pole, but you get even more lost and your thoughts may become
obscure. You have not yet understood completely. Therefore, I will relate
my original intention once again.
You said, “[You say that] he [who is in one unit together with the two
polarities and] who becomes the three powers with them must be a name of
the virtuous one. Why are sages and wise people also so?” [I am afraid that
you misunderstand my words.]
The way of human beings was established incorporating various benevolences and righteousness. Natural compassion is a manifestation of the virtuous. To feel ashamed for evils is the beginning of a chivalrous mind. [Nevertheless,] the trees of Mount Niu were cut with scythes and axes [and lost
their beautiful] nature.319 A peaceful and quiet state of mind is put into disorder
by the thought of interests. We should really nourish the initial stage [of a
wholesome heart] and help its growth. Then, can there be no mistake [if it
is said that a wholesome heart] exists but it is not counted?
In addition, you say, “To comment on the three powers has nothing to
do with the masses. Why does calling them sentient beings abuse sages and
wise people?” I have already heard your instruction, but I have still not understood on what basis the two roads [of sages and ordinary people] are judged
[separately]. Would Yi [Yin] and Yan [Hui] belong to the lower stratum [of
sentient beings]? Would [Sun] Qiao (i.e., Zichang of Zheng state) and Ji[zha
of Wu state] belong to the upper stratum? If we people hope for [sagehood]
tirelessly, in order to dispel what we have not yet understood, we certainly
raise both registers [of sages and ordinary people]. If [the notes of beilü and]
gong [naturally] harmonize and two separated pieces of a tally join together,
wouldn’t this be the highest wholesomeness?
Moreover, you say, “The great virtue [of Heaven and Earth] is called
life. [In life,] there is a common feature of all things, which is the same as
what differentiates all things. How could it be distinguished to attain life?”
I do not say that this is not so. Even though people are born and equally

130

Fascicle Four

placed under the great virtue (i.e., life), they cannot be called sentient beings.
It compares to the case that although sages equally receive the ﬁve primary
elements, they cannot be called the people. What merit is there in considering
that the life that is not different from each other must be sentient beings?
In the letter received, you say, “People employ other living creatures in
order to nourish themselves, and other living creatures are put to work in
order to support people.” If you broadly judge like this, then you have the
same thought as my humble view. As to passion and sensual desires, if we
do not restrain them, we will destroy life and be brutal to other living creatures.
We will be the so-called one of excessive [desire] or the arrogant one. Sages
assuredly remove this.
Furthermore, you say, “Those who take the Way to be the mind will
probably stop [evils] before they come to [the worst] like this.” I would like
to ask you a question. Are those who stop [evils before they come to the
worst like this] not going to kill [animals] with their own hands? Or do they
make all [people] equally receive the teaching [of not killing]? If you mean
that they do not kill with their own hands but go to a market [to buy] a necessary amount [of meat], the issue is originally the [same] intention as that
[gentlemen] should stay away from the kitchen. If you want to recommend
it to families entered in the household registers (i.e., common people), I see
that your discussion does not hold water.
Moreover, you say, “If [the spirit] is the same as trees and plants, then
it will disappear like smoke. What does the exquisite spirit rely upon to establish itself in Heaven?” Well, the disembodied spirits are dim and faint. Wandering spirits become evil spirits. When [the spirit] is gloriﬁed and [its departure from the body] saddens others, it will go somewhere. Zhongyou (i.e.,
Zilu) received [no answer from Confucius] when he wanted to know about
death.320 Si (i.e., Zigong) was also unsuccessful in getting an answer [regarding
the nature of human beings and the Way of Heaven].321
As for the matter that we will never again receive a body, I clearly stated
this in my previous discussion. Regarding the matter of what the spirits rely
upon to exist in Heaven, I ask you to depend on Confucius’s answer. Regarding [the comment,] “Actions and the way of reward and retribution inevitably
tally [with each other],” I should say that the Yu family [of the Han dynasty]
made a gate higher and waited for the merit of the accumulation of their

131

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

23a

virtuous deeds,322 and Lord Boyang, [who rescued Emperor Xuan when the
emperor was still an infant,] did not attack [any enemy] yet he was blessed
with the rank of marquis.323 How are these concerned with the next life?
In addition, you say, “According to the common talk of those who reign
over the world, people who [value] giving donations have no recollection
[of their act of giving], and when government ofﬁcials conduct righteousness,
they still show kindness to others without thinking [that what they are doing
is wholesome].” This statement is true. There is, [however,] something to
slightly regret [about this]. To require kindness in order to plan for a reward
is what a preacher exhorts. To be kind in order to be delighted with a reward
is a common affair of the world. If one doubts [the Buddhist] scriptures, he
will suffer hardships for successive kalpas. If he diligently makes donations,
he will obtain rewards accumulated many times over. These issues are not
likely to be included in the teaching of our school. Thereupon, I am simply
discontented.
I know that you want to draw it (i.e., Buddhism) to the upper stream. This
is also something for which I do not begrudge supporting immensely. Those
who place themselves in reality, however, considerably take the splendor of
foreknowledge to be vile. Therefore, I do not [draw Buddhism to the upper
stream]. If donations are not made as aid in an emergency and if kindness is
given [only in order to receive] merit and fame, when these are all evaluated
by a wise person [like you], we feel ashamed. Thus, I have acted in accordance
with my perseverance for a long time, but I have never improved myself. I feel
inwardly ashamed at [Qu] Boyu [of Wei state, who continually tried to practice
good conduct].324 I have not spared the time to censure others.
Sincerely,
He Chengtian

The Second Expatiation
to He of Hengyang

I have been occupied in farming for a while. I was [busy] personally gathering
the crops in a rice ﬁeld among the hills. In spare moments from my farming,
aged rustics are my companions. The topic of our conversation is limited to
crops. My work is entirely to plow land and pasture animals. We talk about
ripening, and plan how to plough side by side. I did not hear anything of

132

Fascicle Four

intelligent signiﬁcance. I received a subtle argument from you, by which I
am brightly consoled. The content of your letter is very detailed, and I feel
more ashamed of my obstinacy. [Nevertheless,] I now again forget [my obstinacy] and write to you of what I cherish in my mind, in order to convey to
you what I have not yet expressed.
In investigating the principles, to rely on our intentions is not as good
as to analyze it from the sacred literature. The discussion on the three powers
must be originally based on all three lines (hua) [of the Book of Changes].
When the three lines are displayed, the middle line refers to the virtue of a
sovereign.325 Therefore, it is so supernatural that it can reach the uppermost,
and so lofty that it can unite with the head of the state. Consequently, I said
formerly that if one is not suitable to Heaven and Earth, he has nothing with
which to originally respond to the knowledge of these things. Even if you
broadly examine your clear thought, you have not been willing to remain in
agreement with me.
You still take [all people] without discarding [anyone] in [the three powers].
You carry them extensively without leaving anyone out. Your resolution to
be generous to people is really ample. I am, [however,] afraid that your arrangement of positions is disordered and consequently there will be numerous
ambiguous issues. If wherever natural compassion arises you exhaust the
capacity of universal love, and if wherever the feeling to be ashamed of evils
arises you accomplish the righteousness of [divine] help for honest people,
you are the most benevolent and the most righteous. I can ﬁnd no ﬂaw [in
this], but those who care about [benevolence and righteousness] are few and
those who use them for their own beneﬁt are many. Those people who possess
their lot [of benevolence and righteousness] in advance and have not reached
its apex simply cannot be a match for the two polarities (i.e., Heaven and
Earth) [of the three powers].
Now, if one who renders himself at the apex [of benevolence and righteousness] is a teacher, if those who have not [yet reached the apex of benevolence and righteousness] are [his] disciples, if their minds of respect and
yielding are helped [to develop], if their minds of jealousy and conﬂict are
removed, if we cause the blades of scythes and axes [with which the trees
of Mount Niu were cut down] to be melted down [and made useless], if [we
cause] the arising of the thought of merit and demerit to stop, and if we urge

133

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

23b

the people of a hundred generations to go out and get onto the path of sincerity
and kindness, why doesn’t a bud [of the wholesome mind] grow? Why isn’t
the wholesome mind invoked? Nevertheless, you falsely accuse that “[a
wholesome heart exists but] it is not counted.” I have not yet evaluated your
intention. Even if the three powers are equally arranged in a line, we cannot
bring people of superﬁcial talent into the line. Even if they are called sentient
beings, we cannot mix them up recklessly with the man of nonarising (i.e.,
the Buddha). Therefore, in this land, those of humble birth are not counted
in [the three powers]; and in [the Buddhism of] that land, sages and wise
people are clearly distinguished. The purpose of recommending all [members]
of both registers [of Buddhism and Confucianism] lies in this.
Regarding people like [Sun] Qiao (i.e., Zichang) and [Ji]zha, their virtue
is not able to be one with [that of] emperors and kings. How could they
belong to the upper stratum? Yi [Yin] and Yan [Hui] still rely on birth [through
receiving] the natural vapor. They ought to belong to the lower stratum. The
judgment of the two paths [of sages and ordinary people] is easier than giving
instructions to one’s servants by merely gesturing with one’s chin.
Moreover, I am aware that you say, “Even though people are born and
equally placed under the great virtue, they cannot be called sentient beings.
It is comparable to the case that although sages equally receive the ﬁve
primary elements, they cannot be called people.”
The reason [sages] cannot be called people is that [sages] are more vigorous than people in spiritual intelligence. Now, [sages] are equally placed
under [the great virtue] in the same way as [ordinary] people. Why do you
avoid [the idea that sages] and people are the same? Certainly, we must differentiate them on the basis of their extraordinary spirits, but we should not
distinguish them based on the life they received. You avoid in vain the name
of the people, but the reality of the people is not damaged.
[What you are doing] cannot help but resemble the case that if one is
afraid of a single-plank bridge and tries to avoid [stepping on] it, in the end
he will not be able to avoid [crossing over to the other side]. As for my statement, “People employ other living creatures in order to nourish themselves,
and other living creatures are put to work in order to support people,” I intend
to mean that the ignorant and the wise restrict each other, and the confused
and the intelligent control each other. This matter, [the difference between

134

Fascicle Four

human beings and animals,] derives from human intellect; it does not derive
from the laws of Heaven. Therefore, at the beginning we are compassionate
to its emergence, and lament its stagnation and [eventual] disappearance in
the end. Would your [feast of] various types of food including livestock serve
the same purpose as this?
Generally, moving and ﬂowing well are the nature of those of the lower
stratum, while making judgments in transformation and shaping (i.e., change)
is the work of sages of the upper stratum.326 If one carefully builds a fence
[around a house], he is still worried that a thief may come over the fence,
not to speak of [his worry when] he completely sets up everything in order
to satisfy extravagant desires. This is precisely the beginning of extremities.
How could we discuss abandoning excessive [desires]? Therefore, I know
that in your discussion of “to destroy life and be brutal to other living creatures” I cannot share anxieties with heartless people [like you]. The intention
to be fond of killing is found in some people, but the feeling to love life is
abundant. “Those who take the Way to be the mind,” which I said refers to
having abundant feelings of loving life, rejecting unreality, casually fulﬁlling
[life], stepping on reality, and having no premature death, and yet it is not
considered to be benevolence whose beneﬁts and favors reach Heaven. Why
would kindness be limited to just fawns and eggs? Why would the issue emulate only [the activities of] wolves and otters?
Judging from this, we should simply not [kill] with our own hands, but
we should also not put the blame on the market or the kitchen [where animals
are butchered]. Moreover, this does not mean that outside of the market and
the kitchen there is nothing to be offered [as food] to nourish us. The writing
of Shen Nong is explained by Zhongsan (Ji Gang, 233–262) [in the Discourse
on Health Care (Yangshenglun)]. Gongli (i.e., Zhong Changtong of the Later
Han dynasty) praised this matter (i.e., health care), and Zhongyang (i.e., Jiao
Shen of the Later Han dynasty) worked hard at the practice [of guiding the
breath (daoyin)].327 This shows exactly that formerly there was a biography
of that person and we now hear of him. Why is it necessary to take carving
meat to be the nature of people who received [a vapor of] harmony, or to
take broiling and boiling meat to be a means to help wholesomeness? If you
worry that my shallow argument does not hold because it is difﬁcult to recommend equally to common people, [it is just like] your concern that since

135

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

the two men [Guan]shu and [Cai]shu were not intimate [with the royal family
of the Zhou dynasty], the virtue of the Zhou dynasty would be lost in the
future. If we can set forth a far-reaching prospect and seek [a good result]
for a long period of time, we will be able to fulﬁll it in a short period of time
and to expect merit in a long period of time.
If the exquisite spirit is exactly distinguished from grass and trees, your
answer, “Wandering spirits [become evil spirits. When the spirit is gloriﬁed
and its departure from the body saddens others, it will go somewhere],” is
the theory that exquisite spirits [exist]. If [you say] that even though there
are [spirits] and they have no form, then could there be beings without form
in the world? This, indeed, is the question. You ought to show the assured
view. The reason Confucius did not answer [the question about the spirits]
is because he had not discerned whether or not [spirits] exist. [Nevertheless,]
you have already accounted for their existence. How could you align yourself
with him in not giving an answer [to the question]? Even though you are
fond of studying, I am afraid that you have not gotten to what you rely upon.
Otherwise, this is because the paths of understanding and of obscurity are
very much separate from each other, and the mysterious issue and the evident
are far removed from each other; these facts consequently cause the bright
moon to stop shining on the world, and [worldly] knowledge restricts your
mind from understanding [Buddhism].
You say that if my words, “[Actions and the way of reward and retribution] inevitably tally with each other” are embodied, it is the Yu family at an
end. Wouldn’t it be that my discussion was too elaborate and yet, against my
intention, I ended up with a noncommittal opinion? Or, [it is like] a worldly
person who has an unpolished gem and displays it in a market is censured.
Otherwise, [it is like] an ofﬁcer in charge of translation who is affected by
the customs [of his own state] talks even more about the conditions of that
state. If I have not completely taken care of the matter, please let me again
present my recent explanation in minute detail.
[The relation between] reward and retribution and actions is primarily
called fate. I think that there are no absurd things. Each one is moved with
good virtue. Among those who are moved [with good virtue], the minds
of human beings are the greatest. The movement of one’s thought cannot
be perceived by servants practicing divination. When it is extended to its

136

Fascicle Four

accumulated point, we are not competent enough to determine its origin and
we must give up [examining it]. I will take the popular view, and based on
this I will show clear evidence.
Zhuangzhou (i.e., Zhuangzi) says that if the land is tilled in a careless and
haphazard manner, the reward (i.e., the harvest) is poor, too.328 Lord Sun (i.e.,
Xunzi) says that the force of reward or retribution falls on a person according
to each category.329 These statements are set forth to admonish us for our future
lives. Shouldn’t we respect them? Since merciful people deeply saw this fate,
they made the correct statement of its foundation. This is not to invite its end.
[The Buddhist teaching] is to increase good qualities, prevent evils,
return the people to the grand submission [to the natural course],330 deliver
sentient beings [from evils], and cause them to enter into the land of eternal
life. It brings about widespread blessings for everyone, and [the Buddha] is
the highest of a hundred deities in nobility. Why should it be merely that
blessings are extended to one’s descendants and happiness is limited to being
ranked as a high ofﬁcial or minister? If we continuously save [others] with
good [intentions], a good [result] will also follow. That force is just like that
of a sundial. Without any exercise of thought, it will occur naturally.
Why do you say, “To require kindness [in order to plan for a reward is
what a preacher exhorts],” “[To be kind in order] to be delighted with a reward
[is a common affair of the world],” “If one doubts [the Buddhist scriptures],
he will suffer hardships [for successive kalpas],” and “If he diligently makes
donations, [he will obtain rewards accumulated many times over]”? It appears
that this is because you verify the parsimonious feeling familiar to you, and
you doubt the virtuous teaching with which you are unfamiliar. Consequently,
you just punish those who boast about achievements, but are recklessly censured
for forgetting about wise people. The difference in signiﬁcance between “those
who forget [kindness]” and “those who keep [merit]” and the distinction in
thought between public and private have already been fully explained in my
previous letter. I will not repeat it here. You, who thinks that “those who place
themselves in reality, [however, considerably] take the splendor [of foreknowledge] to be vile,” tend to simply stay in kindness and leave behind coldheartedness. If there are people like those who make donations not in order to give
aid in an emergency, or who are kind only expecting fame [in return], then you
will be ashamed of them and I will also be ashamed of them.331

137

23c

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

The Second Response to
Yan of Yongjia

I have believed in my narrow view from the time I was young. The older I
grow, the deeper [this tendency] becomes. If I scruple to say what I have
already begun to say, I [feel] that my heart will become clogged and rotten.
Hence, I was hoping to ﬂoat relying on a stream or to soar entrusting myself
to a female kylin, when you expressed your thoughts with good intention
and again kindly gave explanations. The way you investigated and testiﬁed
is thorough and clear. Your beautiful expression is extensive and abundant.
If sometimes good jade has a ﬂaw, even a humble person may point out the
ﬂaw. When there is a waning moon, even a rustic looks askance at the part
that is lacking. How could I, such a [rustic] person, be fond of arguing? However, I cannot stop talking. Again, I will take a step further and ask you questions to get [your instructions], with which I will examine completely what
brings me to a standstill.
In your letter you say, “The discussion on the three powers must be originally based on all three lines [of the Book of Changes]. When the three lines
are displayed, the middle line refers to the virtue of a sovereign. Therefore,
it is so supernatural that it can reach the uppermost, and so lofty that it can
unite with the head of the state.”
If, just as your point of argument, we consider the three lines [of the
Book of Changes] to be the three powers, the ﬁrst (bottom) line is intended
to be the line of Earth and the third (upper) line is said to be the rank of
Heaven. [The Book of Changes,] however, [says,] “The one can live in seclusion without regret.”332 This does not mean a category of [things like the
Earth] which supports and contains all things in its largeness. [It is also stated
in the Book of Changes] that “Gentlemen are active and vigilant [all the
day].”333 This does not refer to the deep blue [sky] (i.e., Heaven).
As a matter of fact, as long as the two polarities, [Heaven and Earth,]
have no consigning basis, how can we take [the second line] to designate the
establishment of [the way of] people? Since the line is located between justice
and harmony, it is simply suitable to correspond to sovereign virtue.
Moreover, you say, “[If] wherever natural compassion [arises] you
exhaust the capacity of universal love, and [if] wherever the feeling to be
ashamed of evils [arises] you accomplish the righteousness of [divine] help
138

Fascicle Four

for honest people, you are the most benevolent and the most righteous.” This
indicates that you admit that those who practice benevolence and righteousness
become the three powers.
Again, you say that Zichang and [Ji]zha cannot belong to the upper stratum,
and Yi [Yin] and Yan [Hui] ought to belong to the lower stratum. People who
are qualiﬁed to put on yellow lower garments (i.e., ranking ofﬁcials such as
Zichang and Jizha) still fall below [the sovereign virtue of the three powers].
Although you said [the judgment of the two paths of sages and ordinary people
is easier than] giving instructions to one’s servants by merely gesturing with
one’s chin, since there is no warrant for high and low (i.e., sages and ordinary
people), a deluded one [like me] has not yet comprehended this.
Yin and yang nourish the vigor [of people], while toughness and gentleness give them their natures. They each have a round head and rectangular
feet; they do not differ in their appearance. They have much natural compassion and the feeling to be ashamed of evil. So does everyone. For those
who take part in and accept the two polarities [in order to be in the three
powers], however, it is necessary to hold benevolence and righteousness as
the ﬁrst step. I feel that you want to limit [the qualiﬁcation of human beings]
with rank or proper equipages such as vehicle and clothes that [the emperor]
should carefully bestow upon his vassals. Consequently you cause the nature
of kind people and incorruptible scholars [such as Zichang and Jizha] to be
compared with that of beasts, and you see the wise, [such as Yi Yin and Yan
Hui,] who are capable and virtuous, as having the same physical energy as
shellﬁsh. Would the meaning to develop the symbolism of the hexagrams be
like this?
Furthermore, you say, “[Now, sages] are equally placed under [the great
virtue] in the same way as [ordinary] people. Why do you avoid [the idea
that sages] and ordinary people are the same? Certainly, we must differentiate
them on the basis of their extraordinary spirits, but we should not distinguish
them based on the life they received.”
Such extraordinary spirits are already different from [the spirits of] other
living creatures. Why would they all suddenly be the same under the law of
receiving life? Life is based on the law and the law differentiates [between
sages and other living creatures]. Then, on what basis is the same name,
“life,” given to other living creatures? If you stick to this name “life” and

139

24a

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

cause the people to certainly follow it, then is something undeﬁned and complete (huncheng zhi wu)334 [that came into existence before Heaven and Earth]
also included in this instance?
Again, you say, “If one carefully builds a fence [around a house], he is
still worried that a thief may come over the fence, not to speak of [his worry
when] he completely sets up everything in order to satisfy extravagant desires.
This is precisely the beginning of extremities. How could we discuss abandoning excessive [desires]?”
You said at the beginning [of this series of arguments] that emperors
and sages set up the teaching to plan seasonal hunting and the scriptures to
prudently follow the seasons; in this way [they tried] to gradually return to
the cessation of extremities. Now, you criticize with the statement, “This is
precisely the beginning of extremities.” I have not known in detail whether
this rebukes my view or ridicules sages.
Furthermore, you say, “Outside of the market and the kitchen, why can
there be nothing to be offered [as food] to nourish us? The writing of Shen
Nong is explained by Zhongsan. . . . Why is it necessary to take carving meat
to be the nature of people who received [a vapor of] harmony, or to take
broiling and boiling meat to be a means to help wholesomeness?”
Well, in offering to Heaven and Earth, calf’s horns [are used]; in the
state offering the three domestic animals, [cows, pigs, and sheep,] are sacriﬁced; and the thick soup of beef or pork is served in a wooden vessel on a
painted wooden stand to offer to guests of honor. An old man of seventy
years is not satisﬁed until he eats meat. Why can you merely display herbs
and medicines and reserve them as the best remedy? The reason I am worried
that [your argument] does not stand up is not that it is difﬁcult for me to support your great discussion, but I take a step back and doubt this matter; simply,
[such dietary habits] cannot be suddenly removed from the world.
Moreover, you say, “If [you say] that even though there are [spirits],
they have no form, then could there be beings without form in the world?
This, indeed, is the question. You ought to show the assured view.”
I examined the intention [of this point] in your letter, as [I feel] it seems
you do not reject that there are spiritual beings. Just on the point in which
you say that spiritual beings should have some substance, isn’t it possible
you are confused, since Indian books state that spiritual beings become other

140

Fascicle Four

living creatures? People of former days considered spiritual beings to be
[the foundation of] the teaching. Moreover, they wrote it down in books
and scriptures, and it is widely found in written materials. [Lord Sun] Qiao
(i.e., Zichang) of Zheng state and [Ji]zha of Wu state considered this so,
too. Therefore, when music is played six times [with the Chinese zithers
made out of wood from] Mount Yunhe, the spirits of Heaven really descend
[from Heaven], and when it is played nine times [with the Chinese zithers
made out of wood from] Mount Longmen, the manes of people all come
and gather.335 You often adhere to the Rites of Zhou (Zhouli), but recently
you disregard this meaning. Just now you berate beings without form. It is
an incoherent argument!
Again, you say, “These statements (i.e., Zhuangzi’s and Xunzi’s) are set
forth to admonish us for our future lives. Shouldn’t we respect them? Since
merciful people deeply saw this fate, they made the correct statement of its
foundation.”
You have not made it clear about so-called merciful people. What are
they? If you depend on the doctrine of reward and retribution [in accordance
with] actions that is stated in books other than [Confucian texts], it is entirely
the teaching of expedients to which I refer. In investigating the utmost doctrine,
you have not analyzed with the sages’ words and yet you have adopted many
crafty and strange [words] in order to support [your argument]. Can it be to
give the impression of rescuing by means of water from disasters caused by
water?
Furthermore, you say, “I think that there are no absurd things. Each one
is moved with good virtue,” and “If we continuously save [others] with good
[intentions], a good [result] will also follow. That force is just like that of a
sundial. Without any exercise of thought, it will occur naturally.”
If these words are certainly so, those who are moved with good virtue
must be equal in degree of seriousness, just as the force of a sundial must
have a certain extent in length. As to decorations in building or construction,
they are not initiated by a benevolent mind. Even though hunting is done
according to the [appropriate] seasons, the extremely cruel nature [of human
beings] has not been uprooted. For what is a person rewarded to ascend to
Heaven, which is splendid and joyful? For what is one punished to fall into
hell, which is dark and full of suffering? Excellent words come to an end in

141

24b

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

differentiating high from low, and the law is made without a scale (i.e.,
measure or standard). All things have come to this point!
Moreover, a guardian attendant who teaches and loves [his master]
encourages [his master] to abstain from eating the intestines of dogs and
hogs, [which resemble those of human beings].
A good cook who wields a knife [to butcher cattle for meat] feels afraid
whenever he comes to a complicated joint.336 The sage is as bright as the sun
and moon, and his ediﬁcation can open the three powers (santong).337 If
[actions and the way of] reward and retribution inevitably tally, how does it
hinder the teaching? Why was it sealed in the ages of [Fu]xi and Tang [Yao]?
Why was it buried in the time of the Duke of Zhou and Confucius? In the
beginning, nets [to catch animals and ﬁsh] were made and this has given rise
to a number of sins. [The practice of] offering animal sacriﬁces was established
and opened the punishment of the long night [of spiritual darkness] (Skt.
dīrgha-rātram). The heavenly kitchen (i.e., food naturally collected) is abandoned, and those animals fed with grass and grain are considered delicious.
There has been no benevolence to save people from drowning [in extreme
misery]. The cruelty of putting people into a dry moat was carried out without
restraint. In order that these acts not be repeated, you should sincerely consider
the issues deeply. If you think that the intelligence of the exquisite spirit [of
sages] is not yet complete in some points, even though you are thoughtful
and love strange ideas, you have not come to disgrace the sages.
When you talk about benevolence and righteousness, you say, “those
who care about [benevolence and righteousness] are few and those who use
them for their own beneﬁt are many.” However, when you speak of doing
kindness, you approve that men of virtue and talents who are left neglected
forget a reward. Since those who care about [benevolence and righteousness]
are few, who are able to be those of virtue and talents yet who are left neglected?
Since those who use [benevolence and righteousness] for their own beneﬁt
are many, how can you say to forget a reward? If you can encourage people
who are willing to give [to the poor], expect companions who want to be
benevolent, expound the meaning of forgetting reward and retribution, and
lead the people toward a mind of righteousness, then righteousness is truly
here and you are not far [from the goal] in seeking benevolence.

142

Fascicle Four

As to your statement, “[The Buddhist teaching is to increase good qualities, prevent evils, return the people to the grand submission to the natural
course,] deliver sentient beings [from evils], and cause them to enter into the
land of eternal life. It brings about widespread blessings for everyone, and
[the Buddha] is the highest of a hundred deities in nobility,” the intention of
this is nonsense, and it is not what I am concerned with in this discussion.
Isn’t this like the case when the Qin army was about to escape and their messenger talked nonsense?338 How could I continue to press you? Please take
a seat. I will explain it to you.
Sages are [originally] placed above, and they do not have to strive for
supremacy against a hundred deities. If there is a beginning, there is an end.
How can you be in the land of eternal life? Well, the other world and this
world are distinguished clearly from each other. Various things are investigated
completely. From early times, when [people kept records by] tying knots,
up to the later period, when culture and education ﬂourish, [sages] lead the
nature of human beings by means of the Way. Therefore, they cut off the intimacy and fame of being praised. They manage Nature within the proper
rules. Nothing hurts the capacity of universal love. By hunting and ﬁshing,
both the wise and ordinary people are nourished. Game for its threefold use
[in hunting] is served to guests as a practical matter.339 Gold and precious
stones illuminate splendidly. A panpipe with thirteen reeds (sheng) and a
short ﬂute ( yue) harmonize the rhythm. Getting drunk and being satisﬁed
with kindness, one is beneﬁted in this way for ten thousand years. Recluses
[who do not serve the government] broaden new works every day, while ofﬁcials expound the teachings of ancient sage sovereigns. Sincerity is apparent
in bright rulers. Beneﬁts spread to all people. The dragon seal [of emperors]
manifests [magniﬁcent] views. Musical stones create harmonious rhythms.
These are for the paradise of Yao and Confucius.
During the time of obscurity, a man lives in seclusion on a hill or near
a mountain stream in order to attend to his own virtue. He kills chickens,
makes a variety of millet, and entrusts somewhat his ambition; or, [ just like
Yi Yin,] he carries a heavy three-legged caldron on his back to cook, becomes
famous and immortalizes his fame; or a man [like Taigong Wang Lü Shang]
butchers sheep, uses a knife [to cook], and lets his lofty aspiration ride the
drifting clouds. These are the ways for gentlemen to set the mind. Why is it

143

24c

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

necessary to consider the future blessings of the family that has accumulated
enough good deeds to be vile, to hope for the blessings of the next existence
of which there is no proof, to turn one’s back on the real pleasures of one’s
own lifetime, and to be tired of working in vain, without a place to return to?
[To practice something elusive like] trying to harness [shapeless] wind or
catch a shadow is not the grace of the golden mean of the Confucian school.
To admire a barbarian and to be confused by absurd things go against the goal
of a masterly mind. [A Buddhist monk’s] squatting or kneeling upright in
worship and [the Chinese style of] bowing complaisantly are inconsistent
with each other after all. I personally wish that you would give up practicing
both [Buddhism and Confucianism] and abide by [Confucianism] alone.
Metaphors such as a single-plank bridge, the two men [Guan]shu and
[Cai]shu, a person in the world [who keeps an unpolished gem and displays
it in a market], and an ofﬁcer in charge of translation, have nothing to do
with the original meanings. Therefore, I say nothing about them.

The Third Expatiation to
He of Hengyang

Sacred thought is difﬁcult to investigate, and a mysterious response is unforeseen. It is as the courtier [Ji Kang] said, “No matter how hard mediocrity
devotes himself, he cannot catch even a clue of it.”340 How could superﬁcial
and obstinate people search and draw out [an answer]? I vainly think that
[the inscription of Emperor Wen of the Wei dynasty, which denied the existence of] the cloth that could be washed in ﬁre (huohuanbu), was [engraved
in stone, but it was] cut down in a later generation,341 and Teng Xiu felt
ashamed of himself throughout his life [for his ignorance] about the barbels
of a shrimp.342 Therefore, I simply fear to judge with my own speculation
anything outside my consideration.
You have already discerned the truth or falsehood [of Buddhism]. The
scriptures of doctrines (fangshu) are everlasting,343 and their unique insights
are strong, durable, and skillful. It is difﬁcult to have doubts about them. I
will write a little more about what I think and explain it, itemizing in accordance with your responses. Since fortune and misfortune are mingled in the
matter, and foreign and Chinese [thoughts] are mixed in the meaning, although

144

Fascicle Four

I tried to make a brief and concise statement, it ended up becoming a petty
composition. After I send this out, I would like to maintain my silence.
You respond and say, “If, just as your point of argument, we consider
the three lines [of the Book of Changes] to be the three powers, the ﬁrst (bottom) line is intended to be the line of Earth and the third (upper) line is said
to be the rank of Heaven. [The Book of Changes,] however, [says,] ‘The one
can live in seclusion without regret.’ This does not mean a category of [things
like the Earth] which supports and contains all things in its largeness. [It is
also stated in the Book of Changes] that ‘Gentlemen are active and vigilant
[all the day].’ This does not refer to the deep blue [sky] (i.e., Heaven).
“As a matter of fact, as long as the two polarities, [Heaven and Earth,]
have no consigning basis, how can we take [the second line] to designate the
establishment of [the way of] people? Since the line is located between justice
and harmony, it is simply suitable to correspond to sovereign virtue.”
My explanation is this: According to former scholarship I have heard,
the simple symbol of the diagrams (xiang) begins with three lines (sanhua)
and the sixty-four hexagrams (jiangua or zhonggua) end with six lines (yao).344
With the three lines the foundation of the position of the three powers is set
up. [In the hexagram qian,] before the six lines change [each line shows]
what a group of dragons pass through.345 Hence, after the sixty-four hexagrams, the signiﬁcance of one’s course of action is clariﬁed. Therefore, [it
is stated in the “Explanation of the Words and Sentences” (Wenyan) in the
Book of Changes that] “The one can live in seclusion [without regret],”
“[Gentlemen] are active [and vigilant all the day],” “[This is ‘the dragon’]
lying hidden,” and “[Gentlemen] advance together with the movement of
time].”346 These are the meanings for sages to adapt to the circumstances of
their times and the way to unite [the diagrams]. If we consider that the two
polarities [Heaven and Earth] have no consigning basis, and we do not take
the second line to be designated for the establishment of [the way of] people
since the ﬁrst line is not intended for Earth and the third line is not positioned
for Heaven, then I do not understand on what basis your previous assertion
that “the three powers are one unit” arises.
If you still accept the theory found in the “Commentary of Appended
Judgments” (Xicizhuan) [in the Book of Changes] and you do not surpass

145

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

25a

the instruction received from your teachers, why do you take only the meaning
of the hexagrams correctly and decline the meaning of the simple symbol of
the diagrams? If there is [a theory of] the three powers other than [those formulated by Fu]xi and King Wen, this is “a new thought of spring and autumn,”
about which I have no idea.347 Moreover, although “The one can live in seclusion [without regret]” and “[Gentlemen] are active [and vigilant all the day]”
are not described for Heaven and Earth, the connotation for low and high
has not been lost overall. How could you reject the signiﬁcance in setting
up the foundation [of the three powers with the three lines] on the basis of
the treatises that are variations [of the original text]?
In addition, I know you say, “Since the line is located between justice
and harmony, it is simply suitable to correspond to sovereign virtue.” If there
are merely the lines for justice and harmony and rather unexpectedly there
is no person of justice and harmony, to what are the lines going to be applied?
If justice and harmony lie in [sovereign] virtue and all ordinary people cannot
have justice and harmony, my discussion that one is suitable to [Heaven and
Earth] cannot be seen as extravagant.
You respond, “[Moreover, you say,] ‘[If] wherever natural compassion
[arises] you exhaust the capacity of universal love, and [if] wherever the
feeling to be ashamed of evils [arises] you accomplish the righteousness of
[divine] help for honest people, you are the most benevolent and the most
righteous.’ This indicates that you admit that those who practice benevolence
and righteousness become the three powers.”
Again, you say that “Zichang and [Ji]zha cannot belong to the upper stratum, and Yi [Yin] and Yan [Hui] ought to belong to the lower stratum. People
who are qualiﬁed to put on yellow lower garments (i.e., ranking ofﬁcials such
as Zichang and Jizha) still fall below [the sovereign virtue of the three powers].
Although [you said the judgment of the two paths of sages and ordinary people
is easier than] giving instructions to one’s servants by merely gesturing with
one’s chin, since there is no warrant for high and low (i.e., sages and ordinary
people), a deluded one [like me] has not yet comprehended this.”
My explanation is this: The so-called most benevolent and most righteous
are designations only for those who have completely reached the acme of
benevolence and righteousness and who can receive [the virtue] standing on
an equal footing with Heaven and Earth. [By this] I do not mean that anyone

146

Fascicle Four

who has even a little bit of the feeling of shame for evils and of universal
love is in the three powers. As I have already explained this in my previous
discussion, I am surprised that you still have a question about this. In the
four [great elements] (i.e., the Dao, Heaven, Earth, and the Sage King) of
the universe,348 only the sovereign is an entity [among sentient beings]. We
know that those who make the two polarities [of Heaven and Earth] the three
[powers] are none other than sages. The Book of Changes and the Laozi
[Daodejing] come to the same [standpoint]. You should have no more doubts.
According to the grading of the Eastern Lu, [where the Duke of Zhou and
Confucius are from,] [Sun] Qiao (i.e., Zichang) and [Ji]zha do not fully equip
righteousness. Why are they placed higher to occupy the highest rank? In the
light of the basis of the western land (India), since Yi [Yin] and Yan [Hui] have
not attained the dharmakāya, they must be placed lower, in the rank of living
beings. In the discussion you gave me, you comment on Śākyamuni’s [teaching]
with the view of the Duke of Zhou. Therefore, my intention was taken contradictorily. I hope you will understand this. I have become rather verbose.
Sages become sovereigns or teachers, while wise people become subjects
or assistants of the teachers. When they approach supernatural achievement
smoothly, and are inﬂuenced by the great work, they can share the course of
action, and keeping silent and speaking are also achieved at the same time.
If one masters a part [of the virtue of Heaven and Earth] to this point, how
could he turn his back to become a ranking ofﬁcial of the yellow lower garment? You vainly see that there are those who cannot be ranked equally with
sovereigns, unreasonably and resentfully blame it on them, and do not know
to raise [the people in the three powers] up to the highest point. Furthermore,
it is not the feeling of sticking to principles. If you pointed out and concluded
like this, why do you say there is no warrant [for high and low] (i.e., sages
and ordinary people)?
You respond, “Yin and yang nourish the vapor [of people], while toughness and gentleness give them their natures. They each have a round head
and rectangular feet; they do not differ in their appearance. They have much
natural compassion and the feeling to be ashamed of evil. So does everyone.
For those who take part in and accept the two polarities [in order to be in the
three powers], however, it is necessary to hold benevolence and righteousness
as the ﬁrst step.”

147

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

25b

My explanation is this: If it is assumed that those who have a round head
and rectangular feet, and who most certainly have the sincerity of feeling
shame for evils and natural compassion in the same way, and who do not
differ in their appearance, can all take part in and accept the two polarities
[in order to be in the three powers], then is a group of people like Jiao (a
younger brother of King Zhuang of Chu state) and Zhi [who are known as
robbers] reckoned among those in the three powers? If this is actually impossible, we cannot place them on the same level with great people, if the only
reason for this is that they are equally human. It is difﬁcult for ordinary people
to become equal to [great people] in dignity and capacity. It has already been
stated that “The benevolent rest in benevolence and the wise seek benevolence,”349 “To practice energetically is close to benevolence,”350 and “The
one who is afraid of vice strives to be benevolent.”351 If we regard those [who
try to be benevolent for beneﬁt] in the same light as the one of the principal
seat, truth and falsehood become mutually indistinguishable. Zhuangzi says,
“In the world, the good people are few and those who are not good are
many.”352 If [the people] are divided like this, how can you say, “So does
everyone”?
You respond, “I feel that you want to limit [the qualiﬁcation of human
beings] with rank or proper equipages such as vehicle and clothes that [the
emperor] should carefully bestow upon his vassals. Consequently you cause
the nature of kind people and incorruptible scholars [such as Zichang and
Jizha] to be compared with that of beasts, and you see the wise, [such as Yi
Yin and Yan Hui,] who are capable and virtuous, as having the same physical
energy as shellﬁsh. Would the meaning to develop the symbolism of the
hexagrams be like this?”
My explanation is this: The reason to limit the qualiﬁcation [of human
beings in the three powers] with ranks or proper equipages such as vehicle
and clothes is indeed that [some people’s] natural dispositions do not qualify
them [to be equal to Heaven and Earth]. Although they want to avail themselves
of [ranks or proper equipages], what can be done about those who are suspicious or deceitful? We bear a numinous being in ourselves and become a
human being, which cannot be equated with beasts. In receiving vapor to be
born, even incorruptible scholars cannot have divergences. The symbolism
of the hexagrams shows numinous beings. It does not symbolize life. If you

148

Fascicle Four

see [a numinous being and life] as the same, would it not be rather a reckless
false accusation?
You respond, “[Furthermore, you say, ‘Now, sages] are equally placed
under [the great virtue] in the same way as people. . . .’ Such extraordinary
spirits are already different from [the spirits of] other living creatures. Why
would they all suddenly be the same under the law of receiving life? Life is
based on the law and the law differentiates [between sages and other living
creatures]. Then, on what basis is the same name ‘life’ given to other living
creatures? If you stick to this name ‘life,’ and cause the people to certainly
follow it, then is something undeﬁned and complete (huncheng zhi wu) also
included in this instance?”
My explanation is this: I said previously, “[In life, there is a common
feature of all things,] which is the same as what differentiates all things. How
could it be distinguished to attain life?” You responded to this, “I do not say
that this is not so.” Furthermore, you asked, “What merit is there in considering
that the life that is not different from each other must be sentient beings?”
This indicates that you contradict my [opinion] that [those who attain life]
are sentient beings, yet you accept [my opinion that life] is not different.
Could there be anything that is not different and not sentient beings? Therefore,
I again simply said: “Certainly, we must differentiate them on the basis of
their extraordinary spirits, but we should not distinguish them based on the
life they received.” You responded this time, “Why would they all suddenly
be the same under the law of receiving life? Life is based on the law and the
law differentiates [between sages and other living creatures].” May I ask you
about the law of receiving life? Is it originally yin and yang? I do not see the
difference [between sages and ordinary people in the law of life], but you
said that you have suddenly not been the same. If there are differences in the
law, isn’t it that [yin and yang] escape in vapor? Then, beyond yin and yang
there is moreover a realm [of transmigration of birth and death] where one
receives life. How should the three periods, [past, present, and future,] be
ﬁrmly founded? If the life of the undeﬁned and complete existence [before
the formation of Heaven and Earth] has a common vapor with that of people,
would this be the meaning of the undeﬁned and complete [that Laozi uses]?
If vainly in the name of life you do not see the truth of life, it does not match
your previous statement. If you say that life is not life, this means that people

149

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

25c

are not people. Venerable Sir Li’s (i.e., Laozi) theory about this, [namely that
something undeﬁned and complete that came into existence before Heaven
and Earth,] probably has such meaning. To censure something that exists by
means of a nonexistent thing is somewhat unprecedented.
You respond, “[Again, you say,] ‘If one carefully builds a fence [around
a house], and so on.’ You said at the beginning [of this series of arguments]
that emperors and sages set up the teaching to plan seasonal hunting and the
scriptures to prudently follow the seasons; in this way [they tried] to gradually
return to the cessation of extremities. Now, you criticize with the statement,
‘This is precisely the beginning of extremities.’ I have not known in detail
whether this rebukes my view or ridicules sages.”
My explanation is this: Formerly I read your original discussion, [the
Discourse on the Full Understanding of Life]. Regarding the section from
“the nine kinds of grains” up to “When Confucius ﬁshed, he did not use a
net,” I came to understand for the ﬁrst time that you meant in your discussion
that whatever is governed and produced originates entirely from the sages,
who are personally good teachers, in order to lead common people. In my
solitary, humble, and clumsy opinion, I would say that whatever [sages] do,
there must be reasons for their actions. Sages manage and control [their
actions], and do not let them go to excess. This is the great point of two
views, yours and mine, in deciding the issue, and the point on which you
and I differ. Since I am going to control its excessiveness, I have a theory of
stopping excessiveness. On the other hand, you just clariﬁed [the sages’]
preparing and providing. You, however, have not been aware in what way
[the sages] leave behind excessiveness. In your response, you said again,
“We will be the so-called one of excessive [desire] or the arrogant one. Sages
assuredly remove this.” I do not understand your intention here. Therefore,
recently I asked you about the issue of excessiveness. You replied and said,
“I have not known in detail who is to be rebuked.” Probably you forgot what
you said previously.
You responded, “[Furthermore, you say,] ‘Outside of a market and a
kitchen, and so on.’ Well, in offering to Heaven and Earth, calf’s horns [are
used]; in the state offering the three domestic animals, [cows, pigs, and sheep]
are sacriﬁced; and the thick soup of beef or pork is served in a wooden vessel
on a painted wooden stand to offer to guests of honor. An old man of seventy

150

Fascicle Four

years is not satisﬁed until he eats meat. Why can you merely display herbs
and medicines and reserve them as the best remedy? The reason I am worried
that [your argument] does not stand up is not that it is difﬁcult for me to
support your great discussion, but I take a step back and suspect this matter;
simply, [such dietary habits] cannot be suddenly removed from the world.”
My explanation is this: Shen Nong laid down how to live and the people
of the Zhou dynasty provided the instruction [for rites]. They already advocated a diet of grains. In addition, the best remedy was mentioned and sacriﬁce
was already offered. Moreover, [plants to be used for offering in rites, such
as] duckweed and white southernwood, were praised.353 In the way to offer
sacriﬁces [to Heaven and the ancestors] and the way to victuals, there is originally no ﬁxed method. I previously adduced that outside of the market and
the kitchen, there are other things that support and nourish us. I mean to
remove the longstanding [foul habit of] cutting meat apart or boiling it in
soup in order to clarify that there is more than one way to prolong one’s life
span, but I mean neither to manage the habits of the world nor [to insist] that
everyone must obtain and prepare herbs and medicines. Even with the merit
of eating the meat of domestic animals, however, it is rare to live a hundred
years. As a good aspect of taking divine herbs, I often hear about a life span
of a thousand years. For this reason I say, why is it necessary for an old man
of seventy years to appreciate the great favor of eating meat? If, however,
one who sequesters himself completely in a closed-in area gives up this [meat
diet], he simply has no other means [for his sustenance]. I think that [your
statement:] “[Such dietary habits] cannot be suddenly removed from the
world” is similar to “They (i.e., emperors and sages) cannot suddenly take
away [the habits that] remain entrenched [in the world],” which I expressed
in my previous expatiation. We can agree on a point for the ﬁrst time. Why
don’t you dare to attribute it to good? Since you understand that [these dietary
habits] cannot be suddenly removed from the world, probably you do not
think that the Way is complete in this [point].
You respond, “[Moreover, you say, ‘If you say that even though there
are spirits and they have no form,] could there be beings without form in the
world? and so on.’ I examined the intention [of this point] in your letter, as
[I feel] it seems you do not reject that there are spiritual beings. Just on the
point in which you say that spiritual beings should have some substance,

151

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

26a

isn’t it possible you are confused, since Indian books state that spiritual beings
become other living creatures? People of former days considered spiritual
beings to be [the foundation of] the teaching. Moreover, they wrote it down
in books and scriptures, and it is widely found in written materials. [Lord
Sun] Qiao (i.e., Zichang) of Zheng state and [Ji]zha of Wu state considered
this so, too. Therefore, when music is played six times [with the Chinese
zithers made out of wood from] Mount Yunhe, the spirits of Heaven really
descend from Heaven, and when it is played nine times [with the Chinese
zithers made out of wood from] Mount Longmen, the manes of people all
come and gather. You often adhere to the Rites of Zhou, but recently you disregard this meaning. Just now you berate beings without form. It is an incoherent argument!”
My explanation is this: It is not only that I do not reject that there are
spiritual beings but also I think that if there are [spiritual beings], they must
have a form. You do not think that they do not exist and I agree with you,
but we have different views on whether or not [the spirits] have [forms].
Hence, you recently questioned closely and wanted to demand [answers]
thoroughly. Please forget about the Indian theory, and strictly comply with
the Chinese classics. Moreover, put aside the issue that [spiritual beings]
become other living creatures. Let us discuss the exquisite spirits that ascend
far to [Heaven].
The appearance and the issue of existence or nonexistence should be
assuredly reported and settled. Spiritual beings are very often mentioned in
stories and writings. It is not that I do not understand their names and titles.
Recently I received three discussions [from you]. Every time I received [a
new discussion], the number of [spirits] increased. A myriad of spirits have
all gathered together, but you have not answered even a part of the question
[about the appearance and the issue of existence or nonexistence]. Even
though your letter is thorough and erudite, it does not relieve my thirst to
know. Regarding beings without form, you do not teach at all. You vainly
said that it is an incoherent argument, and considered it a common opinion.
If investigating honestly is considered to be incoherent, is being superﬁcial
and unsystematic considered to be fair and intelligent?
You respond, “[Again, you say: ‘[Zhuangzi’s and Xunzi’s] statements
are set forth] to admonish us for our future life,’ and so on. You have not

152

Fascicle Four

made it clear about so-called merciful people. What are they? If you depend
on the doctrine of reward and retribution [in accordance with] actions that
is stated in books other than [Confucian texts], it is entirely the teaching of
expedients to which I refer. In investigating the utmost doctrine, you have
not analyzed with the sages’ words and yet you have adopted many crafty
and strange [words] in order to support [your argument]. Can it be to give
the impression of rescuing by means of water from disasters caused by water?”
My explanation is this: Thinking about merciful people, I hear for a long
time that there are such people. Since you demand who they are, I would say
that they are Mañjuśrī and Śākyamuni. I know that you think the doctrine of
reward and retribution is entirely the teaching of expedients. The way of
expedients is mysterious and deep; only sages can accomplish it. Even though
you are proﬁcient in knowledge and understanding, you have not seen its
culmination. I am exhausted from trying to ascertain it, yet you easily make
your own judgment. It is very shameful. If what the doctrine of expedients
states is all deceptive and delusive, there would be no reward and retribution
in the [law of] Nature. I am reluctant to jump to a conclusion, while you
vehemently make an arbitrary decision. Again, this is dreadful! The spirit
[of the doctrine] is lofty, but the one who hears it is low. How can you bring
a false accusation?
I think that the “sages’ words” you mentioned must be the words of the
Duke of Zhou and Confucius. What we talk about now is entirely the issue
of “believing and following” [of which they speak]. Nevertheless, you say
that I have not analyzed [the issue]. This again shows a lack of complete prudence. Since your discussion respects the Duke of Zhou and rejects Śākyamuni, I refer to Śākyamuni and equate him to the Duke of Zhou. My answers
do not go beyond your questions. I do not feel that I have “adopted many
[crafty and strange words].” [Great men such as] You Yu and [Jin] Ridi were
not born in the Chinese region. How can we specify that there is no one who
has mastered the principles outside of the nine regions away from the royal
domain? It is also really difﬁcult to distinguish Buddhism from non-Buddhist
teaching (i.e., Confucianism). If you believe your own criteria, have only
your ears and eyes to teach you, and consider that everything except what
you have already learned and known is crafty and strange, then I will stop
my argument!

153

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

26b

You responded, “Furthermore, you say, ‘I think that there are no absurd
things. Each one is moved with good virtue, and so on.’ If these words are
certainly so, those who are moved with good virtue must be equal in degree
of seriousness, and the force of a sundial must have a certain extent in length.
As to decorations in building or construction, they are not initiated by a
benevolent mind. Even though hunting is done according to the [appropriate]
seasons, the extremely cruel nature [of human beings] has not been uprooted.
For what is a person rewarded to ascend to Heaven, which is splendid and
joyful? For what is one punished to fall into Hell, which is dark and full of
suffering? Excellent words come to an end in differentiating high from low,
and the law is made without a scale (i.e., measure or standard). All things
have come to this point!”
My explanation is this: I spoke of [the force of] a sundial in order to give
evidence [of perceiving reward or retribution]. The intention of your letter is to
raise a doubt that it is not necessarily that [actions and the way of reward and
retribution] correspond to each other and to suspect that there is no rule between
them, and then you again try to remove a fortunate response. A fortunate response
is nothing other than what is produced by fate. If a fortunate response is extinguished, there is no fate. You are accomplished in astronomy and proud of your
knowledge. I think that one who keeps it in mind to believe in the Way must
not come to this point. If you think that decorations in building or construction
are not initiated by a benevolent mind and it is worse than taking another’s life
in accordance with [appropriate] seasons, wouldn’t it be seriously ungrateful
to the mind of that man (i.e., Śākyamuni)? The emperor’s vehicle and seal are
not necessarily the sentiments of Yao and Shun. Would respectful buildings and
magniﬁcent offerings be Śākyamuni’s intention? To demand the reward [of
rebirth] in Heaven and to ask for punishment in Hell are very similar to the
stories that the ancient questioned [Zhou] Yafu (a general and minister of the
Han dynasty who died of starvation, as had been foretold by an elderly woman
physiognomist) about, and that Ying [Bu] asked a question [to a guest who had
foretold his future misfortune].354 How tasteful these words are! This is, however,
what many śramaṇas fully know. I will leave it out.
You responded, “Moreover, a guardian attendant who teaches and loves
[his master] encourages [his master] to abstain from eating the intestines of

154

Fascicle Four

dogs and hogs [which resemble those of human beings]. A good cook who
wields a knife [to butcher cattle for meat] feels afraid whenever he comes
to a complicated joint. The Sage is as bright as the sun and moon, and his
ediﬁcation can open the three powers. If [actions and the way of] reward and
retribution inevitably tally, how is it hindered by the teaching? Why was it
sealed in the ages of [Fu]xi and Tang [Yao]? Why was it buried in the time
of the Duke of Zhou and Confucius? In the beginning, nets [to catch animals
and ﬁsh] were made and this gave rise to a number of sins. [The practice of]
offering animal sacriﬁces was established and opened the punishment of the
long night [of spiritual darkness]. The heavenly kitchen (i.e., food naturally
collected) is abandoned, and those animals [that are] fed grass and grain are
considered delicious. There has been no benevolence to save people from
drowning [in extreme misery]. The cruelty of putting people into a dry moat
was carried out without restraint. In order that these acts not be repeated,
you should sincerely consider the issues deeply. If you think that the intelligence of the exquisite spirit [of sages] is not yet complete in some points,
even though you are thoughtful and love strange ideas, you have not come
to disgrace sages.”
My explanation is this: I know that you think the meaning of reward
and retribution was sealed in the times of [Fu]xi and the Zhou dynasty. For
this reason, you ascertain that it is testimony that [reward and retribution]
do not correspond to [good and bad actions]. The time of [Fu]xi and Tang
[Yao] was long ago, which no one knows fully. The record [of that time] in
the Book of History comprises no more than a few sections. When the merits
of virtue and punishment were just mentioned, they had no scope to record
the origin of weal and woe. Now, in the writings on emperors and kings, the
issue of a person’s life is still not written, but taking the lack of a written
record as evidence, you consider that indeed it did not exist in ancient times.
This is again a fault caused by considering your mind as your teacher.
Moreover, it is all displayed in the works of the Duke of Zhou and Confucius to believe and follow [the view of] blessings [left to one’s children]
and misfortune [which makes itself felt long after the seed was sown]. You
said, “[Why] was it buried [in the time of the Duke of Zhou and Confucius]?”
Was it [buried] just like a narrow path? Since there are familiar and unfamiliar

155

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

26c

in language and shallow and deep in teaching, is it to have the wise give this
and snatch away that?
While we live, we indeed have desires. When we have desires, we certainly
ask for something. If desires are not satisﬁed, there is conﬂict. If desires are
satisﬁed, the mind becomes peaceful. If we ﬁght, we harm each other. If we
are peaceful, we stabilize each other. The reason a net was made is to remove
harmful things in order to have peace. Furthermore, hunting and ﬁshing are
no different from the sacriﬁce of livestock. In the previous reply you were
already aware that sacriﬁces of livestock could not suddenly be removed from
the world. [Now] you say, “Wasn’t it possible to abandon at least hunting and
ﬁshing in ancient times?” This has not yet been a coherent discussion.
[The tendency] to cling to life becomes stronger the lower the social
class. Therefore, to try to dispense with death is [an action] of following
one’s feeling and to take away other [sentient beings’] lives is [an action] of
going against one’s nature. The perfect person (i.e., Śākyamuni) is esteemed.
Why would he offend and go against the natural course? From this, we know
that since we cannot suddenly remove longstanding customs, [Śākyamuni]
simply set up a system to control them. Even though the spirits of sages are
vigorous, they have nothing to make [people’s] ignorant minds wise and
clever. How could the people who left their homelands and wander in other
lands (i.e., those who left the truth and who do not know the way to return
to it) be better?355 The reason sin and punishment visit is that people themselves invite them.
The heavenly kitchen was involuntarily abandoned since [heavenly] matters are far away and difﬁcult for us to reach. Since substantial things are
familiar and easy for us to indulge in, [we feel that the meat of] domestic animals is always delicious. [Good deeds such as] saving a man from drowning
and taking a man out of a dry moat [in which he had fallen] are common to
many wise people, but [the way] to teach people differs [for each person].
It is not that the Way itself differs. Your reprimand that [I think the intelligence
of the exquisite spirit of the sages] is not yet complete in some points also
seems inappropriate. Zichang (Sima Qian) loved strange ideas, but it is originally not similar to this.
You respond, “When you talk about benevolence and righteousness, you
say ‘Those who care about [benevolence and righteousness] are few and those

156

Fascicle Four

who use them for their own beneﬁt are many.’ However, when you speak of
doing kindness, you approve that men of virtue and talents who are left neglected
forget a reward. Since those who care about [benevolence and righteousness]
are few, who are able to be the men of virtue and talents yet who are left neglected? Since those who use [benevolence and righteousness] for their own
beneﬁt are many, how can you say to forget a reward? If you can encourage
people who are willing to give [to the poor], expect companions who want to
be benevolent, expound the meaning of forgetting reward and retribution, and
lead the people toward a mind of righteousness, then righteousness is truly
here and you are not far [from the goal] in seeking benevolence.”
My explanation is this: “Those who care about benevolence and righteousness are few and those who use them for their own beneﬁt are many.”
I learned this [expression] from Zhuangzi’s book.356 It is not my own statement.
You hastily impeached me before you made a complete examination. Well,
“Since those who care about [benevolence and righteousness] are few and
those who use them for their own beneﬁts are many, no one is able to be a
man of virtue and talents. Yet who is left neglected, and how can you say to
forget a reward?” [Your statement] is really what I have diligently and prudently considered from the beginning: simply, we cannot set [human beings]
down for [the three powers] arranging with the two polarities [of Heaven
and Earth]. It is not something on which you should depend in order to show
that your great discussion is correct. If being willing to give [to the poor]
and forgetting a reward are to master benevolence, and if forgetting a reward
and giving [to the poor] tally with righteousness, we may leave behind the
word “want” [in the phrase “in order to hope for companions who want to
be benevolent”] and also remove the word “toward” [from the phrase “lead
the people toward a mind of righteousness”]. If [righteousness is truly] here
and you are not far [from the goal in seeking benevolence], who would not
long for these?
You respond, “As to your statement, ‘[The Buddhist teaching] is to
increase good qualities, prevent evils, return the people to the grand submission
[to the natural course], deliver sentient beings [from evils], and so on,’ the
intention of this is nonsense, and it is not what I am concerned with in this
discussion. Isn’t this like the case when the Qin army was about to escape
and their messenger talked nonsense?”

157

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

27a

My explanation is this: Your discussion holds [the teachings of] the Duke
of Zhou and Śākyamuni. I also respond to it taking [examples] from both
the foreign land (India) and the land of Zhou (China). You repress [the teaching
of] that land using [the teaching of] this land, and you say that the highest
level of happiness is [achieved] in an illustrious family. I inculcate [the teaching of] that land, explain [the teaching of] this land, and say that [the Buddhist
teaching] brings about widespread blessings for everyone. Based on the views
of this land, you say that blessings rest with high-ranking ofﬁcials. I believe
in the information from that land and say that [the Buddha] is the highest in
nobility among a hundred deities. These are controversial points in our discussion. Why do you say “It is not what I am concerned with [in this discussion]”? The foundation of the criticism of this discussion takes [presenting]
by turns to be the essence. If every time it gets beyond your control you say
that it is vast and preposterous, then the road to look for principles is nearly
blocked up. The statement “When [the Qin] army was about to escape [and
their messenger] talked nonsense” is probably not relevant to this case.
You respond, “How could I continue to press you? Please take a seat. I
will explain it to you. Sages are [originally] placed above, and they do not
have to strive for supremacy against a hundred deities. If there is a beginning,
there is an end. How can you be in the land of eternal life? And so on.”
My explanation is this: “How could I continue to press you?” How
wholeheartedly you strive after virtue! “Please take a seat, and I will explain
it to you.” What great expressions these are! In general, would being a leader
of people be something to attain through ﬁghting? [The one who becomes
a leader] not only refrains from ﬁghting but also certainly assumes a humble
attitude. When you see the phrase “The highest in nobility among a hundred
deities,” you may not think to contend with a hundred deities for supremacy.
Instead, you take it as Lord Teng and Lord Xue, [who fought each other for
supremacy]357 and forget to master benevolence. I am aware that you think
there is a beginning and an end in things, and that there is no land of eternal
life. If we look for it within our realm [of existence], it is true, just as the
purpose of your letter, and it is just as I said in my previous expatiation, “Various existing things are really suitable for this (i.e., in the great law of Nature
life and death are the same in arising and falling).” As to illustrations in the

158

Fascicle Four

Book of Mountains and Seas and records in the Biographies of Arrayed Transcendents, these issues are concerned with this world, but they can no longer
be traced back, not to mention the case where the Way separates from common
practices and the principles separate from an ordinary pattern. Since something
is not within your own [experience], you think that it must be entirely discarded. This is again hard to understand.
You respond, “Well, the other world and this world are distinguished clearly
from each other. Various things are investigated completely,” and so on.
My explanation is this: When I came to examine the section on this subject, [I realized that] you enthusiastically relate [historical events of] successive
generations. Your writing is extensive, the content is complete, and you are
very good at methods [taught by] your teacher. Your voice to sing for the
world of sages is vigorous, but you simply have not made a key remark in
studying to ﬁnd the signiﬁcance of the Way. Formerly, when I was young, I
spent a little time randomly studying a large number of historical records. I
have been vaguely informed of the outline of the ways of emperors and kings
and the traces of the virtuous and the intelligent. I dare to thank you for your
detailed explanation. You have given me a generous instruction. Truly you
are diligent in the management of business.
You respond, “Why is it necessary to consider the future blessings of
the family that has accumulated enough good deeds to be vile, and to hope
for the blessings of the next existence of which there is no proof” and “[A
Buddhist monk’s] squatting or kneeling upright in worship and [the Chinese
style of] bowing complaisantly are inconsistent with each other after all. I
personally wish that you would give up practicing both [Buddhism and Confucianism] and abide by [Confucianism] alone,” and so on.
My explanation is this: [The issue that the future] blessings [of the family]
that has accumulated [enough good deeds] are not considered to be vile was
already explicated in the section of “believing and following.” The issue about
hoping thoroughly for the next existence was also [presented] completely, when
I spoke of perceiving reward or retribution. The ﬁve-colored strings of the
emperor’s ceremonial cap (zao) and the emperors’ ceremonial gown [of
dragon patterns] (gun) and the great robe of fur (daqiu) [worn by emperors
for the rite of making sacriﬁcial offerings to Heaven] are the same, and

159

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

27b

integral to the rites. Why wouldn’t it be possible that [a Buddhist monk’s]
squatting or kneeling upright in worship and [the Chinese style of] bowing
complaisantly are practiced together in the same world? In principle, it is
possible to practice them concurrently. Do not presume that [one of them]
should be rejected.
You respond, “Metaphors such as a single-plank bridge, the two men
[Guan]shu and [Cai]shu, a person in the world [who keeps an unpolished gem
and displays it in a market], and an ofﬁcer in charge of translation, have nothing
to do with the original discussion. Therefore, I say nothing about them.”
My explanation is this: These several passages in my latest letter arose
somewhat from a joke. It is similar to the incident in which the story of the
people of Yue, [who were always naked,] asked about clothing was adopted
in an old tale. When an arbitrary opinion has come to this point there is no
help, but it is just very strange. The reason, however, that I questioned using
the metaphor of two persons, [Guan]shu and [Cai]shu, is because I want to
dispel your suspicion that [a diet without meat could not be recommended
to] common people. Since you have never responded to this, it is really promising [for me]. You are powerful, as if allied nations follow you just like
clouds, and your great discourse has become popular. I, [on the other hand],
live apart from society, and every time I present my solitary opinion, it is
commented on in whispers. There is no doubt of the fact that I am not equal
to you in this way. I truly rely on a versatile scholar. We are common in principles. I abruptly forgot about the troublesomeness [of this] and have greedily
written all to my heart’s content.
End of Fascicle Four of The Collection for the Propagation
and Clariﬁcation [of Buddhism]

160

Fascicle Five

The Discourse on Regeneration
(Gengshenglun)
by Luo Junzhang

It is good that the scholar Xiang [Xiu] said, “What is Heaven? It is the general
name of all things. What is Man? It is one of the things in Heaven.” From
this, we may say that each thing has its own term of existence, while Heaven
and Earth are everlasting. In that case, changes of the everlasting [Heaven
and Earth] do not go beyond [the boundary of] all things from the beginning.
If all things did not regenerate, Heaven and Earth would have an end. Heaven
and Earth are not supposed to have an end. So we can conclude that [all
things] regenerate.
I seek [this fact] in various ancient discussions. It is said that “Omens
of all things were determined a long time ago. All living creatures repeat
birth and death,” “The sage composed the Book of Changes, in which the
culmination was already provided,” “To trace to the very source of the spirit
is to know [the law of] transformation,”358 and “To trace to the very source
of the principles is [to know] completely the nature [of all things].”359
If it is possible to trace to the very source of the spirit, anything that has
a form cannot have no term of existence [in this world]. In that case, human
beings and things have their ﬁxed terms. You and I have our own station [in
existence]. It is impossible that existence extinguishes and becomes nonexistence. It is impossible that you can transform to become me. Gathering,
scattering, disappearing, appearing, we circle round and round on our eternal
path. [Anyone]—the wise, the ignorant, one who lives long, or one who dies
young—circles round and returns to one’s [original] being. [The circle] spontaneously goes on consistently, and there is not an iota of difference. Together
with their fate [all things] extinguish and then return. People of the world are
absurdly not aware of this. How far and distant it is! Its way is profound. Even
though Heaven and Earth are vast, they are harmonious, without disorder.
Although all things are numerous, they are sorted according to their
classes. Each of them has its foundation. There is the sequence in successive

161

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

27c

ancestors. In the direct line and the collateral branches for a hundred generations its longstanding [element] is never lost. Furthermore, the spirit and
the physical substance are a natural couple. The natural couple’s separation
and reunion are the change in birth and death. There are gathering and scattering in the physical substance. It is the natural course of transmigration [of
birth and death]. When people and things undergo change, each of them goes
[from life to death]. Each is its own part in going [from life to death]. Therefore, when each of them returns [from death to life], there is a principle. Even
though things are confused and indistinguishable when they scatter, they are
not out of order when they gather. The farther they go, the closer they return.
In addition, the spirit and the physical substance profoundly meet each other,
and spontaneously unite together exactly, just as two pieces of a tally ﬁt
together. People of the world all lament that uniting leads to separation without
fail, yet no one consoles himself with [the thought] that separation leads to
uniting without fail, as well. All people know that gathering leads to scattering
without fail, but no one recognizes that scattering leads to gathering without
fail, as well. They do not give much thought to this [matter]. How could there
be distance [between uniting and separating, or gathering and scattering]?
Generally, since the present existence arises in conformity with the former
existence, [present] affairs are in alignment with past affairs. In the essence
there is nothing disordered. In the intention, we are not aware that [the one
of the former life] profoundly unites with [the one of the present life]. Who
would say “I realize this”? Now, a talker merely knows that the one of the
former life is not [the one of] the present life, but he simply does not know
that the one of the present life is the one of the former life. Those who have
extensive views, therefore, see that life is equal to death, and say that life and
death are just like wakefulness and sleep. How true this statement is!

Sun Changsha’s Letter
[to Luo Junzhang] by
Anguo (Sun Sheng)

I have examined the Discourse on Regeneration, in which you sum up the
issue of changes, and thoroughly analyze gathering and scattering. Your
logic is distinguished. Moreover, your purpose and composition are also

162

Fascicle Five

pleasant. This is a good discussion. Nevertheless, I still have a different
opinion.
Since now there are innumerable cases that all things transform into
other forms, you do not miss in complying with the law. However, it takes
many years until what is hidden reveals itself. If this is so, the cases that all
things transform [into other forms] should still be many, but there is no case
that being obtains its [original] form again. When things exhaust the condition
[to exist in this world], they must go far off to an unseen place where our
ears and eyes cannot perceive them. Only at that point do they return to their
foundations. Therefore, I think that since our physical bodies scatter all over,
so do our sensory perceptions. They are disorderly, confused, and mixed,
and they transform into other substances. Each of the other substances loses
its former [state]. They are not what they used to be. This is the reason why
all creatures that have feelings grieve. If this is so, you cannot console only
yourself.

Response to Sun [Sheng]

I received your letter. Your composition is brief yet your purpose is expressed,
and the logic upholds actual facts. Even though I am glad for your simple
and easily understandable reply, I have not yet appreciated it. Moreover, I
have in my mind small and unimportant things endlessly. Please examine
my original [discourse again].
In the original [discourse] I did not say that things do not change at all.
Each of those things that change, however, attains by itself what it transforms
into. Those that decay do not lose their former essence. Who takes charge
of molding them, namely, mixing [clay] and making [each form]? This statement is the most apt for the case. [Things] are separated and never thrown
into disorder. If they are like this, would regeneration occur only once?
[Things] arise endlessly and regenerate for a long time. When they come to
an end, they return to the beginning. The truth is evident. While you are not
able to know the present, how can you know about [the next life after] regeneration? Probably, since my grief had accumulated, I spoke in a rough way
and consulted with you about what I came to understand. How could it be
said that I console only myself? I simply have a little diversion under pretense
of this.

163

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

The Discourse on the Immortality
of the Spirit (Shen bumielun)
by Zheng Daozi (364–427)

28a

Many [people] think that body and spirit perish together and the function
of the spirit (zhao) and consciousness are extinguished along with them.
Can it be explained why this is so? All people of the world already consider
the Duke of Zhou and Confucius to be the culmination. Benevolence, righteousness, and ethical education were ﬁrst formed in their minds. The foundation of the spiritual intelligence is never mentioned in even a single word.
Therefore, [in their teachings] what is done with sensory perception is limited
within the concrete [realm]. The Buddha speaks words of the utmost importance, but ordinary people do not believe in him. I fell into delusions when
I was young, but I thought to get out of the delusions. I sought the profound
purport and examined the essence of the spirit. I realized that the principle
is more exquisite than a physical body and the spirit is more subtle than the
principle. Entrusting what has appeared, I will transmit my mind and brieﬂy
adduce the testimony. I hope that this will shine upon all who will be awakened to [the truth] and consequently contribute to [removing] longstanding
delusions.
Spirit and body are mixed and come together. Even though they exist
together while one lives, with regard to the point that there is a difference
between coarseness and subtlety in their origins, there is a distinction between
corporeality and incorporeality. Why do I say this? A body consists of the
ﬁve viscera (i.e., liver, lungs, heart, kidneys, and spleen), the six entrails (i.e.,
gall, stomach, bladder, the three parts of the abdominal cavity, small intestine,
and lower intestine), the limbs and the seven apertures in the head (i.e., eyes,
ears, nostrils, and mouth). All unite to become one [body]. Therefore, one is
alive. At just the moment when people are born, each one receives the ﬁve
primary elements in a different way [from others]. Hence, some people suffer
from being crippled in a limb or some part of the body, or lack either ears or
eyes, but this does not prove fatal. Even with the body it is like this, not to
mention with the spirit whose essence mysteriously shines. It governs all
bodies ingeniously. Body and breath move together, while the spirit and the
wonderful realization ﬂow in the same way. Although motion (i.e., the body)

164

Fascicle Five

and inactivity (i.e., the spirit) support each other, exquisiteness and coarseness
separate from each other in their origins. Wouldn’t it be because each has its
origin and they depend on each other to function? When you take a familiar
example of this, the reason is clear. I hope you can comprehend this.
In what a body supports, muscles and bones have sensations of pain and
itching, while nails and hair do not. Why is this so? Wouldn’t it be because
muscles and bones are the essence of life but nails and hair are not the foundation of life? When life is in the foundation, sensations exist. When life is
in the periphery, there is no sensation. For the function of a body, it is still
considered that the foundation and the periphery are concerned with rising
and falling, not to mention the spirit that is the foundation of life, and whose
origin is the most subtle. How could [the spirit] wither along with a seven
chi-tall [body] and be exhausted together with [the sense organs that are like]
doors and windows? If you infer from this truth, you can clearly understand
that the spirit is immortal.
A guest criticizes, “Your argument on the body and spirit is complete.
It is astute to speak of sensibility and insensibility in a body. Nevertheless,
even though the body and spirit have different origins—[the body] is of
coarse origin and [the spirit] is of subtle origin—both consider existence to
be their status. The reason for being is that life is the foundation. Why, then,
is it possible that the foundation of existence has become exhausted and that
which has depended on the foundation alone exists? Beyond the outside of
life, it is vast and completely obscure. Since it is completely obscure, it is
not only that there is nothing to establish with words but also that there is
nothing to extablish with consciousness. If it is not established by the consciousness, where does the spirit deposit itself? Since there is nothing [into
which the spirit] can deposit itself, how can it be immortal?”
I respond, “Your criticism is good as an argument. It has not yet been
based on the mind. Is this why a criticism such as this comes up? Now all
changes are entirely existence. Prospering, declining, rising, falling, dying
or being born, take the place of each other. A body becomes exhausted and
another is born. This is the whole process of a living being. With regard to
water and ﬁre, they prevail over all sentient beings thoroughly and are abundant, without deﬁciency. Wouldn’t it be because the essence of ﬁre follows
things, the law of water annihilates [water itself] and follows others, [both

165

28b

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

ﬁre and water] are not self-generated when they are generated, they are what
all sentient beings depend on, they are useful in the light of [other things],
and therefore things cannot use them up? Even [ﬁre and water that] exist in
the same sphere of life are clever in this way, not to mention the principle
of the spirit that is singularly transcendent and unparalleled. It is not on the
same level with ordinary things, but is it ﬁxed that, since it is outside of life
and is completely obscure, the spirit has nothing into which to deposit itself?
If we carry out a discussion on this basis, the Grand Terminus (taiji) is the
mother of the two elementary forms [yin and yang], and the two elementary
forms are the foundation of all things.360 The Grand Terminus, [however,] is
simply the vapor of Heaven and Earth. It can still unite the roots of all these
changes, and it does not change that it is the root. How much more can the
spiritual intelligence—the apex of the numinous being that exhausts both
existence and nonexistence—do? You can comprehend that [the spirit] is
immortal.”
The critic says, “You infer that the function of the spirit is beyond the
body and you indicate that the Grand Terminus comes before things. This is
really signiﬁcant. It is, however, valuable that reason satisﬁes the minds [of
people]. Then a discussion can [actually] be carried out. The spirit and the
body have not been separate from each other even for a moment. If they were
separate from each other, there would be no spirit. There is no spirit in trees
and plants because they do not have consciousness. When the body is
exhausted, to what does the spirit attach itself, being called immortal? If it
is able to be immortal, it rides on the numinous being [of the dead] without
availing itself of a body. Since it does not avail itself of a body, why does it
exist with a body? It is not separate from [the body] at last. If [the spirit and
the body] cannot be separated from each other, it can certainly be understood
that the foundation of life [in both spirit and body] is the same.”
I respond, “There is a criticism of this. The body and the spirit have their
own origins. Let me explain it for you from the beginning, in orderly fashion.
As to ﬁre, there is ﬁre on the basis of ﬁrewood. If there is no ﬁrewood, there
is no ﬁre. Even though ﬁrewood is a device to make ﬁre, it is not the foundation of ﬁre. The foundation of ﬁre spontaneously exists, and simply comes
to function complying with ﬁrewood. If ﬁrewood came before ﬁre, would it
be reasonable to say that there was no ﬁre before Suiren (a legendary ruler

166

Fascicle Five

who ﬁrst discovered ﬁre)? The foundation of ﬁre is the utmost degree of
yang, and yang is the culmination of ﬁre. Therefore, ﬁrewood is what ﬁre
deposits itself into, but it is not the foundation [of ﬁre]. That the spirit and
the body avail of each other is also like this. Availing of and complying with
each other are merely the cause of the path [of transmigration] of birth [and
death]. Why could it be that if there is a body, the spirit exists; and if there
is no body, the spirit is exhausted? Its foundation is entranced, unconscious,
and indescribable.
“Let me extensively give an example in order to clarify this for you.
When ﬁrewood is in water, ﬁre is dead. When ﬁrewood is out of water, it
makes ﬁre.361 The ﬁrewood remains the same, but ﬁre is designated beforehand
[to either burn or be extinguished in accordance with conditions]. That the
spirit does not rely on a body is also like this. You can understand thoroughly
that the spirit does not need a body.”
The critic says, “It cannot be promptly concluded that the spirit does
not need a body. If [the spirit] does not need a body, as you said, what avails
itself of a body and what shines alone are usually the same in the principles.
Even though [the spirit and the body] avail themselves of each other, this is
not interdependence in the foundation. According to what the Buddhist doctrine clariﬁes, we must educate and mold this spirit in order to save that body.
Why is this so?”
I respond, “Your question has some intention. This is what ordinary people
are deluded by, because they have not reached the foundation. Although the
spirit does not need a body, that body is surely produced. In the body that is
surely produced, this spirit certainly dwells. If [the spirit] certainly dwells in
[the body] that is surely produced, the function [of the spirit] and the perception
[of the body] become one, and they are spontaneously beneﬁcial to each other.
If they are spontaneously beneﬁcial to each other, it is the highest degree of
educating and molding in the principles. If it is [the highest degree of] educating
and molding, it is fruitful. If it is fruitful, the Way is practiced. This can be
compared to [the relationship between the changes of] the four seasons and
[the changes of] all things. How could it be intentional to be mutually beneﬁcial?
It is what the principles follow and what is naturally reached.”
The critic says, “I have respectfully heard that although the body and
the spirit are different from each other, they are mutually beneﬁcial. You

167

28c

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

have already compared the spirit in the body to ﬁre in ﬁrewood. Firewood
has no intention to make ﬁre and ﬁre has no frame of mind to deposit itself
into ﬁrewood. Therefore, they can collaborate endlessly. They spontaneously
transform together for a long time. It is not that the ﬁre of this ﬁrewood moves
to that ﬁrewood and becomes ﬁre. Nevertheless, in Buddhist doctrine, on the
basis that after the body is exhausted [the spirit] further dwells in that body,
the coming into and going out [of life] of the spirit and the body originate in
evil acts and meritorious deeds. Let me ask you: If this body performs evil
acts, are evil acts done by the physical body or by the spirit? If the body [commits evil acts], [the body] is merely one of all things created by the Great
Founder.362 If the spirit [commits evil acts], since the spirit does not act independently and is tied to something else, namely the body, your assertion that
the body and spirit do not avail themselves of each other fails in this point.”
I respond, “It is good to have this question so that I can explain the reason
thoroughly. I said [previously] that body and spirit do not avail themselves
of each other, by which I simply meant that they have different foundations.
Once they come into life, in the endless transmigration of birth and death each
of them pervades its function. If this life is used in order to commit evil acts
and perform meritorious deeds, could it be possible that the spirit performs
its function subtly by itself and does not do anything for the function of the
body? If this is so, it would be intentional to be [either] wise or ignorant. It
is not that [the spirit] neglects the function and mysteriously meets with [a
body]. It is logical that [the spirit] meets mysteriously with [a body], and it
is logical that the body is exhausted. The spirit that was educated dwells in a
body. You do not doubt the original [assertion that spirit and body are interdependent]. That (i.e., the previous discussion) and this (i.e., the latter discussion) follow the same logic. Why do you doubt only the latter part?”363
The critic says, “The spirit functions in conformity with the body, and the
body functions in accordance with the spirit. This is exactly so! Since realization
derives from the spirit, delusion lies in the spirit as well. The spirit follows the
body. Therefore, there are the wise and the ignorant. Being wise or ignorant
is not [a function of] the spirit but [results from the fact that] the spirit does
something in the functioning of the body. [The spirit] revolves in the three
periods (past, present, and future) for a very long time, beyond calculation.
Being wise or ignorant has no beginning, and the potency [of being wise or

168

Fascicle Five

ignorant] becomes evident midway [through the course of the transmigration
of birth and death]. The law of non-beginning is profound, while the potency
[manifested] midway is immature. Could it be possible that what exists in
the later potency rises far above the origin of non-beginning? If you have a
good [explanation] for me to understand this thoroughly, please let me follow
in your footsteps.”
I respond, “Since you inquired into the origin [of being wise or ignorant],
you made this statement. In the principles there is neither beginning nor end.
The culmination of profundity is boundless. Once we have already been born
or transformed, continuously committing evil acts or performing meritorious
deeds simply takes place naturally. So-called sagacity truly derives from the
ears and eyes, but the foundation of the ears and eyes is not sagacity. What
is called being wise or ignorant really ought to have a beginning. If there is
already being wise or ignorant, nothing about the beginning can be known.
There is something, but it cannot control [other] things. There is only nothing
[as the foundation] that is later able to become to what things return. If there
is a beginning, it is impossible to have no end.364 Only when there is nonbeginning do beginning and end become inexhaustible. This is naturally a
matter of course. It is impossible [to deny this]. Based on the assumption
that things have a beginning, you cannot demand that the spirit is the same
as things. The Way of the Spirit is abstruse and subtle. The ultimate principle
is unspeakable. As the principle is indicated indistinctly, we come to understand it together. If we seek for the foundation from the end, we are apt to
fail to catch its entirety. So I would like to abide by this viewpoint and hope
that it offers steps to lead to the peak [of realization]. If you [were to continue
to] indulge in arguing and competing in compositions, I know that you
should cease.
“The Hongfan chapter [of the Book of History] speaks of the foundation
of living. On this point it is the same as Buddhism. As to the matter that in
what the Buddha expounds there are many [statements like] the Milky Way
[that are too far-fetched to gain credulity],365 this is simply because you
indulge in daily matters. Shangchen (King Mu of Chu state) extremely transgressed against [ethics] (i.e., he killed his father, King Cheng), but his descendants made the state prosperous. Yan [Hui] and Ran [Boniu] were virtuous,
but they were not well known because they died young. The teaching of the

169

29a

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

Duke of Zhou and Confucius is for matters of this world (i.e., this existence).
If this reason is inferred, it can be understood.
“Let me extend the testimony in order to examine it in more detail. If
one receives a numinous being and embraces harmony, he can master the
ultimate way and become pure. Yao begat Danzhu, who was stupid and evil,
who had no sense of order, and who did not know benevolence and righteousness. Gusou begat Shun. When we trace the origin of [Shun’s] birth,
[we ﬁnd that the father] was not a man who could raise [a virtuous son].
When we seek the principle [based on the teaching of the Duke of Zhou and
Confucius, we know that] good qualities should be passed on, but the [real]
matters are like this. You, however, said that the Buddhist doctrine is unrealistic. Shouldn’t you realize [that this is not true]?”

The New Discourse
on Body and Spirit
by Huan Junshan

I, [Lu] Cheng (425–494), think that Junshan had never heard Śākyamuni’s
teaching, but he already excerpted the simile of ﬁrewood and ﬁre when he
discussed [the relationship of] body and spirit. In the later disputant’s statement, there is a point that obscurely matches with [this simile]. Accordingly,
I carry on [his discourse] here.
I once visited the former magistrate of Chen county, Du Fang, who [now
resides] in Tong prefecture. I saw that he was reading Laozi’s book. He said,
“Laozi preserved his health by [living] a tranquil life without worldly desires
and enjoyed his life for as long as several hundred years. Today if we practice
the way he did, would we be able to prolong life and stay young?”
I responded, “Even though [human beings] are the same in form and
name, each has a different degree in their temperament, nature, and ability.
Some have strong air, some have weak air; some have determined air, and
some have timid air. By loving, cultivating, and appropriately using [our
natures and abilities], we can simply alleviate [the pain of] our aging. It is
just like if we take good care of clothes, footwear, and utensils, they remain
in good condition and last long.”
Nearby I saw the embers of a ﬂaxen torch that hung down one chi. On
the basis of this, I then made the analogy, “[The condition] of the spirit dwelling

170

Fascicle Five

in a body is similar to that of a ﬁre burning a [ﬂaxen] torch. If we are good
at holding it and shifting its position in accordance with the ﬂame, it is possible
that the ﬁre will not go out until the torch fuel is entirely consumed. Without
the torch, no ﬁre can be produced by itself in emptiness. Moreover, it is impossible for the embers [of the torch] to burn after [the ﬁre goes out]. The embers
are like a person’s aging and inﬁrm [body]. When teeth fall out, hair turns
grey, and muscles lose their vigor, the spirit cannot invigorate [the body].
When [the symptoms of aging] completely cover the inside and outside [of
the body], the vapor is exhausted and we die. It is just as the ﬂame and the
torch come to an end together. [Suppose] a man encounters an evil thing and
is injured or falls ill. If he does not receive [medical] treatment or meet a good
doctor, he will probably die an unnatural death. If he dies [in this way], his
muscles and bones are usually just like ﬂames that are fanned by a strong
wind, which are not protected from [being extinguished], and which die out.
Namely, the body remains, [just as] the main part [of the torch] remains.
“Once while sitting and drinking in my inner chamber at night, I lit a
ﬂaxen torch. In the midst of burning, the torch was crushed and about to go
out. I closely inspected it by myself and found that the bark [of the torch]
covered [the top] like a scab. So I supported [the torch by my hand] and
shifted its position. Consequently, the ﬂame recovered [its strength]. This
indicates that when a human body has a sickness or is severely injured, if it
is taken care of and maintained well, it is possible to restore the body to
[good] condition.
“Furthermore, no one can know the beginning of the time of his birth,
and even when he gets old, he ought not to know when he will die, either.
In ancient times, when it was a peaceful world, people were born under goodness and prosperity. All were strong and enjoyed longevity. They lived for
about a hundred years and died. When they died, they looked like they were
sleeping and suddenly [their spirits] left [their bodies]. It is just like fruits
and grains that fully ripen and naturally fall [to the ground]. People of later
ages are victimized by the vicious vapors of declining and waning. Moreover,
they lose [their chance for] a timely marriage and work excessively and diligently despite hardships. Hence, even if they give birth, both [parents and
children] are impaired, and their bones, muscles, blood, and breath are not
strong enough. Therefore, many people die of misfortune that shortens their

171

29b

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

life, or while still young in midlife. When they fall ill, they may suffer from
pain, sadness, and worry, and later they pass away. Therefore, we sigh, we
hate death, and we consider it to be a great [occasion].
Formerly Lord Jing of Qi state praised his state, commended his happiness, and said, ‘If from the earliest times there were no death, what would
that be like?’ Yanzi (i.e., Yan Ying), [prime minister of Qi state,] answered,
‘The Supreme Thearch considers that human death is good, the virtuous consider it to be a rest, and those who are not virtuous consider [that death is
simply] to go away.’366 Today [people] do not think to make effort to broaden
[their knowledge], to study every day, and to understand [the Way] thoroughly
in order to quickly rise in the world and become famous. If they have a long
life only coveting proﬁt and still seek to prolong their life, they are deluded
and do not understand [the truth].”
Someone criticized this, “When the body and spirit are compared to a
torch and ﬁre, it appears that there is a parallel point, but I am afraid that
there is not. The reason human skin and ﬂesh are healed spontaneously when
they are ﬂayed or injured is that the blood and breath circulate. When the
ﬂaxen torch is damaged, although it burns, it cannot completely recover [its
original force]. Hence, [human beings] grow with the spiritual breath. If the
torch is unable to recover by itself, this is probably what is considered different
[from human beings]. Why do you assert that [human beings and a torch]
are the same?”
I responded, “A ﬁre begins from the edge [of a torch], but the spiritual
vapor of a human being is within the body. It is gradually released from the
interior and united at the exterior. Even if it moves from the exterior toward
the interior, assuredly it is not necessary to go in from an edge. This is similar
to a red-hot charcoal ﬁre: if water is sprinkled on it, it may seem to be about
to go out but it glows again. This is the same as the case where the human
blood and breath stimulate the growth of skin and ﬂesh. When we look at
[the state of something after complete combustion, we ﬁnd] that some parts
become ashes, and other parts become embers. Why is it impossible to compare this to [the human body and spirit]?”
On another night I was talking with [Liu] Boshi, sitting face to face,
burning the oil of a lamp. Since the oil in the lamp was exhausted and the

172

Fascicle Five

wick was bare, the light was going out. Then, showing this to Boshi, I said,
“Human aging is also like the bare [wick of] the lamp.” Furthermore, I spoke
of the matter of the ﬂaxen torch that I previously [mentioned to you]. Boshi
said, “When the lamp [oil] and the torch burn out, we must add oil or switch
to a [new] torch. When a man becomes old, he should quickly pour [blood
and breath in his body in order to sustain his life].”
I responded, “A man has already received a body [from Heaven] and
formed himself. This is just like holding that lamp or torch. When [the lamp
and torch] are exhausted, how can they change themselves, since they have
been exhausted? When they are exhausted, the one who changes them is a
human being. That which quickly pours [blood and breath in a human body
in order to sustain its life] is Heaven. If Heaven is able to do well for human
beings and ﬁll up their bodies with blood and breath and strengthen their
muscles and bones, then their bodies and spirits become vigorous, even to
the extremities, and they live for a long time. Otherwise, they get a fatal
illness or are injured. It is just as a ﬂame lasts a short or long time according
to the quality of the oil or the length of the torch. If you want a lamp to add
[oil to itself] or a torch to [replace] itself [with a new one], it is impossible.
Just by collecting nearby oil in order to soak the tip of [the wick], or shifting
the position of the main part of a torch in order to make the ﬂame stable,
their brightness can be recovered. [But] when the foundation [of the ﬂame]
is exhausted, there is no longer anything to burn.
“Now, regarding the preservation of our health, we may be able to replace
a lost tooth, dye gray hair black, or regain lustrous skin and face, just as in the
case of collecting [nearby] oil or shifting [the position of] a torch. When life
comes to an end, [however,] one dies alone. Since intelligent people are aware
that it is difﬁcult to seek [a long life], they do not trouble themselves about that.
Ignorant people are deluded and hope to gain the power to add oil or replace a
torch. Therefore, they are anxious and restless. Moreover, trees, plants, and the
ﬁve kinds of grains spring up on the earth by the vapor of yin and yang, and
produce fruits and seeds when they mature. The fruits and seeds go back into
the earth and are later reborn. This is compared to human beings, birds, beasts,
and insects: all are born through the union of male and female. When they are
born, they grow up; when they grow up, they become old; and when they are

173

29c

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

old, they die. It is similar to the changes of the four seasons. To attempt to change
its nature and seek to practice a peculiar way are done only by those who are
deluded and who do not understand [the truth].”

The Discourse on Why Śramaṇas
Do Not Bow to the Sovereign
(Shamen bujing wangzhelun)
by Dharma Teacher [Hui]yuan

30a

During the reign of Emperor Cheng (321–342; r. 337–342) and of Emperor
Kang (322–344; r. 342–344) of the [Eastern] Jin dynasty, Chariot and Horse
General Yu Bing (296–344) had doubts about why śramaṇas treat the emperor
as equal to themselves, without regard to formalities. [Yu Bing] clariﬁed the
reason, and Cavalry General He [Chong] (292–346) responded to this.367 Later,
in the Yuanxing era (402–404) [of Emperor An (382–418)], Defender-inChief Lord Huan [Xuan] agreed with [Yu Bing], but he thought that Yu’s
argument was not complete. He then gave a letter to the eight executives, in
which he wrote:
“Even though the Buddha’s ediﬁcation is endlessly vast and infers the
world beyond the visual and aural senses, respect is considered to be its foundation. On this point, there is no difference between the [Buddhist] clergy
and laypeople. I assume that what they aspire for differ, but this does not
mean that respect should be abolished.
“In the Laozi [Daodejing], princes are considered equal to the three great
elements, [the Way, Heaven, and Earth].368 When [we examine] why they
are considered so important, [we ﬁnd that the reason] entirely lies in that
they support [all things] to grow and [the heavenly bodies] to move smoothly.
[Otherwise,] how could they be referred to be equal to the two polarities,
[Heaven and Earth,] only for the reason that sages are on the throne? [As the
Book of Changes says,] ‘The great virtue of Heaven and Earth is called life.’369
[The virtue] to make life all over the country and arrange all things lies in
sovereigns. Therefore, we respect the throne and we are gloriously courteous
to it. How could we vainly revere and value them? The signiﬁcance is simply
in the fact that sovereigns control [all things]. The reason śramaṇas are born
in succession and live with supports is also that they are every day under the
government ordinance [made by sovereigns]. How could it be that [śramaṇas]

174

Fascicle Five

enjoy the virtue [given by sovereigns] and abandon courtesy [toward them],
or beneﬁt from [sovereigns’] kindness but reject [the propriety of] paying
respect to them?”
At that time, many people of distinction both in and out of the government
responded [to Huan Xuan’s inquiry]. Although their statements did not awaken
[the people] of that time, they all made good points. [Nevertheless,] generally
[their statements] consisted only of what these people expressed from their
hearts, and [the objective] truth was hidden by [their subjective] feelings.
Consequently, this caused the supreme monk’s robes to be damaged by earthly
affairs. The mind that brightly aspires [for the Buddhist teaching] gave way
to human customs. It is sad! This is precisely a cause for the case that “[The
world and the Way] were lost to each other”370 or the bad luck that happens
every thousand years.
I am deeply afraid that the Great Dharma is going to ruin, and I am
impressed with [the old warning] that “Not to forget that previous lessons are
[a teacher for later events].”371 Hence, I wrote a discourse of ﬁve sections, in
which I actually expressed my humble intention. How could it be said that
[Buddhism], which is as deep as a gully, needs [my humble statement that is
as powerless as] the morning dew? I, however, would like to set forth my
boundless mind [for Buddhism]. I hope that among gentlemen of later generations those who hold Buddhism in esteem will read [my discourse] carefully.

Section One: Lay Buddhists
When we examine what Buddhism clariﬁes, we ﬁnd that in general the
idea of renouncing the world is considered different [from other teachings].
Generally there are four different classes for those who have renounced the
world: [bhikṣus, bhikṣuṇīs, śrāmaṇeras, and śrāmaṇerikās]. In propagating
the teaching and educating the people, their achievement is equivalent to
that of sovereigns, and their ediﬁcation concurrently takes the way of statecraft.
Regarding the time to awaken people, there is no time not to do so (i.e.,
people may be awakened anytime), but according to the period [in which
Buddhism] is encountered, [Buddhists may] go out [to edify others] or retreat
[for self-cultivation]. Therefore, following the rise and fall [of the world, the
teaching] simply becomes evident or not evident. Let me brieﬂy mention
here what among the issues can be discussed.

175

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

Those who remain householders and respectfully perform the Dharma
are the people who obey the [sovereign’s] ediﬁcation, whose feelings are no
different from those of people in general, and whose lifestyle is the same as
that of non-Buddhists. Accordingly, they have attachment to their families
and relatives and offer courtesy to their rulers. Courtesy and respect lie in
the foundation [of the people’s feelings]. Consequently, on the basis of [the
foundation,] the teaching is established. When we [inquire into] the origin
of [the foundation] we ﬁnd that the accomplishment is derived from the world
of antiquity. Therefore “By teaching love on the basis of the feeling of intimacy” we cause the people to become aware that there is spontaneous kindness. “By teaching respect on the basis of sternness”372 we cause the people
to become aware that there is a natural important one.
The two issues (i.e., relationships between parents and children and
between sovereign and subjects) actually stem from the reward and retribution
of the unseen world. Reward and retribution do not begin in the present life.
One must inquire into their origins. Therefore, [in Buddhism] retribution for
a sin is considered punishment, and [Buddhism] makes people fear [retribution]
and exercise caution for their later [existences]. [Rebirth in] Heaven is considered to be a noble reward, and [Buddhism] makes the people happy and
has them perform [good] acts for their later [existences]. These all clarify the
teaching with the law of reward and retribution, just as the shadow [responds
to the form] and the sound [follows the voice].
To submit causes is taken as proﬁciency, and [the teaching was established] without changing the nature. This is because if one treats oneself generously to maintain his life, he sticks to the confrontation [between himself
and others] and has confusion, a nuisance roots deeply, and he assuredly
never misses maintaining his life. He considers sensual desires to be a [pleasurable] garden, and music and women to be as joyful as sightseeing travel.
He is addicted to worldly pleasures, from which he is unable to escape by
his own effort. Accordingly, for the teaching to restrict [sensual desires, the
law of reward and retribution is expounded] and taken as the limit [of the
teaching for lay Buddhists], and nothing more than this is clariﬁed. Since
nothing more than this is clariﬁed [for lay Buddhists], generally [they] are
very much the same in obeying the law [established by the sovereign]. Therefore, it is impossible for them to receive the virtue [from their parents and

176

Fascicle Five

the sovereign] and yet fail to show courtesy toward them, or to beneﬁt from
the favor [of their parents and sovereign] and yet reject paying respect to
them. Consequently, [lay Buddhists] who are delighted with the teaching style
of Śākyamuni always ﬁrst admire their parents and respect their sovereign.
When one abandons secular [life] and takes the tonsure, he must await
the orders [of his parents and sovereign] and take action following [their
orders]. If the sovereign and the parents have doubts about [his determination
to abandon secular life], he should retreat, ask their intentions, and wait for
the time when they have the same state of mind as his. This is precisely the
reason why Buddhism values supporting [people’s] daily lives and helps the
sovereign educate [the people] in the way of administration. The purpose of
statements made by the advocates appears to be the same [as mine]. Therefore,
I have posited the distinction between Buddhist clergy (nei) and laypeople
(wai) in order to clarify the purpose regarding the three most revered people.
I have brieﬂy narrated the tenor of Buddhist scriptures and pronounced my
thoughts.

Section Two: The Buddhist Clergy
The Buddhist clergy are visitors from beyond the mundane world. Their
lifestyle is beyond that of people of the world. The teaching for them is to
master [the fact] that afﬂiction is caused by having a body and that afﬂiction
is ended through not preserving the body, to know that [the operation of] life
after life is derived from receiving the principle of the mutation [of birth and
death in the phenomenal world], and to seek the ultimate law of Nature
through not following the principle of the mutation [of birth and death]. Since
they seek the ultimate law of Nature through not following the principle of
the mutation [of birth and death], they do not value the support of [a sovereign
who] manages the movement of [Heaven and Earth]. Since they bring an
end to afﬂiction through not preserving the body, they do not esteem the
advantage of [the sovereign’s] welfare [toward the people]. This means that
principles and forms go against each other and monks and secular people
are contrary to each other.
This kind of person makes a vow for himself by taking the tonsure at
the beginning, and shows [his determination] in changing his ordinary clothes
[to monk’s robes]. Accordingly, in general all members of the clergy renounce
the world in order to pursue their aspiration, and they become different from

177

30b

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

secular people in order to realize their way. Since they become different from
secular people, their clothing code must not be the same as the secular rule.
Since they renounce the world, they ought to follow a lofty lifestyle. Well,
[Buddhist] monks are like this. Therefore, they are able to save secular people
who are drowning in the deep stream [of transmigration of birth and death],
uproot their deep roots [of karma] for numerous kalpas, profoundly lead
[them] to the ferry of the three vehicles, and open widely the passes to the
realms of heavenly beings and human beings.
If a person completes the virtue [of a monk], the Buddhist Way diffuses
[virtuous inﬂuence] over his family members of the six relations, and the beneﬁt
spreads to all people. Even though [monks] are not placed in the rank of princes,
[their way] is already compatible with the fundamental way the emperor rules
over the world, and they can let the people be as they are. Consequently, while
privately they oppose their family’s valuable [attachment to him and become
a monk], they do not go against ﬁlial piety. While they may lack the courtesy
of paying respect to the ruler in public, they are not impolite [to him].
Judging from this point of view, you know that if you go outside beyond
the principle of the mutation [of birth and death in the phenomenal world]
in order to seek the ultimate law of Nature, [you will know that to investigate]
the principles is profound and the signiﬁcance is great. It is clear that [the
Confucian] benevolence spoken of [by people], heaving a sigh, is insigniﬁcant
in merit and of little beneﬁt. If that is the case, [Buddhist monks] are still
ashamed to hear the teaching of “those who are about to face toward Mount
Ming”373 (i.e., those who aspire to the way of Laozi and Zhuangzi beyond
the Confucian ethics) and turn back. How could [monks] be compared with
those who follow the [sovereign’s] education and the wise men who receive
a stipend without rendering any service, and be [considered] the same as
them in regard to showing ﬁlial piety and respect [for their parents and the
sovereign]?

Section Three: Those Who Pursue the Ultimate Law of Nature Do
Not Follow the Principle of the Mutation [of Birth and Death
in the Phenomenal World]
Question: “When we look to Laozi’s thought, we ﬁnd he means that
Heaven and Earth are considered to be great because of their attainment of
the One (i.e., the Way); princes and kings are considered to be noble since
178

Fascicle Five

they master to follow [the One];374 since [Heaven and Earth] attain the One,
they are the foundation of myriad changes; and since [princes and kings]
master to follow [the One], they have the function of leading the movement
of Heaven and Earth. If this is so, to clarify the ultimate law of Nature must
lie in mastering the root [of the Way]. To master the root [of the Way] must
be due to following the principle of the mutation [of birth and death in the
phenomenal world]. Therefore, wise people of former times thought that
[Lao’s statement of this] is good. It is impossible that many other theories
differ from this. If a theory that differs from these many theories is established,
it is unworthy of serious consideration. Nevertheless, you said not to follow
the principle of the mutation [of birth and death in the phenomenal world in
order to pursue the ultimate law of Nature]. Why is this so?”
Answer: “Every existence in the ﬁnite world equally receives a life in
[the law of] the great change (i.e., the Way). Even though a large number of
individuals are multifarious and there is a difference between the exquisite
and the coarse, generally speaking, in the long run they are simply divided
into [two kinds:] those who have a mental function and those who do not.
Those who have [a mental function] give rise to a feeling for change, and
those who have no feeling for change. Since they do not have a feeling for
change, when the change ends, their life is completed. Since their life has
nothing to do with feeling, when the form decays, the change ceases to exist.
[On the other hand,] those who give rise to a feeling for change respond to
things and are moved. Since this movement must be caused by the feeling,
their life does not cease. Since their life does not cease, the change becomes
broader, the form (i.e., the body) goes through [the transmigration of birth
and death] more and more, the feeling is more pent-up, and the afﬂiction
gets deeper. How can this afﬂiction be described?
“Therefore, a sutra states, ‘Nirvana is the state of no change. Thereby
the exhaustion of change is considered to be the realm [of nirvana]. The three
realms of existence are the state of ﬂowing motion. Thereby, they are places
full of sin and suffering.’ When the change comes to an end, causes and conditions cease eternally. When [the change] is in ﬂowing motion, we receive
suffering forever. How can this be clariﬁed?
“Life is shackled by the body, and it continues to exist due to [the law
of] the change. When [we human beings] give rise to a feeling for change,

179

30c

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

the spirit is tied to its foundation, and the intelligence becomes dull. When
[the mind] is ﬁrmly blocked [by feelings], one tries to preserve only himself
and gets involved only in the state of [ﬂowing] motion. Then the reins of
mental function lose control, the path to [the transmigration of] birth and
death is daily opened, and one just follows greed and clinging in the long
ﬂow [of the transmigration of birth and death]. How would it be to receive
a life only [in this world]?
“Consequently, those who turn back to the origin and seek the ultimate
law of Nature do not toil their spirits with [the work of] life. Those who transcend the mundane world do not trouble their life with feelings. If we do not
trouble our life with feelings, it is possible to sever [the transmigration of]
birth and death. If we do not trouble our spirits with [the work of] life, it is
possible that the spirit profoundly unites with [the transcendental world].
Since the spirit profoundly unites with the transcendental world, it is called
nirvana. How could the term nirvana be named groundlessly?
“Let me infer and actualize it. Even though Heaven and Earth are great
for producing and raising all things, they cannot make living creatures immortal. Although princes and kings consider causing all beings to survive to be
their [major] achievement, they cannot cause them all to be free of afﬂiction.
Therefore, in the previous discussion I said, ‘[The teaching for Buddhist
monks is] to master [the fact] that afﬂiction is caused by having a body and
that afﬂiction is ended through not preserving the body, to know that [the
operation of] life after life is derived from receiving the principle of the mutation [of birth and death in the phenomenal world], and to seek the ultimate
law of Nature through not following the principle of the mutation [of birth
and death].’ The meaning lies in this. Since the meaning lies herein, this is
why śramaṇas treat sovereigns as equal, without regard to formalities; they
exalt their tasks, they are not graced with a title of nobility from princes and
kings, and yet they beneﬁt from the kindness of [princes and kings].”

Section Four: Those Who Have Mastered the Ultimate Way Do Not
Respond to the World by Serving Both [for Relief by Politics and
Emancipation by Religion]
Question: “Looking at all previous histories, from the time of the earlier
emperors on, those who occupy the throne and are united with the fundamental

180

Fascicle Five

ways [of the world] do not necessarily differ from each other in the original
base. Since the original base cannot be dual, through all the generations ceremonial forms are the same and the system is consistent. It is ‘Only Heaven
is great and Yao solely modeled after it.’375 If it is like this, it is not the case
that the wisdom [of sages] has nothing to illuminate, and there is nothing
else that can be illuminated. Since it is not the case that in the law of Nature
there is something that is not completed, there is nothing the law of Nature
can complete. Inferring from this, [the world] beyond what we see and hear
is empty; there is nothing to ascertain about it. Since there is nothing to ascertain in reason [about the world beyond what we see and hear], it can be clear
what are the ultimate law of Nature and the ultimate Way [mastered by sages].
Today, all śramaṇas do not understand the meaning beyond writings, and
they are puzzled about [the sages’] purpose that is beyond the teaching. Certainly they are terribly wrong. If there were an apparent sign for this (i.e.,
that the Chinese sages did not realize the truth of the transcendental world),
it would be invaluable information.”
Answer: “The mysterious ultimate law of Nature is vast and remote.
The Way of the Spirit is profound. It can be sought with [philosophical] principles, but it is difﬁcult to cross-examine with phenomenal facts. Once [the
Way of the Spirit] is established as a teaching, the teaching aims at following
the fashion of the day. The capacity according to [the fashion of the day]
varies between superiority and inferiority, but regarding [the fact that the
teaching] completes [the nature of] all things, it lies in using the function of
human receptivity of mysterious responsive activity, conforming to people’s
minds, and leading their endowments. When their endowments reach the
utmost limits, ‘the knowledge stops at what it does not know’376 and does
not participate in more than that.
“If this is so, it is not that those who have mastered the ultimate Way do
not comprehend both [worlds within and beyond human limits]; they comprehend both, but they simply cannot manage both simultaneously. Therefore,
[the Zhuangzi says,] ‘When the ancients spoke of the Great Way, [ﬁrst Heaven
was clariﬁed], “objects and their names could be mentioned at the ﬁfth from
the beginning,” and “rewards and penalties” could be stated at the ninth.’77
This [indicates] only the steps [to rule] the secular world, but [a teaching,

181

31a

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

regardless of the steps,] still cannot be suddenly established, not to mention
about [teachings] in the world beyond [the secular world]. Let me infer this
more broadly [in order to explore] the purport more deeply.
“As for the statement [in the Zhuangzi], ‘Outside the six conjunctions
(i.e., the limits of the world of humans, literally, the four cardinal directions
plus zenith and nadir), [the sage] keeps it in mind, but does not discuss [anything],’378 this does not mean that it is impossible to discuss it but that if [the
sage] dares to discuss it, he may be at variance [with the truth]. The statement
‘Inside the limits of the world of humans, [the sage] discusses [in outline]
but does not debate anything about it’ does not mean that [the sage] cannot
debate, but that if he dared to debate it he may [cause others] to have doubts.
The statement ‘The spring and autumn manages the affairs of the former
kings’ designs. [The sage] debates these but does not criticize them’ does
not mean that [the sage] cannot criticize them, but that if he criticizes he may
[cause others] to be confused. These three manners (i.e., not discussing, not
debating, and not criticizing) are all based on the fact that our visual-auditory
senses are limited and place restrictions on our behaviors, and do not get
involved in the world beyond our visual-auditory senses. If we seek the sage’s
purport on this basis, the ways inside and outside [the limits of the world of
humans] can be united and clariﬁed.
“I always think that the Buddhist and Confucian teachings, and that the
Tathāgata and Yao and Confucius secretly have a close relationship with each
other even though they differ from each other in establishing their teaching.
[These two groups] actually make a distinction about renouncing [the world]
or staying [in the secular world], but they are the same after all. Debating it
in detail, we will be able to see a main theme [that the two ways are the
same]. In reason, there may be those that are united at the beginning and separate [into more than one] later, and those that are separate at the beginning
and become united later. Those that are ﬁrst united and later separate are
none other than all buddhas and tathāgatas, while those who are ﬁrst separate
and later united are successive sovereigns who have not mastered the ultimate
Way; they are in the [latter] group.
“Why is this made clear? A sutra says, ‘The Buddha mastered the spontaneous, marvelous Dharma. He ediﬁes the people with expedients. Following
the revealed world extensively, he becomes an immortal, the wheel-turning

182

Fascicle Five

noble king, a high-ranking ofﬁcial, a minister, the most reverend priest, or
a monk. As [one of] these, he transforms and manifests himself everywhere.
No one among all the kings and virtuous men knows who he is.’379 This case
is that of the so-called one that is ﬁrst united and later separate.
“On the other hand, there are [sovereigns] who began a great enterprise
[of educating the people] but have not yet achieved the meritorious education.
Since the form [of the teaching] varies, what [the people] receive is uneven.
Some expect achievement after death, or some have the testimony that
responds to [the education] revealed in their lifetimes. Among sage kings,
those who have accomplished the teaching based on [the Buddhist Way] are
countless. Even though [their method of teaching] is that of the stick and
carrot and has no set rules, their goals must converge. This case is that of the
so-called ones that are ﬁrst separate and later united.
“If [things] are now separate and later united, those who intend to walk
on a road leading everywhere will assuredly not limit themselves to only one
passage. If [things] are united now and later separate, it can be certainly known
that the conclusive point of Śākyamuni and that of Yao and Confucius are no
different from each other. Hence, if we seek uniﬁcation from separation, we
will know that [Buddhism and Confucianism] must arrive at the same truth.
If we seek separation from uniﬁcation, we will realize that there are many
methods to master the ultimate Way. Those who only look at [the surface of]
phenomena, however, do not understand that both are one. Therefore, they
are merely confused by the many ways and surprised by their differences.
“Observing on this basis, the merit of the way of Heaven and Earth is
nothing more than operating [the universe] and producing and nourishing [all
things]. The virtue of emperors and kings is nothing more than following the
way [of Heaven and Earth] and helping it in nourishing and leading [the people]. If we compare them (i.e., the merit of the way of Heaven and Earth and
the virtue of emperors and kings) with [Buddhism], the singularly transcendent
teaching and the immutable religion, it is already clear that it is doubtlessly
impossible to talk about its superiority and inferiority in the same breath.”

Section Five: The Body is Mortal but the Spirit is Immortal
Question: “Your discussion takes the case that the mutation [of birth and
death] comes to an end to be the utmost supremacy. Hence, those who want

183

31b

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

to reach the utmost supremacy must go against the mutation [of birth and
death] and seek the ultimate law of Nature. Since in order to seek the ultimate
law of Nature one does not go through following the mutation [of birth and
death], you refer to successive sovereigns and equate [their teachings] with
Buddhism, and take the one who has mastered the utmost supremacy to be a
sovereign who rules with expedients. This is what your discussion entails.
You must believe that it is the Great Pervader.380 When I inquire whether or
not this conforms to reality, it is not so in reason. Why? A person [is born]
receiving the vapor [of yin and yang], which lasts only for his lifetime. When
his life comes to an end, he will vanish and return to nothing. Even though
‘the spirit is the most mysterious of a myriad of things,’381 this is originally
just what yin and yang transform into. ‘By a transformation a person is born.
By another transformation a person dies.’382 Since [the vapor] is collected,
there is a beginning; when it is dispersed, there is an end.
“Inferring from this basis, it is assuredly known that spirit and body altogether transform, they are originally not in different lines from each other,
the exquisite [vapor of the spirit] and the coarse [vapor of the body] are the
same, and [both spirit and body] are one unit from beginning to end. When
the body is complete, the vapor is collected and the spirit comes to exist.
When the body is destroyed, the vapor is dispersed and the function [of the
spirit] extinguishes. When [the vapor] is dispersed, [life] returns to the original
place of Heaven where it received [the vapor]. When the function [of the
spirit] is extinguished, it returns and becomes nothing. It is simply the law of
Nature that all [existence] repeats extinction. What else could do this?
If [spirit and body] are fundamentally different from each other, these
two different kinds of vapor are united in the law [of Nature]. When they are
united, [spirit and body] equally transform. In addition, the spirit that dwells
in the body is compared to a ﬁre that burns wood. When [the body] is produced, [the spirit] must exist. When [the body] is destroyed, [the spirit] must
be extinguished. When the body is broken up, the spirit is dispersed, as it no
longer has [the body] to rely on. When the [vigor of] the wood is lost, the
ﬁre goes out, as it no longer has [fuel] to rely on. It stands to reason.
“Even if it is difﬁcult to distinguish and clarify whether or not [spirit
and body] are homogeneous, it can be said that existence and nonexistence
are certainly due to the collection and dispersion [of the vapor]. The phrase

184

Fascicle Five

‘collection and dispersion’ is the general term for the change of the vapor
[of yin and yang], and for birth and death of myriad transformations. Accordingly, the Zhuangzi says: ‘Human life is due to the collection of the vapor.
When [the vapor] is collected, there is life. When it is dispersed, there is
death. If death and life are in the same category, what is there to worry
about?’383 The ancients who were good at speaking of the Way must have
the idea [that life and death are due to the collection and dispersion of the
vapor]. If that is so, the highest truth (i.e., life) terminates in one’s lifetime.
I should ask you the meaning [of your statement] that the life [of the body]
comes to an end, but [the life of the spirit] does not change.”
Answer: “Whatever can the spirit be? It is a being that comes to have
mysterious functions at the apex of exquisiteness [of the vapor of yin and
yang]. Since it is the highest exquisiteness, it cannot be illustrated with the
symbols [of the Book of Changes]. For that reason, sages call it ‘the most
subtle [of a myriad of things].’ Even the most intelligent person cannot deﬁne
its form and cannot trace the very source of its profound purpose. Nevertheless,
you, the speaker, have doubts based on general knowledge, join many others
[who accuse Buddhism], and make yourself confused. Your false accusation
is already serious. You intend to talk about [the spirit]. This is to speak of an
unspeakable matter. Here, within [the limit of] unspeakableness, I would like
to draw an outline of it for you.
“The spirit perfectly complies with [every change], being free from anything, and it is extremely mysterious and indescribable. It is moved by [external] objects and acts on them, and it operates availing itself of the law [of
the phenomenal world]. It is moved by [external] objects, but since it is not
a thing, when the thing changes [the spirit] is not extinguished [along with
the thing]. It avails itself of the law [of the phenomenal world], but since it
is not the law, even if the law comes to an end [the spirit] is not exhausted.
Since we [human beings] have feelings, we can be moved by [external]
objects. Since we have consciousness, we can seek with the law. There are
[both] exquisiteness and coarseness in the law [of the phenomenal world].
Hence, the nature [of the law] varies. In intelligence there are sharp and dull.
Therefore, the function [of intelligence] varies.
“Carrying out the discussion inferring from this point of view (i.e., that
feeling and consciousness form the phenomenal world), it is known that the

185

31c

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

mutation (i.e., transmigration) [of birth and death] is affected by feeling, and
the spirit is transmitted by the mutation [of birth and death]. Feeling is the
mother of the mutation [of birth and death]. Spirit is the root of feeling. For
feeling there is the law of encountering [external] objects, while for spirit
there is the function of moving into the unseen world. Those who have become
awakened thoroughly simply return to the origin [of the mutation of birth and
death], but those who are deluded merely chase after [external] objects. The
ancients who discussed the Way did not come to agreement [on this matter].
Let me cite [instances from their discussions] and clarify the matter.
“Zhuangzi, in the chapter on the ‘Great and Most Honored Master’
(Dazongshi) [in the Zhuangzi], pronounces profoundly that ‘the great mass [of
Nature] gives us life so that we toil, and grants us death so that we can rest.’384
Moreover, he says, ‘Life is considered as being a human. Ah! Death is to return
to the truth.’385 This is, as they say, to know that life is a great calamity and
non-life is considered as returning to the origin. Wenzi quotes the words of the
Yellow Emperor, ‘Although the body is dispersed, the spirit does not change
itself. Based on the fact that it does not change itself, [the spirit] takes advantage
of [every] change [of others]. Therefore, its change is boundless.’386
“Zhuangzi furthermore says, ‘When we take only the body of a human
being [from the inﬁnite nature], we still have joy. This body undergoes myriad
changes endlessly.’387 These words are, as they say, to know that human life
is not exhausted only in one mutation [of birth and death], but follows [the
changes of various] things and never returns [to the origin]. Even though the
discussions of these two gentlemen (i.e., Zhuangzi and Wenzi) do not investigate exhaustively the truth, they try to go along with the ultimate law of
Nature, and it is worthy to listen to them.
“You, the disputant, have not examined [Zhuangzi’s] theory that ‘birth
and death simultaneously exist side by side,’388 and you are deluded by the
idea that [the vapor of yin and yang] is collected and dispersed just in one
mutation [of birth and death]. You do not think that in the Way of the Spirit
there exist numinous beings that are more mysterious than anything else,
and you say that the exquisite vapor (i.e., the spirit) and the coarse vapor
(i.e., the body) are equally exhausted. How sad would this be?
“The metaphor of ﬁre and wood [you cited as a quote from Zhuangzi]
is originally derived from a sacred [Buddhist] scripture. Since its [correct]

186

Fascicle Five

transmission was lost, the deep purport has not been investigated, and the
subtle words thereupon sank into a secular teaching. It causes you to avail
yourself of it, and yet to have doubt.
“If until now there was no chance for a leader who was awakened to the
ultimate law of Nature, we would not know that there was a pioneer who
had insight into this law, and the function that [the spirit] transmigrates in
the unseen world would never reach [the people of the world] until the end
of their lives. Why is this so? When feeling and consciousness move each
other389 [it gives rise to] the mutation [of birth and death], which is endless.
[The relation between] cause and condition is ﬁrmly established, and it is
transmitted imperceptibly. Other than those who thoroughly investigate, who
could discern [the truth of] this change? Let me testify to it with facts for
your sake.
“That a ﬁre is passed on to ﬁrewood is similar to the spirit transmigrating
to the body. The ﬁre transferring to other ﬁrewood is just like the spirit moving to another body. The former ﬁrewood is not the same as the latter, and
then we know the extremely skillful performance of a hand [in transmitting
the ﬁre from one piece of wood to another]. The former body is different
from the latter, so we realize the profound response between feeling and
consciousness. Deluded people, [however,] see the body decay in one existence and then they think that the spirit, feeling, [and consciousness] die
together with [the body]. This is simply compared to the case that when one
sees that the ﬁrewood is burned up he says [that the ﬁre] is extinguished
forever. This is to strain the passage from the chapter on ‘Nourishing the
Lord of Life’ (Yangshengzhu) [in the Zhuangzi] and not to look deeply into
the virtue [of the passage].
“Now, as you say in the discussion, if spirit and body altogether transform
[and life returns to the original place of Heaven where it received the vapor],
then [human life] begins from the original place of Heaven, and one’s disposition of being dull or intelligent is the same as the natural endowments
he receives [from Heaven]. Therefore I would like to ask you: Does a person
receive his disposition [of being dull or intelligent] in the body, or in the
spirit? If he receives it in the body, [since the disposition of being dull or
intelligent is an attribute of the spirit,] everyone who has a body would all
change and become spirit. If he receives it in the spirit, [since the spirit is

187

32a

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

not exhausted,] it would be passed on from spirit to spirit. [If this were the
case,] then the [good-for-nothing] Danzhu would have been as holy as [his
father,] Emperor Yao, and Zhonghua (i.e., Emperor Shun) would have had
as [obstinate] a function of a spirit as [his father,] Gusou. Would this be possible? Could this be possible? If it is impossible, we assuredly know that the
unseen [cause and] condition was apparently established in the long-distant
past, and the distinction of being intelligent or dull is destined before the
body [is produced]. Although the marvelous lathe (i.e., the movement of
Nature) revolves well, it still cannot change the character of Nature, not to
mention that of [human beings, who] are more humble than [Nature]. If we
examine [the metaphor of ﬁre and ﬁrewood] logically, [we ﬁnd] it is sublime
language and has a veriﬁcation. If we follow it with the facts, it is possible
that there is no delusion in the Great Pervader (i.e., the great truth).”390
After [the composition of] this discourse was completed, the guests who
had retired from public life walked under a bright moon and visited me one
evening. We all gathered at the Dharma hall. Thereupon, one of the guests
asked me, “I respectfully read your discourse. The fundamental point of argument was perceivable and there was almost no ﬂaw in it. One day, [however,]
when I tried to study it again I found there is a certain point that I do not
understand thoroughly. You think that the śramaṇas’ system of deportment
(i.e., religious precepts) is a special regulation that differs from the secular
system, and which is an excellent tool (i.e., the rule of deportment) for those
who cultivate the [Buddhist] Way; therefore, they certainly should omit
making perfunctory respect to their sovereigns and parents.
“My present question is this: [Śramaṇas] devote themselves to begin
the difﬁcult enterprise [of delivering sentient beings] and they hope [to
achieve] the merit of transcending the world of the mutation [of birth and
death] in the far future, yet their kindness is still latent and there is no [immediate] revelation of the efﬁcacy of the teaching. The reward and retribution
for the next existence is profound and has not appeared responding to [what
one does in this existence]. Nevertheless, they cause princes to offer [various
things to them] and nobles who believe [in Buddhism] to kneel down [to
worship them]. Shouldn’t they be censured for receiving kindness from others
for doing nothing and being too hasty? Should they not be chastised for beneﬁting from others’ favors in vain, just like a parasite?”

188

Fascicle Five

I, the host, answered after awhile, “Let me take an example from familiar
matters [and explain] for you, all wise people. [For instance,] suppose here
is someone who, in order to announce an order he had received from the
[government] of that time, is traveling to a remote place where the customs
are different and where he needs nine different translators [to reach his destination]. The question is whether or not the king must provide him provisions
and bestow upon him a carriage and clothes.”
[The questioner] replied, “Yes, he must do so.”
I said, “We can discover the case [of śramaṇas] from this example. What
kind of person is called a śramaṇa? They are those who uncover the obscurity
and confusion that cover common people, who open the profound path to
the world beyond the mutation [of birth and death], who together with the
people of the world follow the way of ‘forgetting both [others and myself],’391
who cause those who wish for loftiness (i.e., enlightenment) to take the
custom handed down [from the Buddha], and who have those who rinse their
mouths in a stream taste its surplus drops. If they are so, even though the
great achievement has not yet been accomplished, when we see the trace of
their superb footsteps, what we realize will indeed be magnanimous.
“In that case, [the sovereign’s] achievement in leading the operation [of
Heaven and Earth] and advantage in supporting the existence [of all things]
are still not as worthy as a śramaṇa’s initial vow [to save all sentient beings].
Needless to say, [the sovereign’s favors] do not match [a śramaṇa’s] toil to
practice the three kinds of acts (i.e., of body, speech, and mind). In addition,
although these people (śramaṇas) need [support from others to sustain] their
bodies, they feel no inclination toward secular matters. They consider that
to receive offerings of the four [requisite] things (clothing, food, shelter, and
medicine) is just as if a horseﬂy or a mosquito were to ﬂy in front of them.
Why is a favor [as tiny as] a bubble sufﬁcient to talk about?”
Thereafter, all the guests realized for the ﬁrst time that on the unseen
path, to open the wheel tracks is considered to be a [śramaṇa’s] achievement,
and a śramaṇa’s guidance is considered to be the way [to enlightenment].
Then they were happy, their minds at peace, and they all left, exclaiming.
This was the third year of the Yuanxing era of the Jin dynasty (404), the
year of efeng.392 At that time, Emperor [An] ﬂed from the capital and the
people were all anxious [about the world]. All my comrades lamented the

189

32b

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

fact that the emperor was a puppet of his subjects. Consequently, based on
[these facts], I set forth this discourse.

The Discourse on the Śramaṇa’s Robe
Worn with a Bared Shoulder
(Shamen tanfulun) by
Dharma Teacher [Hui]yuan

Someone asked, “The śramaṇa’s robe that shows a bared right shoulder is
derived from the Buddha’s teaching. Does it conform with [proper] decorum?”
I answered, “Yes, it does.”
He asked [further], “The three dynasties (i.e., Xia, Yin, and Zhou) had
different systems from each other and the decorum of each was not the same;
[sometimes it was] simple and [sometimes it was] embellished. These changes
are detailed in ancient books, but [the decorum of] Buddhism is excluded
from those [of the three dynasties]. All the debaters have doubts about this.
If there is a profound principle, I would be happy to receive your instruction
for what I have not yet learned.”
I responded [to his question], “Primitive people did not lose the great
simplicity and their decorum was not embellished. Since the three kings (i.e.,
King Yu of Xia, King Tang of Yin, and King Wu of Zhou) appeared in the
world [and established their system], [decorum] changed in accordance with
the times. Seen from this basis, what you, the debaters, maintain is simply
the word regulated in the secular world [of ethical education]. How do I
know this is so? What we do not have in China might be obtained from the
customs of other countries. Since the people there have been without changes,
their way (i.e., traditional decorum) has not been ruined. Hence, in Indian
decorum, when they completely pay respect to virtuous ones or when they
show their sincerity to gods, they usually dress with part of the body bared,
which [the Book of Rites] refers to as a high degree in removing decorations
[from clothing].393 Although the books that explain [this style of clothing]
have not been circulated in this land, it appears that [the correct meaning of
this style of clothing] was known at the beginning [when the style of clothing
was established].
“The Buddha rose in the world and based on [Indian traditional customs]
he established the teaching. He clariﬁed that since [Buddhists’ acts] are not

190

Fascicle Five

evil they should bare the right shoulder. Why is this? It is because the noble
and the humble must be distinguished in their ranking; if virtuous ones are
promoted by [receiving] a high rank, the mind to uphold the virtuous ones
will arise. Therefore, śramaṇas go beyond fame and rank in order to cast
away [the customs of] the times. They withdraw and never desire to take the
initiative [in the world].
“Moreover, people are generally right-handed. If we do not follow [righthandedness] in doing something, we will have difﬁculties in everything. If
we commit a blunder, although we may try to recover, it is not easy even for
the middle level of wise people [to recover it], not to speak of those who are
below this level. Let me try to explain this.
“The body consists of right and left, and the function of principles consists
of right and wrong. To make up these two issues (i.e., right and left in the
body and right and wrong in principles), each one avails itself of the foundation. If the foundation is blocked and [the blockage] is not uprooted, [each]
responds more and more to the demands of the phenomenal world. Accordingly, if the body and principles help each other, the way [of the foundation]
will be subtle and clear. [Nevertheless,] if the customs of the world do not
change, to respond to the subtle [way of the foundation] is difﬁcult to manage.
Once [the practice of wearing] a robe with one shoulder bared is made known,
we will follow the practice in the body, be moved with the principles, and
comprehend it in the mind. Thus, we control the vapor of following [the
nature] and show the form of sincerity. Accordingly, the simultaneous practice
of right and wrong is originally impossible.
“Hence, by wearing a robe with one shoulder bared, the World-honored
One (Skt. Bhagavat) consolidated sincerity and shut off evil; he made the
name and reality [of śramaṇas] well matched, and he caused reverence and
laxity to not mix with each other. Later he opened the path to seek [enlightenment]. He leads those who have been deluded for a long time to the true
nature, he causes the wise who are stranded in the world to not despair by
thinking that they have no hope [for salvation], and he causes those who
hope to advance [in Buddhism] to not turn back by being deluded in the path.
“In this way, those who have in mind the sacred gate [of Buddhism] all
walk on the right [path]; they think of following [the law of Nature]; they
obey the same rules regardless of the time or location; recollecting the past,

191

32c

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

they think of the simple [life]style [of ancient times]; they go against the
splendid [customs] of the secular world in order to cleanse the mind; they
examine the foundation to understand [the law of] changes thoroughly; they
realize the profound [philosophical principles] in conformity with familiar
matters; they feel shame if [their actions] contradict their appearance and
dress; and they become deeply aware of the principles.
“If we act in this way, our feeling is ediﬁed, we earnestly approach [the
Buddhist Way], and we do not tire of practicing [Buddhism]. Our acts must
follow [the law of Nature], and our appearance unconsciously becomes
respectful. This is indeed the external cause that the Tathāgata invites [people
to Buddhism] and his wonderful method to teach ordinary people and to lead
[them to Buddhism]. Nevertheless, many debaters have not been instructed
[in the meaning of wearing a robe with one shoulder bared], and some people
want to eliminate [this style]. It goes against the method of antiquity. How
serious this problem is!”

A Criticism by He [Wuji],
Zhennan [General]

I received your response to my question regarding the monk’s robe with one
shoulder bared. Both the main point and the teaching are magnanimous. You
connect the simplicity [of the robe] with [the customs of] primitive times,
take [an example for the subsidiary relation between] the body and principles
from familiar matters, distinguish respect from laxity, and completely explain
both sincerity and clothing. There is almost no ﬂaw. Regarding the reason
you clarify, that [having the right shoulder bared] is to follow [the law of
Nature], however, I still do not agree with you. This is because to establish
the system of decorum and clothing may be in accordance with the needs of
the times. Hence, there are inside (i.e., statecraft) and outside (i.e., religion)
in the phenomenal world, and then [the system] can be established roughly
or minutely according to them.
Regarding Li (i.e., Laozi), Śākyamuni, the Duke of Zhou, and Confucius,
there are those who live in the secular world and those who leave the secular
world behind. They are not the same in following their traditions, but it is
clear that there is no difference between one who goes against [tradition]
and one who follows it. Therefore, Laozi clariﬁes to make much use of the

192

Fascicle Five

right side in military honors and unfortunate rites,394 and in the Book of Rites
it is instituted not to use the left in funeral rites.395 Moreover, the four immeasurable minds (Skt. catur-apramāṇa or catvāryapramāṇāni) thoroughly refer
to the most sincere mind to respect one’s parents, and the method of hunting
called sanqu (i.e., driving game from three directions, leaving one side open
for some to escape) shows the benevolence of the king’s acts.396
When we examine [events that happened] in later ages, the purpose [of
those events] can be seen. Would we rather entrust the utmost way of following
[the law of Nature] to inauspicious incidents, and show the auspicious sincerity
in funeral rites? The reason that [Lord Xiang of] Zheng state stripped off the
upper garment [and stood in front of the king of Chu state] is similar to the
reason that [Lord] Xi of Xu loaded a cofﬁn on his carriage [to meet the king
of Chu state].397 All these [incidents occured] because they thought that if
what they availed themselves of went against [the law of Nature], they would
assuredly receive an unexpected punishment. Testifying from this, where
does following [the law of Nature] exist? [It exists in both China and India.]
Therefore, I act in accordance with what I have in my mind, hoping you will
explain more thoroughly and cause the inside (i.e., Buddhism) and the outside
(i.e., Confucianism) to be united into one.

Dharma Teacher [Hui]yuan’s
Response [to He]

I respectfully inquired into the purpose of your question. [Your assertion]
may open the lofty path, illuminate what I have not rendered, and cause the
exquisite and the coarse to follow [the law of Nature] at the same time and
Buddhism and Confucianism to be united into one. I read your instruction
of this repeatedly and came to realize numerous things. I always think that
in the teaching of the Way (i.e., Buddhism) and the teaching on social relationships (i.e., Confucianism), or in [the case of] Śākyamuni, the Duke of
Zhou, and Confucius, although the method of establishing their teachings
differs they secretly have a close relationship with each other. They actually
differ in renouncing [the world] or staying [in the world], but they are the
same after all. The trace of the wonderful [teaching of Chinese sages], however, is hidden in daily use. The purport is deep and profound, and it is difﬁcult
to seek. Consequently, [sages’] words of utmost [signiﬁcance] were blocked

193

33a

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

by scriptures of worldly teaching, and this caused those who speak [of
Buddhism and Confucianism] to regard them as separate from each other.
The reason I know this is so is that [Chinese] sages teach based on the
idea of “ﬁshing [without a net] and shooting [at game excepting those in
nests].”398 [They teach people] to remove the extremities [of hunting], to
lessen [the trouble caused by] taking excessive catches by hunting in accordance with the four seasons, to not be stingy by letting some animals escape
through the politeness of the method of hunting called sanqu, and to be sure
to wait until [ﬁsh and animals] have grown to maturity before [ﬁshing for
them and hunting] them with nets. [The Chinese sages’ teaching] is thorough,
[extending even] to benevolence for the grass at the roadside in remote ages.
Its tenor is a match for Śākyamuni’s compassion. If we think [everything
that exists] in the world is equal to us and if we see ourselves as the same as
others, [a large tree whose trunk] ﬁlls the arms and the ﬁne hair of an animal
are the same. Would there be a difference between superior and inferior, or
would they not be all of a sort? Nevertheless, examining from the trace [of
the Chinese sages’ teaching], [the foundation of its tenor] is on the whole
similar to universal love, but when we deeply seek reality, there are roles in
social classes [in the Chinese sages’ teaching], and what is well constructed
with the roles is too detailed to describe [here]. Accordingly, [in the Chinese
sages’ teaching] we progress in virtue along with [our roles in social classes],
and make our duties clear for our superiors and parents.
The teachings in Buddhism and Confucianism can be understood from
this viewpoint. The Chinese sages’ intention can be known. However, since
the path that unites [Buddhism and Confucianism] into one has not been
clariﬁed, people of the world do not know it. If [my view] of this is approved,
the reason why śramaṇas wear a robe with the right shoulder bared is not
open to question. In your letter, [however,] you wrote that I should explain
it more thoroughly. Therefore, I would like to examine and express again
my long-cherished thoughts.
When we seek how one takes a body that goes through changes, [we
ﬁnd that the body] is molded by yin and yang and we receive a body that
consists of a right side and a left side. With the shift of day and night, [the
change of] life and death is explained. In human feelings, everyone is delighted
with living and afraid of dying, and everyone is fond of advancing but detests

194

Fascicle Five

retreating. For this reason, former monarchs followed the people’s nature.
Comforming to the nature [of human feelings,] they distinguished the [ceremonial] system for auspicious [occasions] from that for inauspicious [occasions], and set up [two] different positions: the left and the right. Hence, on
auspicious occasions the left is esteemed, one is promoted in the peerage,
and he lives in comfort; while on inauspicious occasions the right is honored,
and one expresses grief in order to dissolve the nature [of human life]. These
are all based on what we receive [from Heaven]. We follow it in order to
understand the teaching thoroughly, respond to the changes of the times, and
recollect the virtue of our predecessors.
What people of the world value is nothing more than survival. When
they live long, [according to the situation,] they stoop, stretch, advance, or
retreat. This is entirely the way [of the secular world]. [The concept that “The
system of decorum and clothing can be established] roughly or minutely
according to [inside (i.e., statecraft) and outside (i.e., religion) in the phenomenal world,” as you mentioned,] lies here.
Śramaṇas are not like this. They put their own persons last, withdraw
[from society], and yet do not detest being humble. If the time is not for
them, they are resigned to the humble position. To govern oneself by being
in the humble position is called modesty. To stay in the low place which
many people dislike is called obedience. If we do not lose modesty and obedience as the base, it is easy to accumulate the merit of “reducing day by day
[to attain wuwei],”399 and it is possible to ﬁnd joy on the path to escape from
[delusions] and to attain [enlightenment]. Hence, [the śramaṇa] lives in seclusion, forgets glory, and conducts himself contrary to [the ways of] the secular
world. Those who conduct themelves contrary to [the ways of] the secular
world are different in reality from wise people who live in the world of ethical
education, even though they may resemble each other in appearance.
How can I clarify this? Generally speaking, those who have renounced
the world understand thoroughly that suffering is caused by having a physical
body and it can be stopped by not keeping the body. They know that [the
endless succession of] life after life is derived from receiving the mutation
[of birth and death], and they can seek the ultimate law of Nature by not following that mutation. Inferring from this point, we certainly know that those
who aspire to the ultimate stage do not trouble their spirit by living, and those

195

33b

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

who are far beyond worldly affairs do not trouble their life by feelings. If
we do not trouble our life by feelings, life can be cut off. If we do not trouble
our spirit, it can profoundly unite with [the transcendental world].
In that case, regarding the establishment of ceremonies for auspicious
and inauspicious occasions, admiring parents, and serving a monarch, as
mentioned above, these are probably just statements for a limited world.
They are what “have not been out from the closed world from the beginning.”400 If we do not go out of the closed world, we will just play with our
writings and will not thoroughly understand [the law of] the change. If that
is the case, [such people] just remain in [the world of] Confucianism and
lose themselves in their lives; they avail themselves of myriad changes and
go against the ultimate law of Nature. Seen from the position of utmost obedience, couldn’t it be said that this is contrary to [the way of śramaṇas]?
[The difference] between those who remain in the secular world and those
who abandon the secular world lies in this point.

The Discourse on the Clarification of Reward
and Retribution (Ming baoyinglun) by
Dharma Teacher [Hui]yuan, Responding
to Huan [Xuan] of Nanjun

Question: “In Buddhist scriptures, the destruction of life is considered to be
a grave offense; [the one who committed such an act] will be punished in
Hell; retribution meted out by the ofﬁcials of Hell according to the laws of
Hell is just as a shadow [follows its original form] or a sound [responds to
its voice]. I have a doubt about this. Why? The substances of the four great
elements are merely earth, water, ﬁre, and wind. They gather together and
result in a physical body, in which the spirit dwells, life lodges, and the mental
function settles. Then the clear consciousness begins to develop [based on
this]. Although [the spirit] exists entrusting itself to [the physical body], the
law [of the spirit] is very different from that [of the body]. How could there
be only the difference between exquisite and coarse? Certainly [unlike the
body] there is no situation in which [the spirit] gets injured. When [the body]
is destroyed, there is no harm to the spirit at all. [That the body is destroyed]
is simply as if the water and ﬁre between Heaven and Earth were destroyed.”

196

Fascicle Five

Second question: “In the mind of all people, affection and desire are
luxuriant, there is just the self, and emotion and anxieties are deep. If a
person’s reward or retribution is brought about based on feelings, and if,
based on affections of the mind, a response is produced, in what does the
reason of following nature have its foundation?”
Answer: “I think these two issues are a key point of your questions and
the pivot of your argument. If the pivot is cleared, myriad doubts will be dispelled in the same way. People who begin to practice [Buddhism] will probably awaken to [the teaching] in accordance with this. It can be said that you
clarify [people’s] stagnant feelings in the realm beyond common knowledge
and offer unexplored wonderful advocacy. Nevertheless, Buddhism is deep
and profound. It is hard to talk about its subtle language. If we do not [understand] the fundamental purport wholly, how can we speak of its profound
purpose? Here, I would like to try to speak of what I have in my mind complying with the great ultimate law of Nature.
“If the fundamental reason why human beings receive a body is clariﬁed
through inferring from the nature of the four great elements, ‘they borrow
different substances, and pretend that the common form of the body is composed of them.’401 Life is just like a particle of dust that is easily brushed away.
Arising and extinguishing are just a change of [the vapor]. [In the temporary
nature of life] like this, we should perceive truth through intelligence and
insight and freely wield the sword of wisdom. So, if we take advantage of the
movement, the coming and going, of nature, even though [the four great elements] gather together [to form the body] or scatter [to extinguish the body],
this has nothing to do with the self. [When we see] a large number of bodies
temporarily dwelling in a great dream,402 they are actually in the realm of
existence, but it is the same as if they were in the realm of nonexistence. How
could it be the case that we are blocked by what we receive (i.e., the body)
and bound by that for which we feel a persistent attachment (i.e., life)?
“If one comprehends this reason in one’s mind and yet other people have
not understood it, he feels sad about the fact that he alone has attained the
truth without having achieved [saving others]; he is grateful to have become
awakened before others and gives rise to the thought [of leading others to
Buddhism]. Then, since he hopes to propagate the [Buddhist] Way and clarify
the teaching, the virtue of benevolence comes into existence. If both others and

197

33c

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

myself attain [the Buddhist Way] equally, there is no opposition in our minds.
Then, when we freely wield a sword, we will unite ourselves [with the
Buddhist Way] and observe [all things] with the tranquil mind; even when
we engage in battle, all whom we encounter are friends [since we have no
opposition in our minds]. If someone tries to injure us, it is not only that we
will have no harm in the spirit; it is also possible that there is indeed no life
to be destroyed [from the beginning].
“This is exactly [why] when Mañjuśrī placed his hand on a sword403—
the action is wrong, but the principle [behind performing this action] is right—
and although he brandished his weapon all day long, there was no place to
catch the sword. If this is the case, it is brought to realization that the mysterious [works of the universe] are put to the best use by stimulating [diagrams
and symbols as stated in the Book of Changes],404 or the education [of the
barbarian people] is accomplished through [performing a dance while] holding
a shield and a battle ax, [just as was done by Yao and Shun].405 Even though
the achievement covers [all things, just as Heaven and Earth do], no [secular]
reward is especially given. Why are sin and punishment brought into question?
If we return to this point (i.e., that those who realize the Way go beyond
reward or retribution), and look for the fundamental [law], then we will be
able to clarify [the meaning of] reward and retribution [in the Buddhist sense].
If we analyze from the phenomenal world and seek the ultimate law of Nature,
then we will be able to discuss sin and punishment [in the Buddhist sense].
I will try to explain this more.
“When cause and condition affect together and a change arises, wouldn’t
they be derived from the [ﬁxed] law? Ignorance is an abyss of delusion.
Greed and attachment is a mansion of numerous sufferings. When these two
(i.e., ignorance and greed and attachment) work together, supernatural effects
occur in the unseen world. Good fortune and ill, occasion for repentance or
regret, all simply arise here.406 Since the function of ignorance covers up that
of intelligence, feelings and thoughts stick to external objects. Since greed
and attachment wash away [human] nature, the four great elements unite and
form a physical body. When the body is formed, there is discrimination
between self and others. When feelings stick to [external objects], there is
subjective [discrimination] between good and evil. When there is discrimination between self and others, we favor ourselves and are never unaware

198

Fascicle Five

of self-existence. When there is subjective [discrimination] between good
and evil, we feel a persistent attachment to life, and [the transmigration of]
birth [and death] never ceases. Thereafter, we sleep soundly in a great dream,
we are confused in the midst of delusions, we suffer doubts in the long night
of spiritual darkness, and we cling to whatever exists. Therefore, loss and
gain come alternately, and weal and woe visit us one after another. For accumulated evils, disasters spontaneously come from Heaven; for committed
sins, punishments [are inﬂicted] in Hell. This is precisely an inevitable destiny,
and it leaves no room for doubt.
“Why is this so? There is the foundation to understand it; that is to say,
in the law [cause and effect] spontaneously cope with each other in the unseen
world. Even though its [outward] sign is obscure, when its force reaches an
extreme point it becomes evident. Consequently, good and evil in the mind
are considered to be [like] a form and a voice, and happiness and suffering
as reward and retribution are considered to be [like] the shadow [of the form]
and the sound [of the voice]. The foundation (i.e., the mind) is moved by
feelings, and then the response (i.e., reward and retribution) spontaneously
arises. Would there be ofﬁcials of Hell? It is because [people] mismanage
[their minds] and lose the [proper] way. In that case, happiness and suffering
as the response (i.e., reward and retribution) are merely due to [the mind],
which is moved [by feelings]. Since [the mind] is moved and [a situation]
becomes so, it is called Nature. Nature is simply nothing but the shadow and
sound of the self. What achievement would even a Creator of the Universe
have [in this matter]?
“Let me examine the essential points of your questions and analyze them
with the realities. In the purpose of your criticism, you completely agree that
earth, water, ﬁre, and wind unite and form a physical body, which is taken as
a dwelling of the spirit. This precisely means that there is a master in the
house. I will ask you a question. While the master (i.e., the spirit) stays in the
house (i.e., the body), does he have feelings or not? If your answer is no, he
does not, the uniting of the four great elements [to form a body] is not due to
the master of the house having been moved. If [the master] lives [in the house]
without feelings, since [the uniting of the four great elements] is not derived
from the result of the master [of the house] having been moved, even if the
spirit dwells in a physical body he has no feeling and no perception, such as

199

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

34a

pain or an itch. If the spirit has no perception and the house has no pain or
itchiness, either, when it makes contact with other things, [the situation] is
like mowing grass or cutting trees. It does not make sense.
“If [the master (i.e., the spirit)] has feelings, the uniting of the four great
elements [to form a physical body] is due to the fact that the master was
moved [by feeling]. If [the master] stays [in the house] with feelings, since
[the uniting of the four great elements] is due to the fact that he was moved,
while the spirit dwells in the house it must have perception of pain or itchiness.
The spirit has perception and the house feels pain and itchiness as well. When
it makes contact with other things, it certainly cannot be the same as water
and ﬁre in the realm of nature.
“Speaking from this basis, spirit and body differ from each other, but
they change together. They really differ from each other in the fact that [the
spirit] is inside and [the body] is outside, but they are joined together. Except
for those who reach the point of view [of the fundamental law], who could
discern the relation between [spirit and body]? If one cannot discern this,
simply the more time passes, the more deluded he will be. Generally, among
those who receive a body and accept life, there is not one who is not like
this. Since we receive [body and life] and we are like this, everyone is blocked
by having a persistent attachment to the self. If the root of the blockage is
not pulled out, [attachment to] the way to continue to exist will become
ﬁrmer. If the origin of the persistent attachment [to the self] is not removed,
[the desire] to maintain [life] will become deeper as well.
“In the case where a thing goes athwart [in our daily life], the mind
becomes deranged; not to mention the case where the whole body is totally
lost. Accordingly, when friends and foes mutually take advantage of a chance
and are estranged from each other, unless the evil intention is removed, animosities arise and never cease. Even if one has exhausted happiness, receives
annoyance, and has no regret in the mind, since a form and a voice (i.e., one’s
acts) are set forth, their shadow and sound (i.e., reward and retribution) spontaneously manifest. There is nothing ﬁxed beforehand in reason, but the laws
[of acts and reward and retribution] come together and make it so. Even
though we want to escape from it, how can we do so? This is exactly to invite
reward and retribution in accordance with feelings, or to produce responses
by availing oneself of being moved. [You and I] fundamentally differ from

200

Fascicle Five

each other in the purpose of our arguments. Therefore, we are simply not the
same in understanding [the reason].”
Question: “If, since people’s feelings cling to life and cannot cause death,
then that feelings are brought into existence is simply derived from the delusion of egoistic attachment. [The Buddha] should clarify this by his transcendent view and let [people] understand it by the right path. Could it be
possible, [without doing so,] to conform to [sentient beings’] delusion and
consider [the delusion] as the object of retribution?”
Answer: “That phenomena arise is indeed derived from the mind. Retribution must be derived from the phenomena [that are derived from the
mind]. Hence, if we observe phenomena through retribution, the phenomena
can be changed. If we are strict with the mind through seeing phenomena,
the mind can return [to the right path]. Inferring from this point of view, we
know that the Sage (i.e., the Buddha) clariﬁes the object of retribution based
on delusion and obstruction; it is not to conform to [sentient beings’] delusion
and consider [the delusion] as the object of retribution, [as you said]. Why
is this so? It is difﬁcult for people to be awakened and [this fact] has indeed
existed for a long time.407 For this reason, in Buddhism, on the basis of what
it is derived from, the teaching is certainly given little by little. Since [the
Buddha] knows that longtime habits cannot be given up immediately, he ﬁrst
teaches that [retribution and reward are caused by] evil acts and meritorious
deeds. [Retribution and reward caused by] evil acts and meritorious deeds
cannot be totally forgotten. Therefore, he has [people] weigh the value [of
retribution and reward]. If they assess which is valuable, [reward caused by]
meritorious deeds or [retribution caused by] evil acts, they examine good
and evil and [through this examination] place their mind [in good]. If [they
know] good and evil are blocked by egoistic attachment, they [abandon the
egoistic attachment], and advance the ego a step further in order to lead other
people to [salvation]. If these two issues (i.e., examining good and evil and
advancing the ego a step further in order to lead others to salvation) are concurrently developed, nothing binds the feelings. Accordingly, we will be able
to ‘honor the talented and virtuous, bear with all people,’408 be benevolent
to ourselves, give peace [to others], and ponder far ahead the reward and retribution that are like shadow and sound, in order to relieve ourselves from
the delusive realm of transmigration of birth and death. Once delusive feelings

201

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

34b

are dispelled, later words about the right path can be understood, and the
deﬁlement to maintain life can be cut off. Since even wise people of the
middle class cannot cut off the deﬁlement to maintain life, how would people
of ordinary intelligence be able to accomplish this?”

The Discourse on Three Periods of Reward
and Retribution (Sanbaolun), Composed
for Those Who Doubt That There is No
Testimony [of Reward or Retribution]
Corresponding to Good or Bad Conduct,
by Dharma Teacher [Hui]yuan

It is stated in a Buddhist scripture that there are three different periods in
which [good or evil] actions mature and bring about [their effects], reward
or retribution: the ﬁrst is reward or retribution of the present existence, the
second is that of the next existence, and the last is that of an existence after
the next. The reward or retribution of the present existence refers to that for
a good or evil [act] begun in one’s present life, [reward or retribution] is
given to him in the present existence. The reward or retribution of the next
existence refers to that [for a good or evil act begun in one’s present life,
reward or retribution] is given in one’s next existence. The reward or retribution of an existence after the next refers to that [for a good or evil act begun
in one’s present life, reward or retribution] is given after the second, the third,
the hundredth, or the thousandth existence from the present existence.
There is no subject that receives [reward or retribution other than the
mind]; receiving [reward or retribution] must be due to [the good or evil of]
the mind. The mind has no ﬁxed task; it is moved by phenomena and responds
to them. Since in its response there is [velocity], fast and slow, reward or retribution comes early or later. Even though there is variation in the time of
its occurrence, following what the mind encounters, all reward and retribution
respond to it. Since there is variation in the strength of response [of reward
or retribution], [they] are not the same in relative gravity. This is exactly
natural reward and punishment, and the outline of the three periods of reward
or retribution. Unless people have the all-around talent, intelligence, and
brightness to reach the essential point [of the Buddhist Way], it is rare to be
able to enter the gate [of this doctrine]. Regarding those in the level below

202

Fascicle Five

them, probably there are people who experience for the ﬁrst time the right
path, who awaken taking a precursor as a guidepost, who broadly take account
of Buddhist scriptures, who [are sharp enough to] ask a question on the
remaining three corners [when they are told about one corner],409 who consider
the virtuous to be their teachers and friends, and who improve their natures
through learning. These people may be able to speak a little about [this doctrine]. Let me try to discuss it.
Good and evil arise through being gradually fostered [for a long time].
When they are gradually [fostered and eventually] reach an extreme, [they
become evident]. There is [a traditional] theory [in China] on the nine grades
of [good and evil]. Generally, what is included in [the classiﬁcation of] the
nine grades is not what reward or retribution of the present existence regulates.
In that case, it can be known that reward or retribution of the present existence
is beyond the ordinary classiﬁcation, and the classiﬁcations other than the
nine grades are not what the three periods of reward or retribution regulate.
Why is this so? If advantages and disadvantages intersect in front of one’s
eyes and suddenly a dispute arises between them, the mechanics of the spirit
spontaneously move and take action before thinking. If it takes action before
thinking, reward or retribution responds to [the action] immediately. This is
one example of reward or retribution of the present existence that is beyond
the theory of the nine grades.
Moreover, the three kinds of acts (i.e., of body, speech, and mind) are
different from each other in essence, but the same in regard to having ﬁxed
[reward or retribution]. Since [having] reward or retribution is ﬁxed, people
must receive them when the time comes. This is not something we can remove
by prayer or avoid through intellectual power. When we infer and investigate
this thoroughly, [we know that] the signiﬁcance is deep and the law is extensive. Since it cannot be examined in detail, I brieﬂy stated the characteristics.
Through [my explanation of] this, those who participate in Buddhism will
be able to understand [the issue of reward and retribution].
There are people in the world who encounter misfortunes even though
they accumulate good deeds, and there are people who do evil deeds and yet
are happy. These are all cases in which the reward or retribution of the present
existence has not yet come and the response to actions one took in a previous
existence has begun to manifest. Therefore, it is said that a person of a good

203

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

34c

omen encounters a disaster, while someone of an unlucky omen meets happiness. A suspicion regarding the ambiguous issue [of reward or retribution]
arises here. Why is this so? There are those who intend to lend a helping
hand to the monarch, aid the conditions of the times, save other people, model
themselves after the lofty traces [of the wise], and make up their minds to
render a [great] achievement, and yet who collapse in the middle of a great
enterprise and are suddenly visited by heavenly disasters; or there are those
who live leisurely in [a humble house with] a gate made out of only one
beam, who have no attachment to the secular world, who consider a peaceful
walk to be [equal to traveling in] a carriage, who live in comfort, and yet
who encounter an undesirable fate unexpectedly when the destined time
comes, who come to associate with and fall into secular ways and secular
customs, and who [eventually] become accustomed to [the secular life]; or
there are those whose names are known to be among the top of [the ten virtuous people of] the four subjects (i.e., virtuous principles and practice, ability
of speech, administrative talents, and literary acquirements) [of Confucianism],
who have mastered the heart of the Way, who have perfect love, who have
realized benevolence, and who develop virtue through cherishing the highest
wholesomeness. Among people like this, there are those who held [the vapor
of] harmony and became ill, or who fulﬁlled [the way of] having faith and
following it, and yet died young. These are all cases in which people encountered misfortune while they were achieving merit or virtue, and this causes
[other people] to doubt [the mechanics of reward and retribution]. Since the
fundamental reason is clear, we should examine the responses. Each response
has its base (i.e., the mind), which moves by [external objects]. Although
[the responses]—the favorable (i.e., happiness) and the unfavorable (i.e.,
misfortune)—differ from each other, the principle is simply the same.
The reason for this is that the situation in which [misfortune] stands
close to [happiness, which] is lurking behind [misfortune], was settled a very
long time ago, and the auspicious omen declared in the unseen world secretly
keeps recurring. Therefore, the vapor of happiness and the vapor of misfortune
alternately shift, while [the spirit transmigrates in] the six realms of existence.
Reward and retribution for good or evil acts appear to be very disordered,
but they work simultaneously. This causes both the ignorant and the wise to

204

Fascicle Five

be equally confused when the response (i.e., reward or retribution) manifests
as phenomena; to think that even though they accumulate good deeds there
is no blessing, or if they accumulate evil deeds there is no misfortune; to be
moved by the gods [of Heaven and Earth] and yet grieve at misfortune; and
to lament that a heavenly disaster befalls a good person.
All [people] think that Confucianism covers everything completely and
there is no ultimate law of Nature above it, and consequently this causes the
Great Way to become obscured by the minor way. If we consider the correct
words to be good guidance and seek the true [law] responding to the mind,
we must arrive at [the fact] that there is no such case in the law of Nature.
When we trace back to what causes it, [we ﬁnd that] according to secular
books [the issue of happiness and misfortune] is considered to be concerned
with a single lifetime; anything beyond [a single lifetime] is not clariﬁed.
Since [the issue of happiness and misfortune] beyond [a single lifetime] has
not been clariﬁed, people who seek the law of Nature limit it to within [the
sensual world] where they can see and hear. This is because monarchs of
former times conformed to the people’s minds, understood their temperaments,
and took [the sensual world] [that can be experienced by] ears and eyes to
be within a boundary, [leaving unclear the world beyond the boundary].
If we now combine the way for outside (i.e., Confucianism) and the way
for inside (i.e., Buddhism) and seek the [sages’] intention to propagate their
teachings, we will know that [both these teachings] must be the same in the
ultimate law, and we will not be confused by many different paths and frightened at the differences between them. If we can look into the three periods
of reward and retribution and view the distinction between those who are distressed and those who go smoothly, it will be entirely understandable why
Confucius did not answer Zhong You’s (i.e., Zilu’s) [question about serving
spirits] and Yan [Hui] and Ran [Boniu] were like ignorant people when they
faced their sage teacher [Confucius].410 It is also because there is the law of
dependent arising from causation (Skt. pratītyasamutpāda) and the law of
existence arising from causation (Skt. pratītyasamutpanna). Even though they
were bright enough to be ready to enter the truth [of Buddhism], they still did
not forget [the way of] benevolence bequeathed by [monarchs of former
times], and they still considered the three periods of reward and retribution

205

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

to be a beautiful garden; or they made rapid progress [to the lofty state of
the mind] and yet did not leave behind the abyss (i.e., the realm of the three
periods of reward and retribution).
From the viewpoint of inferring in this way, it is known that if the guests
beyond the secular world (i.e., śramaṇas) keep the wondrous Dharma in
mind, cleanse their minds in the profound gate [of Buddhism], and obtain
[the Buddhist doctrine] by inspiration at once, they can transcend to the
uppermost state [of mind]. Although people like this may have accumulated
misfortune in some previous life, even if they do not control their achievement,
[the accumulated misfortune] will spontaneously be put to extinction, and
they are not subject to the three periods of reward and retribution.
Speaking from this basis of why [the teaching expounded in] Buddhist
scriptures surpasses Confucianism and is beyond [the teachings] of the nine
philosophical schools [of China], would it not be because [Buddhism teaches]
to reach the essence [of the Way] through governing the spirit, to train the
mind, to trace completely the very source of the change, and to mirror myriad
phenomena upon [the world of] no phenomena (i.e., the world of truth)?
End of Fascicle Five of The Collection for the Propagation
and Clariﬁcation [of Buddhism]

206

Fascicle Six

The Discourse to Elucidate the
Refutation (Shibolun)
by Shi Daoheng (346–417)

During the Yixi era (405–418) of the Jin dynasty, according to what I have
heard, the two wise men of the Jiangsu area, Yuan and He, got together to
make a discourse on statecraft, and satirized the current administration. Even
though I have not read this composition, its intention seems to be to ridicule
the pitfalls of the world, modeling itself after the chapter on the “Five Kinds
of Vermin” in the Han Feizi,411 and they issued the Discourse on the Five
Kinds of Perversions. Śramaṇas, however, took no action [against this discourse] and it vulgarly lowers their case. I am afraid that [the discourse composed by Yuan and He] misleads people of the world and causes them to fall
into vicious delusion eternally. I cannot stand the extremity of resentfulness
and regret. Therefore, I would like to elucidate this through a discussion in
the form of [questions and answers between] the guest and the host.
There was a gentleman who was controlled by Confucianism in a metropolis in the east, who cross-questioned an impudent rustic in an out-of-theway place in the west.
He said, “I have heard that the Buddhist teaching is too deep to discuss
on the basis of Confucianism; the style of the teaching is too profound to
determine by physical methods; it is too reﬁned, non-aggressive, simple, and
distinctive to get involved in with common knowledge; it is too wondrous
and beyond all existences; and it cannot be fathomed by ordinary thought.
Consequently, [Buddhism] is often respectfully followed by sovereigns of
the times and admired by the nobles, and then the common people crowd
together, plight their faith, chime in, and quickly head [toward Buddhism].
All of them sigh together in admiration and praise the virtue [of the Buddha],
saying ‘If we are imbued with the reﬁned taste [of Buddhism], we will reach
the subtlety of its exquisite meaning. If we study the delicacy of its doctrine,
we will be mysteriously harmonious in the function of the spirit, we will
wash away the deﬁlements of the mind, we will leave behind the shackles

207

35a

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

35b

of the physical body, we will transcend the nuisances of mundane life of the
place of conﬁnement, and we will stay away from worldly duties and be
aloof from the world. When we submerge in the true essence (i.e., awakening),
even [Bo]yi and [Shu]qi would have no chance to surpass us in keeping
integrity. When we abandon glorious favor, even Chao[fu, a recluse during
the time of Emperor Yao,] and Xu [You, a philosopher during the time of
Emperor Yao,] would have no chance to go beyond us in determination.
When we taste the profound tenet [of Buddhism], even Yan [Hui] and Ran
[Boniu] would have no chance to join us in the practice. When we leave
behind disorder and impurity, even [Chi]song[zi] and [Wangzi]qiao, [immortals of ancient times,] could not compare with us in purity.’ If things are truly
just as have been spoken, there is no ﬂaw in reason.
“Now, however, when I observe all śramaṇas, [I feel that] they are all
lacking in talent; they live gregariously and they are vulgar. I have not seen
anyone outstanding [among them]. They are confused and indistinguishable,
just like a river in which the [muddy] water of the Jing River and the [clear]
water of the Wei River have merged. They are disordered, just as if perfume
and you (i.e., caryopteris divaricata), [the foul-smelling water plant,] are put
in the same box. If the source of the water is clean, the stream must [also]
be clear. If the root [of a plant] is deep, its branches and leaves will certainly
be luxuriant. Examining the speech and behavior [of śramaṇas], they are not
logical all the time. Examining their whole aspect, there is almost nothing
to compare with [their disorderliness]. The reason I am surprised at them is
precisely derived from these points. Just as the [Yellow] Emperor forgot that
he is intelligent, and Ju Liang forgot that he has [great] physical strength,
[when they heard about the Way], they all became sages by being forged in
a furnace and hammered or molded.412 If ‘the Way is not to be practiced in
vain,’ [as is stated in the Book of Changes,]413 the talent [for propagating
Buddhism] must correspond to the capacity [of sages]. If so, since śramaṇas
have left their homes, renounced the world, and attend to their own ambitions
in a lofty spirit,414 they must go against their blood relations, abandon the
secular value of glory, disﬁgure themselves, abide by the precepts, study the
doctrines earnestly, take refuge in the Dharma wholeheartedly, sit easily
stretching out their legs, and content themselves with a vegetarian diet. Even
if their virtuous deeds are outstanding, they become esteemed by [the people

208

Fascicle Six

of] the time, their appearance and deportment are peaceful and majestic, and
they serve as a good example to the people, even then they are in fact dark
in everything and good for nothing.
“Why is their behavior contemptible and ignoble while they have such
lofty [ambitions]? They never weary in seeking [fame and proﬁt]; they are
anxious, lacking even temporary peaceful relaxation. Some reclaim land and
cultivate it in agriculture, living like farmers. Some peddle or engage in trade
widely and compete with many others for proﬁt. Some conduct medical practice and hastily treat illness with cold or heat.415 Some devise tactics with
heretics in order to beneﬁt their occupation. Some practice divination by
directions and time and speak recklessly about the auspicious and the inauspicious. Some go against the Way, avail themselves of authority, and skillfully
curry favor of the time. Some hoard and save to nourish themselves excessively. Some talk idly pointing at their palms and consume [the fruit of] the
common people’s labors without moving from their own place. This is all
because [śramaṇas] are not equipped with virtue and their behavior is often
against the Dharma. Even if they may temporarily have a good point, how
much could it help to elevate their reputation? They should abolish these
[behaviors] by themselves and standardize their customs. [Their present conduct] is futile for the political affairs of the time, and harmful to the study
of the Way. This is what people who lead a virtuous life detest deeply, and
what concerns greatly those who rule over the state.
“Moreover, there are ﬁve kinds of perversions in the world and śramaṇas
are included among them. The basis to clarify this is that śramaṇas skillfully
devise expedients and instigate ignorant secular people; one way [they do
this] is to give parables to induce the people, and the other is to coerce them.
[Śramaṇas] say, ‘If you do evil deeds, you will certainly have misfortune
for successive kalpas. [On the other hand,] if you cultivate good deeds, you
will have eternal blessing.’ They say that those who are sinful will be investigated in Hell, and those who have merit will be helped by deities. They
earnestly encourage and lead the people, exhorting them to do what they
ordinarily cannot do. They force people to improve themselves and urge
them to do what they usually cannot do. [As a result,] in the worst case one
will reduce [one’s] support for one’s parents, and the least bad case is that
one will decrease the share [of living costs] for one’s wife and children. At

209

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

35c

a gathering of [śramaṇas] they have the best feast. Buddhist temples run the
gamut of splendor.
“[Śramaṇas] make off with people’s valuable items; they waste more
money on useless things; they use up others’ personal annual savings; and they
cause a deﬁciency of funds for the state and military. In vain they raise their
voice for the future; they pursue the formless before it shows a sign of manifestation. When we listen to their statements, they sound great and ﬁll our ears.
When we look at their appearance, they look aloof and ﬁll our eyes. [Yet] if I
seek evidence [for their greatness] through examining actual facts, I have not
seen any indication of it at all. It is truly as it is said: ‘Even though one tries
to keep his shadow tied up, he catches [only] the wind.’416 I have no clue to
[understanding them]. This is clearly what I have not been content with and
what the learned are very confused about. If you have good information on
[this matter], please let me humbly receive it. If I attain realization even for
the time being, I will be able to leave behind this hindrance eternally.”
The host was disappointed [with the guest’s account]. After awhile he
lamented with a long sigh and said, “What a strange story! How vile your
account is! The reason it is impossible for a vulgar [person] to talk about the
Great Way is that he is hampered by the appearance of things, and the reason
it is impossible to explain the ultimate way to obscure people is that they
adhere to the letter. Here, I will brieﬂy illustrate one corner [of a subject] for
you,417 so that you can think and return to the ultimate Way.
“Now, when the Sage teaches, he gives the Dharma according to the
capacity [of the recipient]. Since there is a limit to people’s capacity to accept
[the Dharma], ediﬁcation is given gradually. Conscience is recorded even if
it is [as minor as] the tip of a hair. A mean and stingy frame [of mind] is omitted even if it is [as large as] a hill or a ravine. Even a very minor virtuous
act becomes eternally one’s own property. Even a momentary meritorious
act results in [an object of] mysterious exertion in the end. When one begins
turning over a bamboo basket of earth, we cannot blame him [because] he
aims to achieve the making of a mountain.418 When one is about to proceed
to the ultimate state of mind (i.e., enlightenment), we cannot slander him
[because of] the fact [that he is completely prudent just as] he ties up a sack.419
On the other hand, the reason a sea is said to be great is because there is no

210

Fascicle Six

clamor for excessive cleanliness. The reason the Way is said to be obscure
in trace is because there is no astonishing appearance.
“Loving parents and being affectionate to a wife and children are attachments of the people who possess a mind, but śramaṇas abandon these, just
as they take off their shoes. Fame, social status, wealth, and carnal pleasure
are what people of the world value, but śramaṇas regard those things [as
being as insubstantial as] rice bran. It can be said that they put up with what
people cannot leave behind. This indicates the lofty and reﬁned taste and
the excellent task to propagate the [Buddhist] Way, yet you say that [śramaṇas] are dark [in everything]. Isn’t this a statement of very good appreciation? Moreover, if your ambition and actions are not the same [as those
of śramaṇas], your course to proceed differs from [that of śramaṇas]; wheel
tracks separate at the fork in the road. Then [you and śramaṇas] do not
mutually understand. Since you have not seen any outstanding points [of
śramaṇas], [your unﬂattering account] is simply a natural consequence. It
is quite natural that the ancients often lamented that it is difﬁcult [to obtain]
people of talent.420
“The Zhou dynasty is known for having many scholars; there were ten
talented vassals who helped their monarch (i.e., King Wu) in administration.
During the halcyon days of Emperor Yao and Emperor Shun, there were
eight virtuous men [for Gaoxin] and eight gentlemen [for Gaoyang]. Confucius
had three thousand [talented disciples]. They were all of outstanding ability
in the country, but those who were selected to become proﬁcient in the four
subjects (i.e., virtuous deeds, speech, administration, and writing) were less
than ten people. Among them, [Ran] Boniu had an incapacitating disease,421
[Yan] Hui had [one of] the six extreme evils (i.e., an early death),422 [Zi]shang
(i.e., Zixia) was stingy,423 [Zi]si (i.e., Zigong) was interested in [hoarding
commodities] to make a proﬁt,424 [Zai] Yu was [compared to rotten wood
that] cannot be carved,425 [Zhong] You (i.e., Zilu) was ﬁerce and obstinate,426
[Ran] Qiu imposed heavy taxes [on the people] and was incompetent in his
ofﬁcial post,427 and although Zhong Gong was [as good as] a red[-horned]
cow, he was born from [a man who was nothing more than] a brindled oxen.428
Nevertheless, the whole world praises their virtues, which became the foundation for the principles of human relationships; and respects their lofty

211

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

36a

tracks, which became examples for the gentry. The people admire their footsteps for a hundred generations, and revere their great conduct for a thousand
years.
“With regard to śramaṇas, they torture themselves [until it is] as if their
muscles were to drop off, and cruelly treat themselves like worthless things.
Would this be the way widely practiced and a well-intentioned argument for
gentlemen? This is compared to the case where a deluded man goes into the
workshop of Gongshu Ban [of Lu state] and does not praise [Gongshu Ban’s]
skillful guidance, yet jeers that a worker of poor skill has injured his hand.
It can truly be said that such a person stoops to vulgar thought and has a base
frame of mind.
“Formerly a prime minister asked a guest, ‘It is commonly said that an
owl eats its mother. Could such a thing occur?’ The guest replied, ‘I have
heard only that a benevolent crow repays [its parents for their kindness in]
raising it.’ The prime minister felt sorry and ashamed of his improper question.
Isn’t your present state of mind similar to that of the prime minister who asked
the question? Gentlemen refrain from [talking about anothe person’s] evildoing
but [instead] cite his good points. On the contrary, what have you said?
“Furthermore, you said, ‘[Śramaṇas] sit easily stretching out their legs.’
Since the forest and countryside are deserted, they often have to worry about
insurgents. [But if they live near] a bustling city, they are often inﬂicted with
the carping criticism of companionship [with secular people]. If they stay in
an inappropriate place, they invite the nuisances of the secular world. If they
hover around a rural community, they risk a [disparaging] comment from
the people of the world. Anyway, there is nothing good [in this]. They are
just driven to the wall. Even though the universe is vast, they do not know
where to stay.
“Again, you said, ‘[Śramaṇas must content themselves with] a vegetarian
diet.’ Well, there is deﬁciency of supply in this world; there are indeed no
accumulated stores [of food] in hills and valleys. When they take just a necessary amount of food, they once again use it in accordance with the Dharma.
What they face is complicated. On what basis can they support themselves?
“Even at the digniﬁed time of sages, there were people (i.e., Boyi and
Shuqi) who starved to death at [the foot of] Mount Shouyang. When the
world was peaceful and brilliant people were promoted, there was a man

212

Fascicle Six

(i.e., Lu Zhonglian) who went to the sea and died there.429 What do you think
[about these incidents]?
“Furthermore, since śramaṇas have no feathers on their bodies, they cannot
live being naked without clothes, and since their bellies are not gourds, they
cannot let them hang down [like gourds], without eating. As long as [their desire
for food and clothes] does not reach the extreme, they must have support. When
the harvest is good, they can take enough [as offerings] from the common people.
When it is bad, they do their best to support themselves [by secular ways]. This
is really not proper, but it cannot be helped. Consequently, if a viper bites one’s
hand, [the hand] is cut off in order to save the body. This is because we ponder
what is more important and maintain the more important thing.
“Even though one may make a living for himself, if he does not seek
anything, he has nothing to obtain; and if he seeks something, it is not necessarily that he uses only one method [to seek]. When he gives relief to himself, if [his purpose] is reasonable, why does he have to reject many methods?
[Śramaṇas] consider that everything within the boundary of desires is troublesome and vile, and cause [their desires] to not move recklessly. Why [is
it said that] they exceedingly attach [to things]?
“Long ago, Bocheng [Zigao] reclaimed land and cultivated it by himself,430 [Chang] Ju and [Jie] Ni ploughed side by side and practiced agriculture,431 Tao Zhu[gong] engaged in trade and made a living,432 Yuling irrigated a vegetable garden in order to support himself,433 Cui Wen[zi] sold
medicines and led a life of poverty,434 [Yan] Junping used to practice divination
to augment his insufﬁcent income,435 Zhang Heng won fame for the art of
divination,436 and Ma Jun gave full display to his achievement (i.e., making
a compass chariot, which shows the correct direction) of marvelous skills.
These are simply people who went against the secular world and led the life
of recluses. However, it has not been positively observed that they cut off
all relationships to the secular world and stayed far away from people of the
world, and yet [the people of the world] all sigh in admiration and do not
stop praising them.
“Nevertheless, it often happens that among śramaṇas, those whose conduct
surpasses that of many people and who feel shame at associating with fellows
of a sort are numerous. As for [śramaṇas] who master the Way, who enter
nirvana, or who transcend the secular domain, their numbers are incalculable.

213

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

36b

You, however, have not mentioned anything [about these śramaṇas]. Why
do you have a partial view? You should view [śramaṇas] based on inspecting
the facts. You cannot make a discussion separating the present from the past,
and you cannot make an expression dividing a small number from the larger
number. The rare and the simple are noble, while the numerous and the lewd
are humble. This is, I am afraid, not a discussion intended to seek the essence
and examine a theorem.
“You said, ‘[Śramaṇas] should abolish these [behaviors] by themselves
and standardize their customs.’ What do you mean by this? The sage (i.e.,
Confucius) did not deceive us [regarding the fact that there was one sincere
person in a hamlet of] ten families.437 If you do something with two others,
they must serve you as your teachers.438 When fragrant orchids are completely
luxuriant, if you were to collect, pile up, and burn them, wouldn’t this too
be atrocious? Among [śramaṇas], there are spontaneously those whose virtue
is profound and whose capacity is expected by the times. Some are outstandingly pure and live uprightly; some contemplate, enter into subtlety, and
pacify their spirits in the absolute state [of mind]; some expound subtle words,
clarify obscurity, and explain problematic points; and some diligently devote
themselves to meritorious deeds, exhort for the ediﬁcation [of others], and
esteem wholesomeness.
“Generally, the foundation of the Buddhist monastic life lies in the day
of tonsure, when they all individually make an oath, in mind and in words,
with genuine feelings and the highest sincerity. Even though life and death
are completely associated and the profound path is long and far, [the monks]
must urge themselves [to proceed]. Then, they will certainly be on the way
leading to [the goal]; the glory of the golden wheel-turning king [who rules
the four continents of the world] will be disregarded as if it were dust and
dirt; and the importance of Śakra-devendra, [lord god of Trāyastriṃśa Heaven,]
will be slighted as if it were rice bran. Everyone is earnest and sincere at the
beginning and has reasons of his own. Naturally [the Way] is, [however,]
neither suddenly attained at a stroke nor perfectly mastered. How could there
not be a minor fault in the course of time?
“Moreover, when you take up the true element and brieﬂy mention [the
reality of] the universe, why do you unite everything together without
examining and distinguishng them? We cannot execute the entire Ji clan [of

214

Fascicle Six

the Zhou dynasty] because of the fault made by Guan[shu] and Cai[shu],439
and we cannot exile all the men of the court [of Emperor Shun] because of
the four villains (i.e., Gonggong, Huandou, Sanmiao, and Gunyu) who committed cruel conduct.440 This is no different from the case where a man who
suffers from head lice wants to burn his own head along with the lice, or the
case of a man who is troubled by irritation on his legs consequently wants
to remove all the parts of his body below the hips. Isn’t this also excessive?
“You said, ‘[Their present conduct] is futile for the political affairs of the
times, and harmful to the study of the Way.’ When those who propagate the
Way beneﬁt the world, common people act daily according to it, yet have no
knowledge of it. Therefore, regarding the ediﬁcation of wuwei, Laozi says,
‘The people all said, “We are as we are, of ourselves!”’441 This statement is
appropriate. Hence, [Duan]gan Mu slept peacefully and yet Wei state was well
governed.442 Gengsang [Chu] was good at instructing and [the people in the
area of] Mount Weilei [of Lu state] submitted themselves to his virtue.443
“Presently in their lifetimes śramaṇas really have no achievements for
which the government could assess value, but they do in fact confer an invisible beneﬁt in the sphere beyond Confucianism. Taking a familiar [example],
to instruct the people through the ﬁve precepts is not on the same [low] level
of [giving instructions through] the Six Classics [of Confucianism]. Taking
profound [examples], the hidden severity of the eight difﬁculties is not equal
to [the sternness of] the criminal code; to engage in evaluating sins according
to the Buddhist canon is not the same as [evaluating according to] the laws
and regulations [of the secular world]; to speak of delusions with transcendental wisdom is not the same sense as do Laozi and Zhuangzi. Regarding
the cause and condition of purity (Skt. anāsrava) and uprooting suffering in
the [thirty-seven] elements to attain enlightenment (daopin), ‘we occupy our
thoughts, but do not discuss anything.’444
“In the teaching of the Duke of Zhou and Confucius, the doctrine is put
to the best use in appearance, while in the highest level of the ultimate Dharma
(i.e., Buddhism) the issue about the spirit is simultaneously managed in detail.
Regarding quality and ranking, [these two teachings] cannot be spoken of
in the same breath in terms of which is superior and which is inferior.
“In ancient times [in India,] Bei helped with the ediﬁcation and assisted in
governing the state by means of the [Buddhist] Way.445 [Consequently,] the

215

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

36c

border regions of the state were peaceful, the people knew righteousness [that
they had to follow], the harvest was rich and preserved, and there was no disaster.
What do you mean by saying that [Buddhism] does not beneﬁt [the world]?
“You said, ‘There are ﬁve kinds of perversions in the world and śramaṇas
account for one of them.’ Generally, what perversion means is to have no
will to work, to be unspeakably self-indulgent; to gamble, dissipating one’s
fortune and ruining one’s family property; to register one’s name in the household register and yet wander around at all times of the year; to neglect the
duties of ofﬁce while receiving pay and not be willing to apply one’s mind
to anything; to hold the reins of government and be in power, and yet exploit
the common people; to compete for promotion and incur both public and
private losses; or to indulge in violence, vice, and cruelty and engage in conspiracy. All of these damage the teaching, disturb order, and greatly harm
the customs of the world. As a result of this, Xun Yue wielded his pen and
his discourse on the chivalrous (i.e., the Shenjian) came into existence. Han
Fei took up a brush and the composition on the “Five Kinds of Vermin” was
completed. It is, therefore, suitable to consider these to be perversions, but
isn’t it a false accusation to apply this to śramaṇas?
“Our nation is just now competing with the times of Emperor Yao and
Emperor Shun for lofty virtue as the primary goal, and trying to equal the
Yin and Zhou dynasties in elegant education as the secondary goal. They do
not allow Mount Ji and the Ying River, [where Xu You and Chaofu lived in
seclusion,] to be occupied exclusively by guests who look down upon the
world (i.e., recluses), or for Mount Shang [where the four old men lived in
seclusion] and the Luo River to be designated only for honored recluseguests. [Our nation] intends to greatly encourage the style of hermits, and
to honor and respect [all of] those who transcend the secular world.
“When I examine what you think, [I ﬁnd that] as regards managing and
operating the government of the time, you want to follow mean and crafty
methods, like those of the tiger and the wolf, which were employed by the
ruined Qin dynasty; and you want to inherit the cruel and harmful pattern
that Shangjun (i.e., Shang Yang) carried out. They burned the books on the
Chinese classics and buried Confucian scholars alive; they did not have the
discipline to rule the country. By establishing very heavy taxation, each
household had no unbudgeted extra money, and by setting up prohibitions

216

Fascicle Six

for miscellaneous minor matters, they treated the people as if they were bandits. [Consequently,] the world became unhappy, and the people felt no
interest in their lives. [This] caused the Ying family (i.e., the royal family of
the Qin dynasty) to come to an end in three generations. The disaster caused
by the two men (i.e., Shang Yang and Han Fei) was ended during their lifetimes. On the very day they were being punished, they repented for the ﬁrst
time that the law they had established was wrong. Originally they wanted to
pacify the country and make the people harmonious. They did not expect
that the bank they had built was too high and harsh, and did not hold living
space for themselves, to the contrary of [their initial plan]. The incident had
already happened. What did they attain by their grief?
“You said, ‘The basis to clarify this is that śramaṇas skillfully devise
expedients and instigate ignorant secular people; one way [they do this] is to
give parables to induce the people, and the other is to coerce them.’ In sentient
beings’ relation to [the Buddha,] there are strength and weakness, and also in
their abilities, there are sharpness and dullness. In understanding, there are
difﬁculty and ease. In practices, there are shallowness and depth. Hence, the
way to explain and teach varies. The causes to inspire beings to awaken differ.
They melodiously try to cause them to follow wholesomeness. This is precisely
a key phrase in the use of schemes and power, and a bridge for a marvelous
salvation. It really does not mean to induce and coerce the people.
“You said, ‘[They (i.e., śramaṇas) say that] those who are sinful will be
investigated in Hell, and those who have merit will be helped by deities.’ All
wholesomeness belongs to those who possess virtue and who are the most
sincere. The Book of Changes states, ‘Those who tread [the path of] sincerity
and admire docility will be given help from Heaven. There will be good fortune, advantage in every respect.’446 Furthermore, it is said [in the Zhuangzi]
that if those who do what is not good in darkness and secrecy, spirits will
inﬂict the punishment.447 Wouldn’t this mean ‘to be investigated in Hell and
helped by deities’? Regarding reward or retribution for good or evil, there
are indeed [many] testimonies [found] in Buddhist scriptures. I will not enumerate them here.
“You said, ‘At a gathering of [śramaṇas] they have the best feast. Buddhist
temples run the gamut of splendor.’ This is due to families who make good
deeds [in order to win blessings]; they merely expend their wealth in order

217

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

37a

to prepare for future help, and they use up [their wealth] simply because they
are making long-range plans for themselves. It does not seem that deities are
delighted with the splendor [of temple buildings] and that all monks wish
for delicious food. This is compared to when a farmer sows seed: he is keen
in selecting [good] seeds in order to reap good-quality grain; or when a carpenter makes a building, he hopes to choose good timber when seeking the
adornments of the building. Therefore, in agricultural operations it is necessary
to plant in fertile soil, and in selecting a site for a residence it is important
to choose high and dry ground. Hence, we know that the three revered ones
are ﬁelds of merit for sentient beings,448 and it is said that making offerings
to them simply results in merit in the course of cultivating oneself.
“You said, ‘[Śramaṇas] make off with people’s valuable items; they
waste more money on useless things.’ To extensively confer beneﬁts [to
others] and love without distinction are great virtues of benevolent people.
To respect and adorn the ancestral temple is [the manifestation of] the most
sincere heart showing ﬁlial piety and respect [for one’s ancestors]. Since in
the worldly teaching (i.e., Confucianism) things are like this, in the [Buddhist]
Way things are like this as well. ‘Things are increased by being diminished.’449
If we do something, we must obtain [a result]. Moreover, the wealth of this
transitory [world] is just like impure soil, but to give it graciously [to others]
is a marvelous faculty. It is compared to the case that even a boat made of
decayed wood is essential for ferrying people over [to the yonder shore].
Why is this seen as a waste of money? To intend to sit upright viewing nature
[without doing anything], or to hope for comfort in silence with one’s arms
folded, is similar to wishing to cut wood without an ax or hoping to feel full
without eating. How could this be possible?
“If one does not lead a virtuous life, that is his own problem. Why is it
necessary to cover the common people’s ears and eyes and conceal the great
virtue of the world? You have already drunk poison and now you want to
poison others. Why are you so cruel? It can be said that you ruin yourself,
entrap others, and cause everyone to suffer from disasters. Therefore, for the
blind, the deaf, and the dumb there is the disaster of being in a place without
sight or sound for the completion of one whole kalpa, and as retribution to
Devadatta, there is the experience of suffering in Avīci Hell.

218

Fascicle Six

“You said, ‘They (i.e., śramaṇas) use up others’ personal annual savings;
and they cause a deﬁciency of funds for the state and military.’ If a sage king
manages the world, if simple and sincere customs spread far, if the whole
wide world is united through shaking the rope of morality, and if many
talented people are caught up by the spreading of a net of virtue, there will
be no one who [laments] the striking waves of a river, there will be no scholar
who grieves in a valley, all the four classes of people (i.e., scholars, farmers,
artisans, and merchants) will be content with their occupations, each and
every ofﬁcial of all ranks and descriptions will do his duty, [everyone in] the
land within the [four] seas will be brought together and understood thoroughly,
and the nine provinces (i.e., China) will be linked equally together. Then the
war vehicles will cease to be dispatched, armed soldiers will run back [to
their homes] and fertilize [the land], good grains will be piled up in the ﬁelds,
food will be stored up even to the extent of some going rotten, the youth will
improve in virtue day after day, the old will enjoy a long life, the people will
all live together in peace and comfort and praise the great peace, and they
will drum their bellies [signifying that they have had enough to eat,] and see
the prosperous ediﬁcation. Why are you unreasonably weak, worrying about
the world even though you think deeply of various things? Isn’t this also a
gross fault? There is a saying that when a ranking ofﬁcial who is quite stingy
and whose mouth is swollen faces the blue sea, [since he cannot drink the
seawater because of his swollen mouth,] he just holds his stomach. This truly
refers to you.
“You said, ‘It is truly as it is said: “Even though one tries to keep his
shadow tied up, he catches [only] the wind.” I have no clue to [understanding
them].’ To disorder truth by using sophistry is something that the great sages
lament. [When Bian He obtained unpolished jade in the mountains of Chu,]
since the people did not recognize it is a precious stone [and thought that he
was trying to deceive them], Bian He wept bitterly.450 Nevertheless, the subtle
purpose [of Buddhism] is delicate, and those who master it reach the Way.
[The doctrine] is lofty and simple, and those who comprehend it attain [enlightenment. Buddhism] employs deep competence and functions as a bridge for
ruined or drowned people to cross over to [the yonder shore]. It pulls [people]
out from darkness and saves them from hindrance. The excellence of [the

219

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

37b

teaching] is always on a level to that of the time [when the Buddha resided
in this world], and the ediﬁcation has spread boundlessly. Therefore, when
a mysterious light ﬂashes once, it moves the trichiliocosm. When benevolence
is sprinkled even for a short time, the whole land of China receives the favor.
Hence, Śakra-devendra and the king of the Brahmā Heaven realized the deep
purpose [of the teaching] and reverted to sincerity. Emperors and kings hope
for the profound belief and consign themselves [to Buddhism]. The eight
kinds of gods and demigods [who protect Buddhism] take the spiritual ediﬁcation and reform themselves. The common people come in a hurry to
observe the real deportment.
“Since [the Buddhist teaching] is lofty, it is not the same as Confucianism,
the teaching for the secular world; and since it is so solemn, it is the profound
path to transcend the secular world. Nevertheless, since the fence is steep
and high, it is seldom that one can pass through the gate, and since the house
is dark and deep, it is rare for people to enter its rooms. Therefore, the
[Buddhist] Way saves those who are completely sunk in [delusion], but the
doctrine is at variance with this. The virtue envelops all endlessly, but the
fact is at a distance from this. Probably there is a reason why you obstinately
hold on to wrong beliefs for your whole life and do not awaken until the end
of your life.
“Even though the sun and moon ride in the sky, a blind man is not able
to see the brightness. Even if thunder shakes the earth, a deaf man is unable
to hear the rumbling. Whose fault is this? To just now wish to comment on
the notes gong and shang or to stain the appearance of a composition is really
the worst fault.
“In ancient times, King Mucalinda recovered his eyesight as the
[Buddha’s] ﬁrst disciple [at the Buddha’s ﬁrst sermon].451 Subhadra listened
to [the Buddha’s sermon] as his last disciple.452 What sin causes you to be
so unfortunate as to harbor only suspicion throughout your life? Compared
to what many people feel sad about, your case is the biggest problem.”
Hereupon, [the guest] withdrew in a hesitant manner. He was in low
spirits and disoriented. After a while he said, “I have just heard the doctrine
of the Great Way, which completely follows in a continuous line from ancient
times to the present, which greatly establishes the law of cause and condition,
and which probes into the very point of principles and completely understands

220

Fascicle Six

every nature. The establishment of the doctrine is not intended only for a speciﬁc period of time, nor is the propagation of the teaching expected [to occur]
for only one generation. It can be said that one traces things to their beginning,
understands them to their end, and returns to life. I have really been asleep,
at a standstill, for the long night [of spiritual darkness]. Since I had not mastered
the purpose [of Buddhism], I always cause hindrances. Now, fortunately, I
have heard your discussion. My deﬁlements have been dispersed and my
doubts have been scattered. I have awakened all of a sudden, as if I had opened
the layers of clouds and seen the bright sun, or as if I had taken off something
that had covered me and realized true wisdom. I am truly not intelligent, but
I will respectfully follow the excellent teaching.”

The Discourse to Rectify [the Argument on]
the Two Teachings (Zheng erjiaolun)
by Ming Zhengjun

There is a Daoist monk who composed the Discourse on the Non-Chinese
and the Chinese. Therefore, I composed this in order to correct [his argument].
Ming Zhengjun,
Sengshao

I came to know that this outstanding discourse of sharp words had an established reputation. Since I am afraid that the Sage (i.e., the Buddha) will be
falsely accused and I would like to clarify the goals [of Buddhism and
Daoism], I will ﬁrst explain the phrases from two scriptures that [the Daoist
monk] cited [in his discussion] and correct [his interpretation]. I earnestly
hope that everyone can understand both [of these] profound teachings.
The Discourse states: “It is said in a Daoist scripture that Laozi arrived
at Guanzhong (present-day Shensi province) and left for Kapilavastu in India,
where the king’s wife is called Māyā (Qingmiao). As [Māyā] was napping,
Laozi availed of the essence of the sun and entered into Māyā’s mouth. At
midnight on the eighth day of the fourth month of the next year, he cut
[Māyā’s] right armpit open and was born. He landed on the earth and took
seven steps forward. Then, he raised his [right] hand and pointed to the sky,
saying, ‘Holy am I alone throughout Heaven and Earth. The three realms of

221

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

37c

existence are full of suffering. How could we be happy?’ Thereupon, the
Buddhist Way arose. This event is found in the Inner Section of the Mysterious
and Sublime (Xuanmiao neipian), which is an authentic scripture composed
during the Han dynasty, not a far-fetched book.”
I corrected this, saying, “The Daoist purpose of this is based on Laozi’s
scripture of two [chapters] (i.e., the Laozi Daodejing). The explanation about
the mysterious and sublime is provided in seven chapters of [the Inner Chapters of the] Zhuangzi, and [the Daoist fundamental tenet is] to attain the One
and master [the law of] the void thoroughly. There is nothing to hear regarding
the wonders of the transformation of a body. [In the Zhuangzi,] Peng[zu] (a
legendary ofﬁcial who was said to have lived eight hundred years) is equal
in life span to a child who dies prematurely.453 I have never seen that [this
text] advocates immortality.
“Therefore, those who are in harmony with Heaven do not engage in
changing normal ways, and they are content with their time and place themselves in order. Why would they seek a long life? If [Laozi] availed of the
essence of the sun, entered into [Māyā’s] mouth, cut [Māyā’s] right armpit
open, [and was born,] there is discrepancy between the time and the event.
This is [a story] that combines various different tales under the pretense of
a miracle. [The Daoist scripture composed during the Han dynasty] tells an
imaginary story and preposterously speaks of deiﬁcation. Absurd [statements
made] during the Qin and Han dynasties extend to Wei and Jin times. The
statement [of this Daoist scripture] does not follow [the law of] sages. How
can you say that it is an authentic scripture?”
The Discourse states: “It is said in Buddhist scriptures that it has already
been an immeasurably long time since the time the Buddha attained buddhahood, or that [the Buddha was] once the leader of the circle of Confucian
scholars, the most reverend priest of the country, or a monk.454 These are all
derived from actual Buddhist scriptures, not expedient talks.”
I corrected this, saying, “The foundation of Buddhism takes root in clarifying the ultimate teaching, and regarding the issue of three periods (past,
present, and future) there is nothing that can testify to it in secular ways. The
way to enlightenment is not something that can manifest evidence. Nevertheless,
at the point where the exquisite and the profound meet, there are internally
signs of meditation and wisdom. When there is a reaction between condition

222

Fascicle Six

and sensation, the law of causation has nothing wrong externally. Śākyamuni
gave the very fundamental cry of truth, and clariﬁed the goal to which the
Way of the Spirit leads. Consequently, to train one’s essential [mind] and to
examine the function of one’s intelligence are not [equal to] the merit of preserving one’s righteousness. In completing the way to the goal through minor
virtue, [Buddhism] is different from [the teaching] that comes close to haughtiness. Salvation in the [Buddhist] Way lies in neglecting the physical body
and what is valued is not to complete life. Since living life [for its own sake]
is not valued, what merit is there in keeping existing things? In neglecting
merit, merit manifests. In the tranquil state of complete extinction (i.e., nirvana),
there is the regular course of the [Buddhist] Way. [Everything] comes out of
non-beginning and enters into non-ending. All responses go to one [who has
made causes]. Even an immeasurably long time is not that long. This is the
teaching that [the Buddha] regards as [the Buddhist Way].”
The Discourse states: “The tenets of the two teachings (i.e., Buddhism
and Daoism) are as if [two pieces of] a tally are matched.”
I corrected this, saying, “Since the Buddha explains [the teaching for] the
three periods, [the teaching] completely complies with all things boundlessly.
Laozi only nourishes our physical body and his teaching dampens enthusiasm
to the utmost. Therefore, in the teaching that is conﬁned to issues about the
physical body, [Laozi] does not discuss life in the other world. In the ediﬁcation
[of Buddhism] that completely complies with everything, it accordingly covers
all things entirely. The Duke of Zhou, Confucius, Laozi, and Zhuangzi are
truly teachers of emperors and kings, but they cannot provide testimony for
the opinion we formerly read. [Buddhism and Daoism] are teachings that have
different [strategic positions]. In addition, the testimony [that the tenets of the
two teachings are as if two pieces of] a tally are matched is disregarded.”
The Discourse states: “Daoism is precisely Buddhism; Buddhism is
none other than Daoism.”
I corrected this, saying, “Since there is a difference between the [two] teachings, just as there is between a square and a circle, how could we see them as
the same? Those who follow Buddhism can ﬁrmly weigh [the teaching of]
Laozi, but how can those who learn [the teaching of] Laozi take it to be the
same as [that of] the Buddha? If [the compiler of the Discourse] presumes
to compete with [Buddhism], trying to cling to the supremacy [of the teaching

223

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

of Daoism], recklessly mixing up [the two teachings] through selecting and
collecting [materials], and intends to establish the unorthodox and remove
the orthodox based on the similarity [of the two teachings], then this is precisely that what should be learned is not what he has learned. He reveals
himself to be a vermin of the Way. He seriously fails to know himself. He
must be ashamed to face those who maintain their proper province.”
The Discourse states: “[Since the Way is helpful to all in the world, it
penetrates all areas, and since its knowledge embraces all things,455 it governs
all things. Since the areas] penetrated vary, the ways to govern [the areas]
must differ. [The Way] causes each [of all things] to accomplish its nature
and does not change its task.”
Moreover, it states: “Some [sages] clarify the Five Classics and some
spread [the teaching of] the three vehicles” and “They teach Chinese people
in the Chinese language and edify non-Chinese in their native languages.”
In addition, it states: “Buddhism and Daoism are equal in universally
edifying, but there is a difference between the Chinese and the non-Chinese
[in their objects of ediﬁcation].”
I corrected these, saying, “He who is quietly inspired and attains thorough
understanding must do everything smoothly. By a single voice, the Buddha
lets [sentient beings] receive awakening, complying with each of their species.
Would the teaching of the three vehicles be necessary to edify [only] the
non-Chinese? Why does the Chinese way require strict adherence to the
teaching of the Five Classics? In emptying one’s mind and exerting oneself
in accordance with affections of his mind, there is no difference between
Chinese people and non-Chinese. How could differences in customs contradict
[the teaching of] the Sage (i.e., the Buddha)? Although the areas penetrated
[by the teachings] are not the same, the teachings are naturally equal.”
The Discourse states: “[The full formal dress of] the black garment
called xuanduan together with the cap called weimao and the formal dress
for government ofﬁcials are the garb of many Chinese people; while the
trimmed hair and black garment [of a Buddhist monk] are the manner of
dress of many non-Chinese people.”
I corrected this, saying, “When we seek the valuable point of a principle,
we should ﬁrst base it on the manners and customs of the people. There are

224

Fascicle Six

differences in the way to follow a tradition. It is simply an issue of the times.
Therefore, the gentleman makes achievements beautifully, just as the leopard’s
spots become more beautiful [in autumn],456 and the people’s culture is ﬁrst
reformed. Zhuan Sun (i.e., Zichang) received an instruction [from Confucius],
and lost his determination to learn about the Yin dynasty.457 Regarding the
virtue of Emperor Shun and Emperor Wu [of the Zhou dynasty], Yao abdicated
the throne [for Shun], and [Wu] expelled [Emperor Yang] from the throne
by force of arms and made a different statute. Sages of later generations had
achievements. Could there be a boundary between Chinese people and the
non-Chinese?
“Moreover, is it necessary to adhere to the national dress in thinking
through the ultimate teaching? Therefore, when we link [the manner of dress]
to unchangeable sorts of things, our delusion becomes deep and our actions
are stymied. Since water and land differ from each other, there are [different]
methods of sending things to a distant place. The example of the boat and
the carriage [found in the Discourse] cannot be considered well done. Moreover, [śramaṇas, like] the one who carved a mark on the side of his boat [to
indicate the place where he dropped his sword into water],458 and [Daoist
monks, like] the one who waited by the stump [where he previously had
caught a hare], in the hope that other hares would come by that spot,459
assuredly show two points to which we are led.”
The Discourse says, “[Buddhist monks] abandon their wives and children
in token of a minor degree and discontinue their ancestor worship in token of
a major degree. They fulﬁll all things they desire with the politeness [of Confucianism], but they completely warp the rule of showing ﬁlial piety and respect
for one’s parents with the [Buddhist] Dharma. [Buddhists] go against virtue
and offend the [right] order, and yet they have been unaware of this.”
Moreover, it states: “To maintain completely one’s body and to abide
by ancestor worship are in the teaching to continue wholesomeness. To damage one’s physical form and change one’s family name are in the learning
to cut off evil. What should be valued in the ultimate principle of the universe
is the Way, and what should be despised in phenomena is secularity.”
I corrected this, saying, “Now [the Discourse] takes rejecting ancestor
worship as offending [the social] order. [In Confucianism, however,] they

225

38a

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

retain desires and expand politeness. This means exactly that the rule of
showing ﬁlial piety and respect for one’s parents exists for one’s own beneﬁt.
Secularity is not necessarily despised. To damage one’s physical form [and
change one’s family name] to cut off evil are despicable [acts] from [the
Confucian] viewpoint, but their way is not necessarily noble. [The compiler
of the Discourse] is fond of the secular [world], adheres to former times,
honors China, and esteems politeness. He turns the noble and the humble
upside down and falsely makes self-satisﬁed talk. He vainly wishes to be a
vermin and drowns in ordinary views. How could he expect the fundamental
principle in the words of the Sage (i.e., the Buddha)?”
The Discourse states: “Either nirvana or the transformation of becoming
a Transcendent is a method [to unite with the Way]. In Buddhism it is called
right and true (zhengzhen), while in Daoism it is called right and One
(zhengyi). The term ‘One’ means to return to non-death and the term ‘true’
means to meet nonarising.”
I corrected this, “[Laozi says:] ‘Princes and kings attain the One and
become the head of the world.’460 He does not talk about the transformation
of becoming a Transcendent. Since [Laozi says] ‘The one who does not lose
[even a part of his body] when he dies is of longevity,’461 he does not discuss
the issue of non-death. [The compiler of the Discourse] makes a personal
assumption and a false accusation. His words are smooth, but they are wrong.
The Great Way has already been obscured and small comprehensions [of the
mind] have risen one after another.462 How true this saying is! All those who
make false accusations and deceptions and who are too arrogant intend to look
for sages’ words in order to illicitly make up for their faults. We indeed do not
tolerate to examine it. The Daoist teaching today merely takes long life to be
a belief and immortality to be the main goal. Alchemy, golden elixir, eating
clouds, taking jade as food, mysteriously ﬂying up, sprouting wings or exuviating
to ascend to Heaven, deliverance through the corpse, and transformation are
the methods with which they entrust themselves. [Yet] when we try to verify
these things, [we ﬁnd that] no such things can be seen after all.
“Furthermore, [the Daoist teaching] claims that if one does not ascend
to [the realm of] immortals he will become a ghost after he dies, or he will
be summoned and appointed an ofﬁcer of Heaven, according to his original
merit. Even though these [notions] are greatly against the worthy writings

226

Fascicle Six

left by Laozi and Zhuangzi, in the fundamental principles they still have
nothing wrong in the worldly teaching. If one loses desires, directs his course
to wholesomeness, avails himself of ediﬁcation, goes at will, and forgets the
purpose of multiplying endlessly, [the search for] truth results in absurdity,
but does not throw a normal [condition] into disorder.
“Regarding [Daoists] like Zhang [Ling] and Ge [Xuan], all of them additionally concocted supernatural transformation to educate the common people;
they concocted weird accounts and misled the people of the world. By means
of talismans and spells, they appeal to [the Heavenly Thearch] in written and
verbal form, and as a pretext they say that these are all what Laozi transmitted
to them. Moreover, they have gradually expanded [their teaching]. Then they
quote Buddhism, which is far away [from their teaching], and try to testify
that [Buddhism] consists of forgeries. Their argument is confused, and there
is no model of scholarship on which they base [their argument]. When we
examine [their teaching] against the meanings of [orthodox] texts, we cannot
ﬁnd anything similar. They cause the true and the absurd to be mixed up,
people who wish for awakening to be deluded eternally, and no one to be
able to dispute it. It is a serious false accusation and severe disorder.
“You are already fully aware that [the teachings of] the Buddha and
Laozi are right, but you have not yet encountered a ferry [to the teachings].
Now I would like to brieﬂy explain a corner [of the teachings] and cause you
to have self-introspection.
“The two teachings (i.e., Buddhism and Daoism) possess both the study
of the truth and the examination of the mind. Therefore, [the teachings] can
avail themselves of all states of things whenever they encounter them.
“The teaching of Laozi consists of moral training, statecraft, cutting off
and abandoning the honor of high rank, and things to rectify their nature. It
takes the absolute vacancy as the foundation and softness and meekness as
the function. It encourages self-examination without blaming others, striking
one’s root deeply in oneself and being perfectly still,463 regarding the movement of the primordial vapor of Heaven as an integral whole, going peacefully
beyond the human world, cultivating harmoniously the great primordial
vapor,464 having equanimity toward loss and gain, not scheming to go with
obstruction even when one is driven to the wall, waiting [for good fortune
and] submitting to fate, not planning [to proﬁt oneself] even though one rises

227

38b

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

in the world, and taking public opinion as a measure of his worth. This is
why scholars truly admire even the branch stream [of the original teaching]
and why the teaching exists. Why do they take up the issues that deiﬁcation
has no set pattern, of beneﬁting the world, and of immortality?
“As for collecting clouds, sprouting wings or exuviating [to ascend as
a Transcendent], changing the spirit, and tracing to the very source of the
numinous being, these are [practices] from a teaching of a different vapor
which was created through mending and accumulating [teachings] that were
formerly completed. Therefore, although there are records of strange matters,
what are called the principles do not follow them. When we investigate supernatural accomplishments we reach all things accordingly; the large are extraordinary auspicious cases, such as a female kylin or a male phoenix; and the
small is the transformation of sparrows or pheasants. Once we have received
a physical body, we wish for learning. Can we achieve it?
“So Yan [Hui] and Confucius are contiguous to each other in their ways,
and they are close to the apex of natural endowments and learnedness. If we
indeed admire the mysterious trace and yet stop it, or if we desire to follow
and yet there is nothing to follow, to be contented with our fate is not reckless
deﬁlement. When we infer from this, [everything] can be clear. Therefore,
Confucius esteemed to know the decrees [of Heaven] and he certainly had
something he did not say. Boyang (i.e., Laozi) left behind strangeness and
honor, and he ﬁrmly abided by wuwei. All these are attempts to restrain the
causes of deception. Then, in tracing to the very source of the spirit and
devoting oneself to the teaching, there is assuredly the ultimate law of Nature
that we follow. In accomplishing the Way and attaining things, there is the
origin that we realize in each of them.
“Actions manifest in one’s previous existence, but you seek merit through
forcing yourself to learn. A deep-rooted practice is accomplished habitually,
but you perversely long for absurd desires and change them to the highest
priority. If [one faces toward] Yan state [in the north] yet desires [to go to]
Yue state [in the south], what could make his desire come true? Therefore,
in learning we ﬁrst ﬁnd what [should be] learned and then learn it in order
to accomplish it. To do what can be done is to do what can be achieved. In
order to study and clarify about the people, the teaching was established in

228

Fascicle Six

the middle of Heaven. Regarding the observation of phenomena and the
survey of changes, [the sages] occupy their thoughts with them but do not
discuss them. This is the profundity in managing the affairs of the secular
world, and the ultimate [teaching] of Confucius and Laozi.
“To do what has not happened, to complete the function of intelligence,
to trace to the very source of causality, to share reason among living creatures
who are different from each other, to have a thorough [knowledge] of falsehood
and return to truth, and the authentic supernatural accomplishments all [indicate]
the greatness of Buddhism. Hereupon, the Buddha precisely clariﬁes the ultimate law of Nature. Laozi [teaches] how to complete one’s life. Those who
stick to life are blocked [from the way to truth] and those who clarify the ultimate law of Nature reach it. Nevertheless, if one quietly rests in the right path,
even if he is blocked, he is not deluded. If he actively follows the ultimate
law of Nature, he will reach reason and illuminate the ultimate Way.
“Therefore, people of virtue certainly esteem to complete the pure nature
given by Heaven and seek the Way by themselves. They respect the foundation, help [people] understand [the teaching] thoroughly, and return the
merit to the four great elements. If one does not try to do things that are not
so, abides by the teaching, and maintains the constant Way, he can learn the
purity of the teachings of Confucius and Laozi. He goes beyond the ultimate
law of Nature and sees as far as the horizon. He searches the stream [of the
teaching], looks into the origin, and considers life to be dust and poison.
Therefore, he stops extending respect to monarchs and parents, he does not
talk about changes and extraordinary things with surprise, he does not hold
stubbornly to one side, he is not frightened by mysterious things, and he
develops his thoughts through pacifying his mind and contemplation.
“When accumulated merits are revealed and the important [time] comes,
the essence of Buddhism is clear in our actions. Consequently, if in learning
we ﬁnd what [should be] learned, it is possible to support all the people and
the teaching is revered in the world. If actions become clear in the doing [of
them], we will exterminate deﬁlements, return to the stream [of the teaching],
and go far away from heavenly and human beings. Anything beyond this
point has probably not been known. What we attain through clearing our
thoughts lies just in this.”

229

38c

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

Family Law (Menlü) by Zhang Rong (444–497)
and the Criticism by Zhou [Yong,
Director of] Shan

Generation after generation, my family has revered Buddhism and the family
on my mother’s side respects Daoism. Daoism and Buddhism are not dual
in the ﬁnal consequence; [both teachings] aim toward tranquility and stability
and they are the same at the foundation. When one is inspired, he is successful
in understanding [the teaching] thoroughly. When we come across traces [of
the teachings, we may ﬁnd that] they become different from each other. This
is comparable to the case where although the music was not handed down,
we are not far from the mystery of the Five Thearchs; or the case where
although the ceremony was not transmitted, the holiness of the Three Augusts
is not suspended.465 The times of the Three Augusts and the Five Thearchs
were different. Therefore their customs were not the same. They belonged
to different ages. Hence their righteousness varied. Why can we arbitrarily
exercise common or dull [intelligence] and falsely accuse the ultimate Way
of the Spirit?
I see that Daoist monks ﬁght Buddhist monks [just as] Confucianists
[ﬁght] Mohists, and that Buddhist monks judge the rights or wrongs of Daoist
monks, and vice versa. Once upon a time there was a wild goose that ﬂew
in the Way of Heaven. Since it was far [from the earth] it was difﬁcult to see
[the goose] clearly. The people of Yue thought the goose was a wild duck,
while the people of Chu thought it was a swallow. [The difference] is simply
due to [the fact that] people lived in either Yue or Chu. The wild goose was
always just a wild goose, wasn’t it? [In the same way,] only the pure foundation is one, and we all believe in the foundation. The traces of the wild
goose have already dissipated. I will soar in the essence gathered [from all
the traces]. You may wholeheartedly follow in the footprints of the Buddha
without disgracing the foundation of Daoism.

A Letter Given to He [Dian], He [Yin],
Kong [Zhigui], Kong [Zhongzhi], and
Zhou [Yong, Director of] Shan, Shanci466

I, Shaozi, will send a letter and make a statement to all those who roam about
in life. I, Zhang Rong, state:
230

Fascicle Six

A bird cries mournfully when it is going to die. A man speaks good words
when he is approaching the end of his life.467 Recently my disease has worsened
and my vitality has weakened. In this condition, I [wonder] how many times
I can breathe while my spirit stays [in this world]. Moreover, I am afraid that
my boat lost the rudder in a deserted narrow ravine, and there is nothing to
fasten a hill to a marsh.468 Therefore, the time I can view the moon (i.e., his
remaining lifetime) is very short. Every moment I am busy. If I do not stitch
[everything together], it drifts away. I would like to make my lingering intention
of the afterlife the rules of conduct for my brothers and nieces. Therefore, I
created the Family Law, and I recite this writing often. I try to reach the origin
of the two teachings (i.e., Buddhism and Daoism). Now I am reporting this
to you, gentlemen. What do you think about this?

Response to Zhang’s Letter Together
with Questions to Zhang

I, Zhou [Yong, Director of] Shan, Shanci, wrote back to you, Shaozi, and stated:
I, Zhou Yong, bow to you with my head to the ground. A great composition
came to me. I read that you are making your family code more severe. We,
those who visit your family, have nothing with which to involve ourselves in
this, and you really do not expect any help from us. When I respectfully examine the same foundation, [I ﬁnd that] there is something to measure your lofty
mind. Even though I know the primary to which the Way of the Spirit returns,
in addition to Buddhism, the principle of Confucianism is magnanimous.
Beside these, as to what can equal [the teaching of] Confucius, [the teaching
of] the Yellow Emperor and Laozi is truly majestic. This teaching has gradually
spread [as time goes by]. It is not that there is not anything perverse [in the
teaching]. In its basic principle, simplicity, there is something respectable. I
select traditional thoughts, brieﬂy differentiate the pure from the murky, and
do not mix them up in the process of selection. I just have held these thoughts
in mind and have not yet expressed them. In any system there is order and
disorder, and we cannot make a mistake in distinguishing the similarities from
the differences. We should make a conclusion in written form.
Discerning the intention of your writing, you said that [the three teachings]
are fundamentally the same. It appears that [your intended meaning of “same”]
is not [the same as what] I think. [Your idea of “difference,”] as you mentioned

231

39a

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

that customs differ according to the time, is not [the same as what] I think,
either. It has been my long-cherished desire to put in order some of my
thoughts on this point. Fortunately, in the light of your opinion, I would like
to try to articulate my view together with you. It is brief, as you see below.
I look forward to hearing your profound instruction.
In the Discourse on the Way to Reach the Origin [of the Two Teachings]
you say, “Daoism and Buddhism are not dual in the ﬁnal consequence; [both
teachings] aim toward tranquility and stability and they are the same in their
foundation. When one is inspired, he is successful in understanding [the
teaching] thoroughly. When we come across traces [of the teachings, we may
ﬁnd that] they become different from each other.”
Zhou says, “You mention in your discussion that they are the same in
their foundation. Please let me ask you: What is the meaning of the foundation
to which you refer here? Wouldn’t it be that those who speak of Daoism consider the two-chapter text (i.e., the Daodejing) to be primary, and those who
speak of Buddhism should take prajñā to be the ultimate law of Nature? The
reason why the two-chapter text is esteemed is that the signiﬁcance reaches
the absolute vacancy at the extreme point. With prajñā one observes that the
extremity of the spiritual function is the Dharma-nature. Even though the
absolute vacancy and the Dharma-nature are the same in respect to tranquility,
they differ from each other in the purport of the way to position tranquility.
As for your statement in the discussion, ‘[Daoism and Buddhism] are not
dual in the ﬁnal consequence,’ do you mean that [the two teachings] settle
in the absolute vacancy or that they are not dual in the Dharma-nature? Is
there another foundation in addition to those of the two paths, or are the
absolute vacancy and the Dharma-nature not different from each other in
purport? If there is another foundation, please tell me about it in detail. If
[the absolute vacancy and the Dharma-nature] are not different from each
other, I wish to hear your explanation of why they are not.”
In the Discourse on the Way to Reach the Origin [of the Two Teachings]
you say that “The times [of the Three Augusts and the Five Thearchs] were
different. Therefore their customs were not the same. They belonged to different ages. Hence their righteousness varied.” [And you say,] “I see that
Daoist monks ﬁght Buddhist monks [just as] Confucianists [ﬁght] Mohists,

232

Fascicle Six

and that Buddhist monks judge the rights or wrongs of Daoist monks and
vice versa. Once upon a time there was a wild goose that ﬂew in the Way of
Heaven. Since it was far [from the earth] it was difﬁcult to see [the goose]
clearly. The people of Yue thought the goose was a wild duck, while the
people of Chu thought it was a swallow. [The difference] is simply due to
[the fact that] people lived in either Yue or Chu. The wild goose was always
just a wild goose, wasn’t it? [In the same way,] only the pure foundation is
one, and we all believe in the foundation. The traces of the wild goose have
already dissipated. I will soar in the essence gathered [from all the traces].”
Zhou says, “You say in the discussion, ‘The times [of the Three Augusts
and the Five Thearchs] were different. Therefore their customs were not the
same.’ This means that Buddhism is different from Daoism. Your statement,
‘They belonged to different ages. Hence their righteousness varied,’ refers
to the Daoist teaching being separate from the Buddhist [teaching]. Daoism
and Buddhism are different from each other. If it is not a wild duck, it is a
swallow. This means only that the foundation in which you believe is just
one: a wild goose. If you run about busily [advocating both] Buddhism and
Daoism, you will have neither of them. In your lofty examination, you have
not been aware of what you are following in order to discern the foundation.
You easily revere [both teachings]. Is there any purpose in doing so?
“If you still take hold of the two teachings and position their foundations,
I am afraid that ﬁghting and judging [between the two different teachings]
will just begin and you will not be able to pass good judgment on anything.
If we survey equally the origin of teaching on the basis of the two teachings,
the origin of each teaching always reveals itself along with the teaching itself.
We should put on a deerskin cap and hold a staff with rings [just as a hermit
does], and see [the world] in a leisurely manner. Then, Confucianists and
Mohists will calmly discuss. [They may wonder] why they formerly competed.
If the origin in which [the two teachings] are well matched is correct and the
traces that separated [from the origin] are wrong, the functions of the two
traces should be all removed. Why do you go in the direction to soar in the
essence [gathered from many sources], while diligently engaged only in
Buddhism, concentrate your vapor, hold the One fast in your embrace, and
yet have no respect for Daoism? Your words are deep and your purpose is
profound. I hope to hear your later account.”

233

39b

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

In the Discourse on the Way to Reach the Origin [of the Two Teachings]
you say, “You may wholeheartedly follow in the footprints of the Buddha
without disgracing the foundation of Daoism.”
Zhou says, “You wholeheartedly follow in the footprints of the Buddha
without disgracing the foundation of Daoism. I hold Śākyamuni’s instruction
in my mind and am attached to the Confucian statements in my daily conduct.
I have not yet understood your intention. How are Buddhism and Confucianism positioned? Do you think that they are one in the foundation and
differ in their later development, or are they different both in the foundation
and in later development? Since I wish to thoroughly inquire about this or
that and investigate exhaustively issues related to the principles, I cannot
help but to ask you [these questions].”

The Second Letter Given to Zhou
with Answers to His Questions

I, Zhang Rong, say, “Since I have still been unable to forget myself, I have
attachment to my family. My body has already weakened and my gray-haired
head has come to an extreme point. I stay in this world for my young dependents.
I do not want to cause my mind to be deserted day and night, like the former
capitol, and what I have troubled with throughout my life to run wild. For
that reason, I created this Family Law in order to regulate the family. If
Buddhism and Daoism are not employed, by what means would my family
be regulated? Therefore, I try to postpone my last day depending on my vital
breath and to extend my life span relying on animation. I am often moved
and wish for divine response. I [hope to] reach the origin [of Buddhism and
Daoism] and to settle the foundation. I truly wanted you to give me a wonderful opinion. Sure enough, you wrote back in this way and gave me your
thoughts, clever views, and correct analysis. Since you have given me your
thoughts, I now speak for you.”
Zhou says, “You mention in your discussion that they are the same in
their foundation. Please let me ask you: What is the meaning of the foundation
to which you refer here?”
I respond to Zhou, “The nature of the mind is the capability to know.
The way of morality is what can be known. If one has the capability to know
and yet he does not know what can be known, this does not mean that he has

234

Fascicle Six

the capability to know. If there is what can be known and yet it is not known
by one who has the capability to know, it is not what can be known. Hence,
we see that one who has the capability to know must go to the way [of morality] and what can be known must know what it goes to.
“Nevertheless, an ordinary person trembles with feeling, disturbs the
function of intelligence, stirs up desires, agitates the spirit, drives his sharpness
out, and clouds the function of recognition. Therefore, the mind goes in the
wrong direction and ﬂows downward, and the function of intelligence separates from the way [of morality]. As to [the teaching of] Boyang (i.e., Laozi),
giving undivided attention to the [vital] breath and bringing it to the utmost
degree of pliancy, staying in the void to let the animation act at will, putting
the restless at ease, and holding all together in one embrace,469 one stays put
as if frozen and understands tranquility thoroughly. When one is solely proﬁcient in tranquility, the function of intelligence has no chance to disappear
and the animation halts in the void. Hence, he directs himself joyfully. If you
want to have Boyang not be tranquil, how could this be possible? If you
would have him be tranquil and not anchored in the Way, how could this be
possible, either? Now that it is tranquil and has two spirits, the spirits are
tranquil and there are two ways. I have never heard this.
“Consequently, at the ﬁnal point it is one. [Nevertheless, an ordinary
person whose] nature is restless and too hasty and whose appearance is wild
is unable to widely practice further. [This is comparable to the case where]
a man thinks to assume hegemony in the world in the next battle and yet just
exhorts the people to respect his determination. I hope you may become free
from all thoughts and hold the [dark-colored] pearl (i.e., the foundation).470
Hence, although there are ﬁve people who are categorized as a ‘Thearch,’
the spirit is always one. There are three people who have the title ‘August,’
but the Way is not more than one. Even though a wild duck and a swallow
are mistaken for one another, in the end it is a wild goose, isn’t it? This is
why I straighten [your] rope.”
Zhou says, “Wouldn’t it be that those who speak of Daoism consider the
two-chapter text (i.e., the Daodejing) to be primary, and those who speak of
Buddhism should take prajñā to be the ultimate law of Nature? The reason
why the two-chapter text is esteemed is that the signiﬁcance reaches the absolute
vacancy at the extreme point. With prajñā one observes that the extremity of

235

39c

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

the spiritual function is the Dharma-nature. Even though the absolute vacancy
and the Dharma-nature are the same in respect to tranquility, they differ from
each other in the purport of the way to position tranquility.”
I respond to Zhou, “Even though the Dharma-nature seeks emptiness
by means of [the doctrine that emptiness] is precisely form [in the phenomenal
world], the absolute vacancy [in Daoism] actually extends the meaning
beyond the phenomenal world. As to the point that they (i.e., Dharma-nature
and absolute vacancy) are linked together, however, you must think about
this more closely. In regard to roaming around without distraction in the
mind, brushing off the dust of the mind by oneself, thinking without disturbance, and being antecedent to the material form by one’s effort, in respect
to forgetting existence, Lao’s [teaching] appears to go against Śākyamuni’s,
but from the viewpoint that [the concept of] forgetting is included [in Lao’s
teaching], Śākyamuni’s [teaching] does not take the place of Lao’s [teaching].
One has a leisurely state of mind, he is pure and peaceful, he sits and abandons
[all things], he is quiet in order to calm the spirit, and he successfully understands [everything] thoroughly in order to empty the functions of them. When
I ascend to this state [of mind], I do not see [any difference between] a
Buddhist and a Daoist. When I give rise to this inclination, how do I know
what is Buddhist or Daoist? There is only one in the ﬁnal consequence. The
real state of things is originally subtle and we realize [that the two teachings
derive from] the One. Since what people sense varies, it is hard to come to
an agreement in responding to things.
“All things in the universe and visual and auditory senses interlock; visual
and auditory senses mutually cross all things in the universe. When they adhere
to each other, they are already profound. When they separate from each other,
certainly they are superﬁcial. Hence the old man in Ku [county in Chu] (i.e.,
Laozi) concealed [the doctrine of ‘emptiness is] precisely form’ for the time
being; he followed what exists without agitating the feeling, and he respected
what does not exist and imbued the mind with what it follows. Things having
been hidden away, the people then wish for nonexistence. Since it is possible
that the wind from the west (i.e., Śākyamuni) rose in the daytime and reached
the essence of the south (i.e., Laozi), wouldn’t it be possible to dream of the
spirit of China (i.e., Confucius) while asleep at night?471

236

Fascicle Six

“If you think that Laozi did not accomplish anything about nonexistence,
I do not expect you to grasp the meaning. If you think that [Laozi] accomplished something about nonexistence and yet did not accomplish anything
about existence, what you understand differs from what I expect. If you have
doubt because Laozi accomplished something about existence and yet did
not clarify it in his teaching, why do Buddhists who accomplished something
[about existence] make the traces high? At such a time, if you think that
Buddhists had better make the traces high sometimes, this is comparable to
the case where Laozi made the traces high occasionally. [The two teachings
are] the same in the ﬁnal consequence. This is my intention.”
Zhou says, “You say in the discussion, ‘The times [of the Three Augusts
and the Five Thearchs] were different. Therefore their customs were not the
same.’ This means that Buddhism is different from Daoism. Your statement
‘They belonged to different ages. Hence their righteousness varied’ refers to
the Daoist teaching being separate from the Buddhist [teaching]. Daoism and
Buddhism are different from each other. If it is not a wild duck, it is a swallow.”
I respond to Zhou, “If it is not a wild duck, it is a swallow. The trace is
assuredly so. About the trace that is assuredly so, I will not give an answer.
However, even though it is possible that there are differences in time and age,
we should not create a difference just for the sake of making differences.”
Zhou says, “In your lofty examination, you have not been aware of what
you are following in order to discern the foundation.”
I respond to Zhou, “I have already explained about recognizing overall
the foundation in my previous letter. My recognition about [the teachings
of] Laozi and Śākyamuni is exactly like this. This is precisely ‘When I see
with my own eyes, the Way exists there.’472 If you want to make unjustiﬁable
investigation into the words, I do not know how I can discuss the issue.”
Zhou says, “If you still take hold of the two teachings and position their
foundations, I am afraid that ﬁghting and judging [between the two different
teachings] will just begin and you will not be able to pass good judgment
on anything.”
I respond to Zhou, “In grasping the meaning, there is the foundation.
Why do you extend your effort to take the teaching [if you have attained the
foundation]?”

237

40a

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

40b

Zhou says, “If we survey equally the origin of teaching on the basis of
the two teachings, the origin of each teaching always reveals itself along
with the teaching itself.”
I respond to Zhou, “You are correct, indeed. This is why I see the derivation of Daoism as the same as that of Buddhism, but for the reason why I
agree with these words, there is just separately a wonderful base.”
Zhou says, “We should put on a deerskin cap and hold a staff with rings
[just as a hermit does], and see [the world] in a leisurely manner. Then, Confucianists and Mohists will calm down. [They may wonder] why they formerly
competed.”
I respond to Zhou, “The two states of Yu and Rui had legal struggles
over farmland, but this is something with which King Wen did not have to
be concerned.473 Even if the natural jade is broken into pieces in order to put
an end to a ﬁght over the jade, is this particularly respectful? Moreover, we
are ﬁghting for a wild goose at night, but you recklessly have a wild duck
and swallow ﬁght each other. This means to put a deerskin cap on the head
in vain and to hold a staff with rings in the hand to fabricate oneself. How
could I understand this?”
Zhou says, “If the origin in which [the two teachings] are well matched
is correct and the traces that separated [from the origin] are wrong, the functions of the two traces should be equally removed. Why do you go in the
direction to soar in the essence [gathered from many sources], while diligently
engaged only in Buddhism, concentrate your vapor, hold the One fast in your
embrace, and yet have no respect for Daoism?”
I respond to Zhou, “The movements of the mind responding to eternal
objects are diverse and one’s feelings are various. Although I do not ﬂy with
a ﬂap of the wings up to the four fruits [of sainthood in the Hinayana], you
have no doubt that I abide in Buddhism. Even though I do not ﬂy with a ﬂap
of the wings up to the ﬁve supernatural powers [of the immortals], what
regret would I have in abiding in Daoism? Moreover, the honorable sacredness
should be the foundation; I do not worry about the traces. Furthermore, I
already have what I have abided in. Would I now change [the destination]
to which I am ﬂying? Since you can understand that there is only one [foundation] in the two parallel pillars, I will not rigorously press you to remove
[the wrong view].”

238

Fascicle Six

Zhou says, “I hold Śākyamuni’s instruction in my mind and am attached
to the Confucian statements in my daily conduct. I have not yet understood
your intention. How are Buddhism and Confucianism positioned? Do you
think that they are one in the foundation and differ in their later development,
or are they different both in the foundation and in later development?”
I respond to Zhou, “I originally blend a hundred sages together and
throw them equally into the One, the ultimate. Recently I discussed this in
the Discourse on the Way to Reach the Origin [of the Two Teachings], but
Confucianism was not included in the discussion. Now you carry Confucianism to an extreme, and you precisely want to arrange Confucianism in
a line and encircle Daoism. Therefore, you act as if you ﬁrst prick up your
ears, think of causing a war, and then plan to mount a surprise attack on the
heavenly city at night, but I am afraid that it is difﬁcult to ascend there; it
is too precipitous for you to ascend there. Even if I see the troops going out,
I will not see them return. I have already said that a hundred sages are thrown
into the same place. Why would I allow that [Buddhism and Confucianism]
differ both in the foundation and in later development? Moreover, you oppose
me with all your force displaying your intelligence and bravery willfully.
My bravery and intelligence spontaneously come together and ﬂow out with
great ease.”

The Second Response and Further
Questions by Zhou Yong

I, Zhou Yong, bow to you with my head to the ground. As for what can move
the mind and to what we consign our mind, what other than truth can be our
teacher? Ediﬁcations in China and foreign countries are what the practitioners
dedicate, but if we distinguish between these (i.e., ediﬁcations in China and
foreign countries) and make our choice clear, this causes me to become discontented and lost. Why would it be difﬁcult for me? You virtuously wish to
say it, and I have not stopped speaking, either. That is to say, I will send [this
letter] to examine [the issue] furthermore. I will await your explanation to me.
You say in the Discourse on the Way to Reach the Origin [of the Two
Teachings], “Even though the Dharma-nature seeks emptiness by means of
[the doctrine that emptiness] is precisely form [in the phenomenal world],
the absolute vacancy [in Daoism] actually extends the meaning beyond the

239

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

40c

phenomenal world” and “Hence the old man in Ku [county in Chu] concealed
[the doctrine of ‘emptiness is] precisely form’ for the time being; he followed
what exists without agitating the feeling; and he respected what does not
exist and imbued the mind with what it follows.”
Zhou says, “It is true that [the old man] in Ku [county in Chu] concealed
[the doctrine of ‘emptiness is] precisely form,’ but I am afraid that in this
statement you have not reached [the doctrine of ‘emptiness is] precisely
form.’ If you make a pretext of being able to conceal [the doctrine], those
who can conceal it are many, and probably there is not only the man from
Li village (i.e., Laozi) [who can do so].
“When existence is existence, people perceive existence. When nonexistence is nonexistence, people recognize nonexistence. Laozi dealt with
existence and wrote on nonexistence, but he did not go beyond this boundary.
This is what I stated in my shallow discussion, the Discourse on Three Sects
(Sanzonglun): ‘If we select and run about busily, no one has been able to go
beyond that level.’ In Buddhism, the reason why worldly-mindedness is left
behind in theory and why the rules governing the rhythm of words go against
the norm is probably because [‘emptiness is] precisely form’ means [that
form in the phenomenal world] is not existence. Therefore, [Buddhism] is
absolutely outstanding among many schools. What merits are there in Laozi,
who did not clarify this point?
“Being confused, perverse, or unrestful is entirely due to attachment to
existence. In going against the Way or being drowned in secular [customs],
here is the trouble. Since the trouble is due to adhering to existence and the
nature of existence has not been clariﬁed, the school that rectiﬁes existence
follows and respects the art of nonexistence. If the nature of existence is not
clear, even though this is a big problem, whom do we go against in esteeming
tranquility? Those who experience nuisances are really few. This is why the
Daoist teaching is added to the propagation of the [Buddhist] teaching and
why I said in my previous letter that ‘the teaching of] the Yellow Emperor
and Laozi is truly majestic.’
“All the former opinions by Wang [Bi] and He [Yan] indicate that Laozi
is no match for the sage (i.e., Confucius). If [Laozi] was just as he is presented
in this view, [his teaching] could not inﬂuence Śākyamuni’s teaching. When
I position Laozi, I do not think this. When a bodhisattva manifests in the

240

Fascicle Six

world, the manifestation has no ﬁxed form; he manifests at times as the leader
of the circle of Confucian scholars, the most reverent priest of the country,
or a monk. This is the established dogma found in Buddhist scripture.474
Sometimes he appears even in the guise of a prime minister or a wealthy
man. Why wouldn’t Laozi’s life be only one track [of his]? It is only because
we have not known the depth of observation and the level of nobility. This
is all because the great brightness has not been opened and for the time being
we have received only one side [of the truth].
“When the sun or moon comes out, the torch should be put out.475 Since
[the teaching of] no remaining is expounded, many interim [teachings] will
spontaneously cease. You still want to resist in order to save the brightness
[of the torch] even under the [light of the] sun and moon, and to clarify that
this [torchlight] and [the light of] the sun and moon are of common origin.
“You already worship the sun and moon in your mind and you have no
intention of disgracing the foundation of the torch, but you have not been
aware of what the foundation of this torch is. Is it a name, or reality? If it is
only a name, where does the fundamental Way exist? If you say you want it
to be reality, the sun and moon are reality. This means that the issue comes
to an end with a buddha, and you do not understand the [Buddhist] Way. In
the purport of the Discourse on the Way to Reach the Origin [of the Two
Teachings], whom does the origin reach?
“You say in the Discourse on the Way to Reach the Origin [of the Two
Teachings], ‘One has a leisurely state of mind; he is pure and peaceful; he
sits and abandons [all things]’ and ‘When I ascend to this state [of mind], I
do not see [any difference between] a Buddhist and a Daoist. When I give
rise to this inclination, how do I know what is Buddhism or Daoism?’
“Again, you say, ‘Now that it is tranquil and has two spirits, the spirits
are tranquil and there are two ways. I have never heard this.’
“Furthermore, you say, ‘As to [the teaching of] Boyang, giving undivided
attention to the [vital] breath and bringing it to the utmost degree of pliancy,
staying in the void to let the animation act at will . . . the animation halts in
the void. Hence, he directs himself joyfully.’
In addition, you say, ‘[In regard to] brushing off the dust of the mind by
oneself, . . . and being antecedent to the material form by one’s effort, . . .’

241

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

41a

Zhou says, “You state that ‘Even though the Dharma-nature seeks emptiness by means of [the doctrine that emptiness] is precisely form [in the phenomenal world], the absolute vacancy [in Daoism] actually extends the meaning beyond the phenomenal world.’ I think personally that Laozi and
Śākyamuni came [to the world] about the same time and took charge of their
own ﬁelds, and about their spheres there is nothing better than [your] statement
of this. In that case, that the state of Laozi’s mind was leisurely indicates
spontaneously that it was leisurely [in the world] outside existence, and that
Buddhists are pure and peaceful and sit and abandon [all things] means that
they sit and abandon [all things in the world where] form is precisely empty.
If we ascend to the state of Laozi’s mind, [we will know that] Laozi differs
from Śākyamuni; if we experience Śākyamuni’s intentions, [we will know
that] Śākyamuni differs from Laozi. Since the spirits are in tranquility, they
are two,476 and there are two ways. Even though you had not heard this before,
I have previously heard it. If this is so, the animation that halts in the void
is spontaneously void; it is in the void that you mentioned, and to direct
oneself joyfully is not the way I mean, either. Regarding the statement, ‘[In
regard to] brushing off the dust of the mind by oneself, . . . and being
antecedent to the material form by one’s effort,’ you have not entirely gotten
involved in the grand law, so I do not dare agree with your Discourse on the
Way to Reach the Origin [of the Two Teachings].
“You say in the Discourse on the Way to Reach the Origin [of the Two
Teachings], ‘If you want to have Boyang not be tranquil, how could this be
possible? If you would have him be tranquil and not anchored in the Way,
how could this be possible, either?’”
Zhou says, “Your statement is very apt, but I am still worried that [you]
have not yet reached the utmost mastery. In what you say here, you hit the mark
in regard to the tranquility of the spirit, but you miss the point as to the void of
things. If you think that tranquility is [temporary] tranquility and you do not
mean that it is the ultimate tranquility, and if you think that the animation is
[temporary] animation and you do not say it is the complete animation, I
approve of this. It is faultless.
“You say in the Discourse on the Way to Reach the Origin [of the Two
Teachings], ‘If you think that Laozi did not accomplish anything about nonexistence, I do not expect you to grasp the meaning. If you think that [Laozi]

242

Fascicle Six

accomplished something about nonexistence and yet did not accomplish anything about existence, what you understand differs from what I expect.’
Zhou says, “As for the accomplishments about existence and nonexistence, if we do not [understand] the apex, we are not ready [to know
them]. In knowing nonexistence and knowing existence, I approve of the
Daoist [standpoint]. Daoist words, however, simply do not reach the state of
neither existence nor nonexistence. Neither existence nor nonexistence is
what [the Discourse on] Three Sects has in store. If you reverence additional
thought, you may just take a look at [this discourse]. I only think that in order
not to cause your understanding to be erroneous, I remove mistakes and settle
the issue.
“You say in the Discourse on the Way to Reach the Origin [of the Two
Teachings], ‘If it is not a wild duck, it is a swallow. The trace is assuredly
so. About the trace that is assuredly so, I will not give an answer.’
“Moreover, you say, ‘My recognition about [the teachings of] Laozi and
Śākyamuni is exactly like this. This is precisely ‘When I see with my own
eyes, the Way exists there.’
“In addition you say, ‘In grasping the meaning, there is the foundation.
Why do you extend your effort to take the teaching [if you have attained the
foundation]?’
“Again, you say, ‘You are correct, indeed. This is why I see the derivation
of Daoism as the same as that of Buddhism.’”
Zhou says, “Regarding your statement: ‘When I see with my own eyes,
the Way exists there’ and ‘In grasping the meaning, there is the foundation,’
I think that the true meaning of the Dharma-nature is precisely this state [of
mind]. Buddhism has it, but what you obtained does not have the reason.
Why do you extend your effort to take the teaching? The foundation of what
you see with your own eyes exists in the traces of the teaching. If we think
[these traces are] a wild duck and a swallow, where has the wild goose gone?
“As for the true nature of all dharmas, Laozi’s [teaching] does not have
the purpose. Even if you try to see the lofty nature (i.e., the Way) with your
own eyes, there is no such thing in Laozi’s traces. Since both the purpose
and the traces are missing, there is no means by which to search for the ultimate law of Nature.

243

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

41b

“Your discussion says, ‘[You may wholeheartedly follow in the footprints
of the Buddha] without disgracing the foundation of Daoism.’ On what point
[in the foundation of Daoism] must we bring no disgrace? If when you search
the traces of Daoists you think you ﬁnd that its derivation is the same as that
of Buddhism, the real meaning of the ultimate truth can be found in writings.
Do we ascertain [the real meaning of the ultimate truth] in the Dao chapter
[in the Daodejing] or do we encounter it in the De chapter? If both chapters
[of the Daodejing] are not what you follow and you attain the profound
[meaning of the ultimate truth] in your mind, this is naturally your subjective
point of view and it is simply the third [standpoint], following [those of]
Laozi and Śākyamuni. Probably you can establish another school independently. This is not what I dare to bring up here.”
“You say in the Discourse on the Way to Reach the Origin [of the Two
Teachings], ‘The two states of Yu and Rui had legal struggles over farmland,
but this is something with which King Wen did not have to be concerned. . . .
This means to put a deerskin cap on the head in vain and to hold a staff with
rings in the hand to fabricate oneself. How could I understand this?’”
Zhou says, “You said that ‘[the old man] in Ku [county in Chu] concealed
[the doctrine of “emptiness is] precisely form” for the time being.’ If that is
the case, the nothingness (xukong) [advocated by Laozi] is insufﬁcient. You
said that ‘The Dharma-nature seeks emptiness by means of [the doctrine that
emptiness] is precisely form.’ If this is so, the Dharma-nature is perfect. Now
here is a man who talks about the Dharma-nature holding a staff with rings.
A scholar wearing a deerskin cap arrives, and grasping the absolute vacancy,
says with censure, ‘Your [view] is not the same as mine. I will ﬁght against
you.’ You serenely lean against a thorny tree (in ancient times, a place where
lawsuits would be heard) and pass judgment after hearing the argument
between them. You say that neither of them is good, and you comment that
one of them wears a deerskin cap on his head in vain and the other holds a
staff with rings in his hand in order to fabricate himself. If you, a sharp and
outstanding person, cast such judgments, the people of Yu and Rui will be
very sad.
“You say in the Discourse on the Way to Reach the Origin [of the Two
Teachings], ‘Although I do not ﬂy with a ﬂap of the wings up to the four

244

Fascicle Six

fruits [of sainthood in the Hinayana], you have no doubt that I abide in
Buddhism. Even though I do not ﬂy with a ﬂap of the wings up to the ﬁve
supernatural powers, what regret would I have in abiding in Daoism?’”
Zhou says, “You said, ‘I do not ﬂy with a ﬂap of the wings up to the four
fruits’ but still you diligently abide in Buddhism. You said, ‘I do not ﬂy with
a ﬂap of the wings up to the ﬁve supernatural powers.’ Why do you cast aside
only the Daoist trace?
“Since this is illogical, I have just made such a complaint.
“You say in the Discourse on the Way to Reach the Origin [of the Two
Teachings], ‘You precisely want to arrange Confucianism in a line and encircle
Daoism. Therefore, you act as if you ﬁrst prick up your ears.’”
Zhou says, “Your Discourse on the Way to Reach the Origin [of the Two
Teachings consists of] only the origin of Daoism and does not refer to that
of Confucianism. Since I have doubts about this lack, I inquired about it to
you. I have not known about directing oneself joyfully. Can one [direct himself] joyfully only by Daoism? Is it possible that he directs himself joyfully
while cultivating in Confucianism? Even though this is not the main point
of our discussion, if I speak freely, I must come to [this point]. I will be fortunate if you give me extra instruction in your spare time, apart from explaining about the foundation.”
I (i.e., Sengyou) have researched the criticisms and questions between
Zhou and Zhang. Although the correspondence between them is numerous,
the standpoints, intentions, and grounds of their arguments can be found in
their earliest correspondence. Therefore I omitted their later writings. My
purpose is to keep to the main point of the discussion.

Letter to the Daoist Gu [Huan]
(420–483) by Xie Zhenzhi

I, Xie Zhenzhi, say, I respectfully read the Discourse on the Non-Chinese and
the Chinese. You argue and discuss the origin [of Buddhism and Daoism] in
detail on the basis of the scriptures of these two teachings. The expression
[of the Discourse] is clear; it is a brilliant composition. [The writing style]
is as sonorous as the harmony of the notes gong and shang. It is full of strenuous endeavors in the profound principle. It is enjoyable!

245

41c

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

Regardless of my narrow view and ignorance, I put forth my efforts to
steal a glance at the profound ultimate law of Nature. I painstakingly explore
what is profound, but I have nothing at all on which to rely. I, however, have
tried to take a lesson [from the Discourse on the Non-Chinese and the Chinese]
and read it more than three times, but my humble doubts have not yet been
resolved. I would like to slightly express my doubts, hoping to hear your
explanations later.
At the beginning of the Discourse you state that the Buddha is precisely
Laozi and Laozi is none other than the Buddha.477 Moreover, you compare
the transformation of becoming a Transcendent [in Daoism] with nirvana
[in Buddhism] and see that longevity [in Daoism] is equal to no death [in
Buddhism]. Accordingly, you refer to the worldly instructions in order to
tally them with the profound teaching (i.e., Buddhism). When I collect examples of these words, they probably appear equal to [those of Buddhism]. In
the last [section of the Discourse, however], you ridicule [Buddhism] and
say that [Buddhist monks] annihilate Chinese [traditional customs] and reject
[ancestor] worship. In addition, you say that [the foreign language used by
Buddhists] is similar to the noisy chirps of insects or birds, and that it is not
something we should follow. Please let me try to speak about these issues.
The Duke of Zhou and Confucius took Confucianism and Mozi’s teaching
as a model to be followed. Laozi and Zhuangzi spoke about the teaching and
clariﬁed a method to lead to [the Way]. These [efforts] all open [the Way]
little by little and cause [people] to approach the Way, [but the people] have
not yet been ready for the great development [to the Way] with these. Moreover, insects and birds are different species [from human beings]. The ediﬁcation originally separates from the Way. When we want to say something
about this, we must ﬁrst investigate the reasons.
Originally, when a person participates in the two polarities (i.e., Heaven
and Earth), this is called the three powers (sancai). How could the foreign
country (i.e., India) and China be divided in a place governed by the three
powers? Then, we know that a person must be part of the human species and
an animal must belong to groups of animals. Let us seek [an example of this]
in familiar matters. The seven treasures are what people love. Consequently,
Chinese and non-Chinese people equally value them. Since being respectful
is what people honor, people of the world are sincerely concerned with this.

246

Fascicle Six

Hence, perfect marital relations were practiced in the four states,478 not to
mention the inﬂuences of the great ediﬁcation. Wouldn’t it then be diffused
throughout the trichiliocosm?
Speaking on the basis of Buddhist scriptures, you perhaps have heard
that the Buddha appeared in the world. He united all traditional teachings
into one; the world was placed in one orbit. At the time Śākyamuni was ﬁrst
cultivating as a bodhisattva, he extensively ediﬁed people. Those who lived
in that land when he attained buddhahood were granted special benevolences
and favors; and they were all reborn in our domain. Our [domain] means
Jambudvīpa (i.e., the continent situated to the south of Mount Sumeru). [People,] however, have been deluded for a long time in [the transmigration of]
birth and death; they have followed and been imbued with secular customs;
they temporarily lose the right path; and they simply have not been aware
of the present enlightenment.
I think that the Sage looks down upon all with the wisdom of the three
transcendental knowledges, observes the faculties of each person, and understands that [faculties] vary from person to person. Therefore, he expounded
[the teaching of] the three vehicles and spread it.
First of all, the true Way is only one and the Dharma is nondual, too.
Now, for the time being [the teaching of] the three vehicles is expounded
and there are different ways to guide [people], but the place to which all
return is one. Hence, when [the Buddha] traveled about, gathered people,
and expounded the teaching, those who attained awakening were as numerous
as grains of sand. In saving [people] from drowning [in extreme misery] and
delivering them from delusions, there is nothing to surpass this teaching.
Therefore, the boundless world, including the present, the future, and the
past, is collectively here. We know that the ninety-ﬁve [non-Buddhist] schools
are clearly not branches [of Buddhism]. At the beginning they said that their
teaching is the same [as Buddhism], but in the end they said that it is different
[from Buddhism]. Consequently, we know that what [they thought] is the
same at the beginning is [in fact] not the same, and what [they thought] is
different is, in the end, no different either. Isn’t this like absurdly beating an
earthen pot and recklessly trying to harmonize with the basic sound huangzhong?479 Wouldn’t this be a deception?

247

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

42a

As for matters such as that [Chinese people] keep their bodies complete
[at death], maintain sacriﬁces, wear a crown and a big sash tied behind with
the ends hanging, while [non-Chinese people] throw on a felt garment, put
on adornments made of shells, bury themselves in dust and dirt, and cremate
the body [at death]; or, as for things such as the sound of the Zhengshi era
[of the Wei kingdom] (i.e., the authentic Chinese sound) and the barbarian
sound, these [indicate] only minor differences in secular manners and customs
[between Chinese and non-Chinese people]. Now we see that a bird sings in
the world of birds, and an animal roars in the world of beasts. If we truly
hold one of many sounds and feel that it is different from all other sounds,
we respond to it in a different manner. In this case, if the foreign country
differs from China in the way to edify [the people], why do you mix everything
up? [Your statement in the Discourse that] if a boat [moves on land] it will
be dried out, and if a carriage [sails in a river] it will be submerged, can be
compared to this case.
Propriety of the secular customs is the attenuated form of loyalty and
good faith;480 it is not the purity of the Way. Those who cultivate the purity
of the Way strive to go against secular customs. When secular customs can
be deﬁed, the Way can be pure. It is difﬁcult to defy secular customs. Hence,
we ought to leave behind extremes. In order to leave behind extremes, you
must ﬁrst take off the crown, shave your head, put on a Buddhist monk’s
robe, and abstain from a [meat] diet. If we take off the crown, we need no
expense for worldly ornamentation. When we shave the head, we need not
trouble with hairpins and combs. When we put on a Buddhist monk’s robe,
we do not bother tailors to make our clothes. When we abstain from a [meat]
diet, we stop thinking about our favorite foods. This is precisely [Laozi’s
saying] “Those who devote themselves to the Way [seek] from day to day
to diminish [their doings].”481 How could this be what the secular customs
of the foreign country established? Regarding [Buddhist] writings and subtle
books such as the Tripiṭaka and the four Āgama sutras, they are exactly [what
Laozi said:] “Those who devote themselves to learning [seek] from day to
day to increase [their knowledge].”482 How could this be what Chinese customs
could create?
Moreover, you say, “Buddhist scriptures are complicated and illustrious,
while Daoist scriptures are concise and profound.” Inferring from this, this

248

Fascicle Six

means that if [the scriptures] are profound, it is difﬁcult to hope to study
them intensively and to rely on them; if they are illustrious, it is easy to hope
to seek them carefully; if they are concise, they must be insufﬁcient in indicating the reasons; and if they are complicated, they are a collection of interesting points and there are many keys to the way [to awakening]. In the
Buddhist teaching, anything that has a form is considered to be illusory.
Therefore [Buddhists] forget themselves in order to save sentient beings. In
the Daoist teaching, [on the contrary,] one’s self is considered to be true.
Hence [Daoists] take medicine and food in order to preserve their lives. Furthermore, if life can be preserved, could a rose of Sharon (or an althea) compete with a thousand-year-old pine tree for longevity, or could an ephemeral
organism be equal to a ten thousand-year-old chun tree in life span? This is
certainly impossible.
If we deeply realize that the three realms of existence are abodes for the
long night of spiritual darkness, and life is a master of the great dream,483 we
long for the Way to awakening. Why would we treasure our body? Even if
our body could be reﬁned and we could live without death, this originally
differs from Laozi’s fundamental way, and it is not the same as the Buddhist
principle. Why do you make such a statement?
The spirit dwells in a body, similar to [how one stays] at an inn. If we
go to an inn, why should we feel a persistent attachment to the eaves? The
perception of the sensory perception and the form of what can be formed are
not the substance of sacredness. Even the life spans of Yao and Confucius
were less than a hundred years. [The period between Śākyamuni’s attainment
of buddhahood and] his entering nirvana is as long as the time it took [Confucius] to recognize the ordinances of Heaven (i.e., ﬁfty years). Hence, from
an eternal kalpa ago, the spiritual intelligence has been puriﬁed and reﬁned.
As the spiritual intelligence has been puriﬁed [and reﬁned], its function severs
[the confrontation between] existence and nonexistence; it brilliantly transcends [the boundary between existence and nonexistence] with the wisdom
of the four phrases (i.e., existence, emptiness, existence and emptiness, and
neither existence nor emptiness). This is exactly genuine and the unalterable
Way from beginning to end.
Furthermore, those who “carve a mark on the side of a boat” (i.e., Buddhist
monks) pray to a golden [buddha image], while those who “wait by the stump”

249

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

42b

(i.e., Daoist monks) harbor the hope to ascend to Heaven as a Transcendent
sprouting wings.484 Consequently [Buddhist monks] practice the six pāramitās
in the phenomenal world, while [Daoist monks] are hindered by delusion and
eat numinous mushrooms [that are believed to possess supernatural powers].
Even though being stuck in the phenomenal world is theoretically against the
six pāramitās, practicing them can probably save people; but if one is hindered
by delusion, he assuredly does not ascend to Heaven as a Transcendent sprouting wings. How then can he have more energy than his own share [to help
others] in close touch with the realities [of life]?
When we seek some traces of the origins of two teachings (i.e., Buddhism
and Daoism), there are different views, the broad and the narrow, and there
is an apparent difference between superior and inferior. You cannot question
closely fellows like these. They have entirely an intimate feeling of self; it
is not the universal great knowledge. Then, it is known that they can discern
differences in the secular customs [of China and the foreign country] by the
teachings. It is sad! The profound Sage (i.e., the Buddha) is already far away.
[Various schools] brilliantly have arisen competing with each other. It can
be said that [to respect such teachings is like] pointing to the trails made by
an insect and considering them to be the Chinese written language invented
by Cang [Jie], or like drinking the milk of a poisonous insect and thinking
that it is clariﬁed butter. This is very sad!
The Buddhist Way is vast and extensive. The capacity of wisdom cannot
be completely expressed. It is difﬁcult to survey the traces of responses by
form. While we argue about existence, myriad aspects are luxuriantly displayed as if a thousand mountains stand in a row. When we analyze nonexistence, even Mount Tai is exhausted in vain; it scatters along with an
autumn down.485 We make use of the ten powers [attributed to a buddha] in
order to destroy devils (Skt. māras), and promote the four immeasurable
minds in order to deliver secular people. When we raise the Dharma torch
of prajñā, what dark place would we be unable to illuminate? If we concentrate
with the Dharma might of samādhi, what distant place would we be unable
to subdue? Why should we doubt that [the Buddhist teaching] is not effective
in both the foreign country and in China?

250

Fascicle Six

The Second Letter Given
to the Daoist Gu

I, Xie Zhenzhi, address myself to you. Thank you very much for your response
and explanation! I exhaustively examined the profound situation. You already
have harmonized smoothly Daoism and Buddhism and yet [separated] Śākyamuni from Li (i.e., Laozi) just as separating [the muddy water of] the Jing
River from [the clear water of] the Wei River. “If we prolonged each by the
addition of the proper lines, [then all events possible under the sky might
have their representation.]”486 They will accordingly become games or gambles, [which are better than doing nothing].487 The more you explain about
the Buddha, the more obscure the exquisite purpose becomes. When we decorate a shop counter in order to trade valuables, we do not sell them on a
bright night. [What you do] is like, as [the Zhuangzi] says, trying to erase
your footprints by running around, or trying to stop casting a shadow by
jumping.488 How could you avoid [such criticism]? According to on what
your discourse is grounded, you think that insects and birds are different
species [from human beings] and that the non-Chinese and the Chinese differ
from each other in manners and customs. I think that the three powers equally
unite, the human reason is one, there are [only] minor differences in secular
teachings, and the teaching of the Dharma is almost the same [for non-Chinese
and Chinese]. You respond, “It is found in the Book of Changes; it is not
what foreign books imitate.” Then you say “A white ﬂag has already been
hoisted, but you do not inspect it closely and take a black ﬂag to be white.
[Your case] is different from [the historical fact in which] Cao [Gui] saw a
ﬂag [and became aware of enemy troops].489 You arbitrarily omit all familiar
essential points in order to indicate the great conclusion.” If so, even though
a pearl is hidden in the topknot [of the wheel-turning noble king],490 the
deception of the inconsistency is easily discovered.491 I speak somewhat in
jest, but I do not intend to defy you at all.
The Grand Terminus is divided into the two polarities (i.e., yin and
yang),492 which are intertwined in vain. When the ﬁve skandhas get together,
the body and consciousness unreasonably manifest. Consciousness is formed
on the basis of deﬁlements, while the body arises from the condition of attachment and hindrance. Before the time of Fuxi, many people were basically

251

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

42c

foolish. Since they were basically foolish, they lived in trees or dwelled in
caves, and [ate the ﬂesh of birds and beasts,] drinking their blood, and swallowing [also] the hair and feathers.493 Sovereign and subject, father and son,
saw each other just as people of the northern tribes and those of Yue state
[of the south] saw each other. They were still like beasts. Moreover, they
could be compared with ignorant children. It was not the world into which
Daoism was introduced and where [the teaching of] love and justice had
inﬂuenced the people. When the people became bogged down in desires and
lost themselves in waves, they thought to deliver themselves by clinging to
a precipice. When we deliver ourselves, we pray for wholesomeness. When
we pray for wholesomeness, sacredness responds to us.
What is sacredness? It is what we communicate with through our receptivity to things. Communicating is not self-communication and receptivity
is not self-receptivity, either. Receptivity is constantly on this side, while
communication comes always from that side. Speaking from that side, [it is
like] a mirror hung in a lofty hall. Speaking of this side, [it is like] all images
coming back to this side. Therefore, we know that India is located in the
central region of this world (Skt. sahā); since it is placed in the excellent
assemblage of purity and wholesomeness, it is possible to communicate
through receptivity with the ultimate sacredness, and the land is situated in
the center of the trichiliocosm. Since the sacredness responded to that land
(India), the voice [of the teaching] spreads in this land (China). When we
see the brightness of the sun and moon, why do we have to borrow the observation of Li Zhu, [who has the excellent faculty of sight]? When we hear
wrathful thunder, why do we have to have Ziye (i.e., music master Kuang,
a blind musician of the Spring and Autumn period) hear it?
Consequently, it does not matter that different things, such as the humble
and the noble, go with each other in the same way, and in the difference
between the two polarities of left and right there is no harm in natural relations.
Since there is no harm in natural relations, [the people gather like] clouds
and practice the Dharma teaching. Since it does not matter that [different
things] go with each other, [the Dharma teaching] bestows [mercy], just like
the rain falls on both the foreign country and China.
The Way is one, while form is dual. The Way is truth, and form is worldliness. Since truth is still one, worldliness is still dual. We make a thorough

252

Fascicle Six

investigation of duality to attain unity; we ought to unify the law. If we eliminate worldliness and return to truth, we will certainly go against worldliness.
For this reason, the Tathāgata established the model and made various teachings the same in the eternal past. If Confucius and Laozi were the Buddha,
they would dim the light, secretly lead [the people], rectify their prejudice
to deliver them, establish benevolence, create righteousness, and conform
to secular people’s feelings. Hence, [people] maintain their bodies [at death]
to be complete, continue [ancestor] worship, extend their kindness to their
family members of the six relations, attend to their health, nourish their natures,
[establish] themselves, and [do not adhere to] other things. However while
these are considered to be very good, they are not considered to be perfect.
Probably this is for a limited system; [neither of them] “whip up their lagging
[sheep] (i.e., neglecting one of two aspects).”494 How is it possible to compare
the Way with supreme enlightenment (Skt. bodhi), and to compare the sages
(i.e., Confucius and Laozi) with Śākyamuni?
When Buddhism is expounded clearly, it has essential points and it is
competent and extensive. Since it has essential points and is competent and
extensive, [people of] exquisite [faculties] and those of coarse [faculties]
fathom it. Since [people of] exquisite [faculties] and those of coarse [faculties]
fathom it, strongness and weakness agree with each other. Therefore, the
pure ferry [to truth] reaches profound points; it is really a pair of accurate
compasses. It is easy to draw a circle by using a pair of compasses, but
difﬁcult to do this only by hand. Why wouldn’t we follow the easy way and
abandon the difﬁcult way?
Daoist scriptures are simple and crude. Many are composed in a farfetched manner. Regarding scriptures such as the Wonderful Scripture of the
Truth of the Numinous Jewel (Lingbao miaozhenjing), [the Daoists] adopted
the Lotus Sutra (Fahuajing) for it. Their manner of composition is particularly
poor. As for scriptures such as the Scripture of the Yellow Court (Huangtingjing) of the Shangqing (Supreme Purity) school, what it upholds is ingesting
drugs: to chew rocks and eat clouds. It is not simply that their law cannot be
followed, it is also difﬁcult to consider that their way is the same [as that of
Buddhists]. Among [such texts], the good point is found only in the teaching
of the Five Thousand Words (i.e., Daodejing), which completely employs wuwei.
Yet to completely employ wuwei has not been able to remove existence. If to

253

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

remove existence is their purpose, what then do they nourish with numinous
mushrooms?
The nine philosophical schools [of China] are even closer to what [the
teaching of] the three vehicles of the Buddhist school leads to. Since the
nine philosophical schools are even closer to [what the Buddhist teaching
of the three vehicles leads to], we attain [the movements of] motion and
rest here. The noumenal principle of meditative power is merely part of [the
teaching of] the three [vehicles]; it is not the culmination. Meditation sutras
are subtle. The characteristics of the objective world are exquisite and profound. Even if we try to become united in truth with these, it is still impossible
to accomplish it.
Now you say, “The Way lies in wuwei and is simply to attain the One.”
“It lies in wuwei and is simply to attain the One” means to commune with
what is profound for a thousand years. If you would like to commune with
what is profound for a thousand years,495 I need not wait for your lofty talk.
[Buddhism] is the brilliant ultimate law that leads people to reach the
reﬁned state. If one were to reject studying and reﬁning his thought, would
this not be negligence? How could it be a tentative method to lead to Daoism?
Examining respectfully what you said, [I come to know that] not only do
you not understand Buddhism, you do not understand Daoism either. I send
a poem to you to offer a little laugh.
The poem says:
[Heaven and Earth] go on. The light becomes dim.
The profound Sage (i.e., the Buddha) concealed himself
(i.e., entered nirvana).
The long night drifts slowly. Many stars shine brightly.
When the sun luminously rises and shines, the lunar mansions
rapidly disappear.
Round and square [pieces of wood] should be uniform for use
as construction materials,
Even though they are different from each other as raw materials.
If one is solely deluded, he is not awakened.
The big-headed fellows are surprised that [the Buddha] departs
[and goes] far away.

43a

254

Fascicle Six

Bian He [of Chu state] wept bitterly at the foot of Mount Jing.496
How could we onesidedly blame King Li of Chu state?
Even if a good grasscutter slights prajñā,
How could we censure transcendental wisdom?
End of Fascicle Six of The Collection for the Propagation
and Clariﬁcation [of Buddhism]

255

Fascicle Seven

Critique of the Daoist Gu’s Discourse on
the Non-Chinese and the Chinese by
Zhu Zhaozhi, Attendant-in-Ordinary

I read your lofty talk on the non-Chinese and the Chinese. You discuss the
two teachings (i.e., Buddhism and Daoism) and present the purposes of each
of the scriptures. [Your opinion] deeply accords with what is profound, and
your wonderful words are virtuous and pleasant. It is not a meaningless statement. Formerly Ying Jifu (i.e., Ying Zheng of the Jin dynasty, ?–269) saw
that [the teachings of] Confucius and Laozi are equal, and now in a later generation you, our wise man, consider that [the teachings of] Li (i.e., Laozi)
and Śākyamuni are also equal. The distinct paths for all ages are united into
one path in the present dynasty. Questions and disputes for successive generations are happily [satisﬁed] today. You appreciate [the teachings] deeply
and understand them profoundly. There are many people who are cleansed
and comforted. There is no discussion more beneﬁcial to the world than this.
Regarding statements of the favorable aspects of each (i.e., Buddhism and
Daoism), however, there are points as close together as the liver and the gall
bladder, and points as far apart as Chu state and Yue state. This is because it
is not understood that although there are two different tastes, sweet and bitter,
they must be the same in nature in order to make a body. Therefore, [Buddhists
and Daoists] attack each other and then strange doctrines arise. [Disputes] are
repeated and become complicated. This causes quite a lot of harm. It is pitiful!
[Your discourse] is at the beginning, just as [when the sun] rises in the sky and
the light covers the outside of this world; and yet in the end, just as [the sun]
sets in an abyss, the light is obscured and the brightness is lost.
If a spiritual guide loses himself, many others are also lost. Therefore,
I forget that I am shallow and ignorant, and then lead and deliver [others].
Now, I will ﬁrst express my thoughts [about your Discourse] and later I will
speak of what I ﬁnd regrettable. I think that since “it is right to follow the
good [way smoothly,] as on the course of a stream,”497 it is not regrettable
merely to go against traditional [notions]. I live far away from you, [beyond]

257

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

the mountain and rivers where you live, and I cannot expect to have a good
conversation [with you in person]. So, I send this to you for the time being
in order to temporarily substitute it for a [face-to-face] meeting. Once the
ﬂags of our feelings meet each other, what we have explained is not shallow.
I, Zhu Zhaozhi, speak.

43b

Since the sacred Way is void and tranquil, it perfectly responds to anything
with no set pattern; because of its response with no set pattern, it responds
to everything. Therefore, if we inspect the mind from the point of sacredness,
originally there is no name in a myriad of understandings. When things are
spontaneously understood and named, with the names they are considered
to be evident. Hence, those who have complete intelligence are called ones
of right, perfect enlightenment (Skt. samyaksaṃbodhi); those who smoothly
and thoroughly understand are called sages; and what opens up [the knowledge
of the issues of] things and accomplishes the undertakings [of men] is called
the Way.498 In this case, a sage is merely the one of right, perfect enlightenment
and the one of right, perfect enlightenment is nothing other than the Way.
You should understand this. Why is it necessary to seek it in a distant place?
The Chinese and the non-Chinese differ from each other in manners and
customs, and also, in terms of their affections, they are different. Since sages
usually take action in accordance with [all things], there is probably a difference in the establishment of each teaching. Nevertheless, [Chinese] rules
of propriety and the [Buddhist] pure precepts have three hundred rules, they
are equal in number, and there are equally three thousand [rules of] deportment
or formal manners [in both China and the non-Chinese country]. What may
differ between [China and the non-Chinese country] lies only in the names
“Buddhism” and “Daoism” and in their appearances. A mastermind still considers the physical body to be like an inn (i.e., a temporary abode). How
would it be worthwhile for him to discuss the Chinese formal dress called
gunmian?499 What may be questioned lies only in the beginning of establishing
teachings, in which China and the non-Chinese country differ from each
other in their function. It is proper to argue the point that present manners
and customs are managed concurrently and will change according to the current of the times. Now I will speak about this point.
In a sage’s instruction, action is certainly based on the right order. In the
eastern country (i.e., China), where splendor is valued, there is the Chinese
258

Fascicle Seven

formal dress called gunmian; the formal manners of ceremonies and music;
rules for deportment; and decorations such as full court dress, a formal gown,
a crown, and hairpins, in order to propagate the [sages’] way; it is probably
[intended] to lead [the people] to become close to [the sages’ way]. Since
simplicity is valued in non-Chinese manners and customs, the people are
instructed with extreme plainness; a shaved head is [considered] a beautiful
appearance; clothing is made without cutting to shape; emotions are calmed;
the intellectual function is opened; and the spirit is expected to be free [from
anxiety and agitation] for kalpas, in order to develop the minds; it is [intended]
to recommend [people] to keep away from [extravagance].
The Daoist teaching is to take transcendent elixirs called zhiying, to eat
clouds, to take [golden] elixir, to breathe in the Grand One (taiyi), to exhale
the old, and to inhale the new. The great [achievement] is that the spirit ﬂies
[out of the body], sprouting wings [as a Transcendent]. The minor [achievement] is that the body becomes light and strong and has no illness; that is to
say, maintaining the body, one can expect the efﬁcacies.
All three teachings (i.e., Buddhism, Daoism, and Confucianism) have
one function of being moved by something and responding to it, but this is
not what I think is the culmination [of the Way].
The culmination of the Way is neither splendid nor simple, neither following nor leaving, neither close nor distant, neither abandoned nor sustained
by anyone, neither partisan nor nonpartisan, and neither slandered nor praised;
it completely ﬂows without obstruction and it is tranquil and vast. This is
tentatively called nonexistence. The subtle state [of the mind] is like this.
How is it different from this?
Nevertheless, since the time of the [Three] Augusts and [Fu]xi, each [of
the sages] propagated his own way, which has been transmitted in a lineage,
and there was no interaction [between different lineages]. This is really due
to the fact that they were all satisﬁed with [their own way] and never sought
[any teaching] other than their own. Therefore, from the time of the Han
dynasty on, simple customs have degenerated, benevolence and righteousness
have gradually declined, the rules of the Great Way have not been transmitted,
studies of the Five Classics have declined even more, great justice has already
become perversely bad, and sublime and profound words have vanished as
well. No one roams at “the gate of many wonders” [that Laozi asserts];500

259

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

43c

deportment based on the golden mean is not observed, the art of courtesy is
already ruined, Chinese ceremonial music falls as well, [Chinese traditional]
manners and customs come to an end, there is no division between sovereign
and subject, the authentic teaching has deteriorated, and human ethics have
become disordered.
Thereupon, the sacred way (i.e., Buddhism) completely governs [all
things] and reaches distant lands as time goes by. The profound ediﬁcation
was transmitted to the eastern land (i.e., China) and granted benevolence to
this world and kindness to sentient beings. The people despise what they
learned previously and were delighted with what they newly heard. They
showed their obedience and followed [the teaching] harmoniously. The essential signiﬁcance has been revived. Consequently, houses of sublime and profound words (i.e., Buddhist temples) were built here and there, and there are
guests (i.e., Buddhist monks) who chant the profound words all around. This
can be observed in reality; it is not merely empty talk, a series of vain words.
Isn’t this just that everything cannot end with the pi hexagram (i.e., Confucianism), which is received by the tongren hexagram (i.e., Buddhism) [in
the Book of Changes]?501
I think that the sages nurturing common people is like an affectionate
mother raising a baby. When [the baby] begins to eat, she feeds the baby
tasty meat; when [the baby] becomes bored of the tasty meat, she changes
[his food] to tallow and honey; and when [the baby] is tired of tallow and
honey, she lets the [baby’s] whole body rest peacefully. It is extremely beneﬁcial to the baby to be peaceful and comfortable both on the inside and on
the outside, isn’t it? Reason is just like this. Nevertheless, if one unrestrainedly
slanders [Buddhism] and recklessly separates it from [Confucianism and
Daoism], he has not realized the center of the ring [of thought] (i.e., the
absolute state beyond the judgment of right or wrong).502 I cannot discuss
[with such a person]. Correspondence exchanged between you two wise men
(i.e., Gu Huan and Xie Zhenzhi) pushes and swings me; it is as powerful as
breaking timber. Even if it could break timber, it is not a reasonable labor.
If we analyze it with reason, would it be necessary to push and swing [people
with such powerful correspondence]?
You began [the Discourse] with the clear [statement] that Confucius and
Laozi are the Buddha, but at the conclusion of the writing, your discussion is

260

Fascicle Seven

desultory. Why [do you say that] Chinese government ofﬁcials’ ceremonial
robes and the manner of raising [a ceremonial tablet] and kneeling on the
ground are all types of Chinese deportment, and slanderingly say that the worship of putting one’s head on the Buddha’s feet is just like when a fox squats
down? Why [do you say that] Chinese ceremonial dress and bowing by completely bending the [upper] body are respectful manners in the region near
the imperial capital, and increase humiliation by saying that the practice of
kneeling with one’s right knee on the ground is just like a crouching dog?
Let me ask you a question. If [you say that] Confucius is one of right,
perfect enlightenment and Śākyamuni is one of wrong views, I cannot tolerate
to hear this talk. If you approve of [Śākyamuni] as one of rightness and truth,
for what reason do you despise and reproach him? You have already lost the
intention to stand in awe of the admonitions of sages. Moreover, you have
forgotten the courtesy of not having one’s own way. This is the ﬁrst thing I
ﬁnd regrettable.
Futhermore, you say, “To maintain completely one’s body and to abide
by ancestor worship are in the teaching to continue wholesomeness. To damage
one’s physical form and change one’s family name are in the learning to cut
off evil.” This means that [King Zhuang,] son of Shangchen (King Mu of Chu
state, who killed his father and usurped the throne)503 would have had the
achievement of carrying on wholesomeness [from his murderous father], and
that [Śākyamuni’s son] Rāhula, who became a Buddhist monk, would have
had the determination to cut off evils. Analyzing your discourse together with
reality, I consider this to be the second point I ﬁnd regrettable.
Again, you say, “[Buddhist monks] abandon their wives and children in
token of a minor degree, and discontinue their ancestor worship in token of
a major degree.” The law of spiritall beings is obscure and vast; it is difﬁcult
to clarify. Therefore, when Zilu asked a question [about spirits], Confucius
did not explain.504 It must be because life and death belong to different paths,
and the condition of spirits are hard to understand. Would it be because the
sage was unable to explain it? In fact, [Confucius] was afraid that the wise
(i.e., Zilu) would not be able to understand this. If we reﬂect with the mirror
of the three transcendental knowledges, we will know that [spirits] exist. You
already accept that the spiritual ediﬁcation (i.e., Buddhism) was transmitted

261

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

44a

to the east, and yet you also say that [Buddhism] took the tide with funeral
services. This is incoherent. This is the third point I ﬁnd regrettable.
Moreover, you say, “The direct teaching (i.e., Daoism) can promote
modesty and suppleness [of human nature], while the indirect teaching (i.e.,
Buddhism) can restrain arrogance and toughness.” I read this statement three
times, and [I am afraid that] it is egregiously disordered. Since modesty and
suppleness are easily contravened, we should promote them harmoniously
with the indirect [teaching]. Since arrogance and toughness are difﬁcult to
edify, we need to restrain them diligently with the direct [teaching]. When
we examine the mind and inspect these matters, isn’t this indeed the case?
If rice bran gets in your eye, you cannot tell east from west. If you are attached
to your biased view, you are confused about the meaning of an expression.
Your statement misses the mark. This is the fourth point I ﬁnd regrettable.
In addition, you say, “Since [the words of the Daoist teaching cause people to] humble themselves, only the intelligent advance; and since [the words
of the Buddhist teaching] promote [people to feel better], the ignorant vie
with each other in moving forward.” Your statement about the words of the
Daoist teaching is true. I respectfully agree with you and sing it loudly. It
covers and carries all things. It raises and educates all things that have a form.
Your statement, “Only the intelligent advance,” however, seems to be your
own discretion.
Once the Buddha’s voice sounds, those who practice the four immeasurable minds are equally in line, the three vehicles equally follow him obediently, and heavenly beings and dragons altogether submit themselves to
him. Your statement “The ignorant vie with each other in moving forward”
appears to be a false accusation as well. This is a discussion to explore what
is complex and profound, but you recklessly form a boil and a papule (i.e.,
create problems) and freely make unfounded remarks. This is the ﬁfth point
I ﬁnd regrettable.
Furthermore, you say, “Buddhism is the way to destroy evils, while
Daoism is the way to give rise to wholesomeness.” Regarding the way to
destroy evils, I can ﬁnd no fault. Stopping evils and performing good deeds are
the reasons why [all] teachings arise. I have not understood about the way to
give rise to wholesomeness. Who has the way [to give rise to wholesomeness]?

262

Fascicle Seven

If wholesomeness is already wholesomeness, why is it necessary to give rise
to it? If wholesomeness is not wholesomeness, it does not mean to give rise
to wholesomeness. Then the outward reason for giving rise to wholesomeness
has no entrustment. The Way is wholesomeness. If you take to give rise to
wholesomeness as the outward reason, this is to excessively add to the wealth
of the rich (i.e., it is too wasteful). If it cannot shake off evils, it is distorted
as a teaching. The Great Way is equally broad for all, but you want to limit
it [to Daoism]. This is the sixth point I ﬁnd regrettable.
Moreover you say, “For those who are brutal and stubborn, it is the best
to be taught by the Buddha. For those who are kind and gentle and who keep
their minds free from preoccupation and open to receive [others’ inﬂuences],
it is the utmost to follow the [Daoist] way.”505 To beat and bring a man who
is brave and ﬁerce to submission and to have a man who is brutal and tyrannical
become peaceful are really Śākyamuni’s great achievements. I am not against
your bright purpose [in this point]. Nevertheless, the power of the Way is
strong and brilliant and the merit of its ediﬁcation reaches far-distant places.
[The Way] “makes the nature [of humans] complete and preserves what
exists continually.”506 There is nothing that is not placed under its favor. Even
owls and the venomous birds called zhen reform themselves. There is nothing
that is not controlled by the might [of the Way]. Your saying that only those
who keep their minds free from preoccupation and open to receive [others’
inﬂuences] are all right is too shallow and harsh. You unconsciously fall into
a persistent biased view. Don’t you realize that being narrow-minded and
inferior impedes the Way? When I open and examine the heading [of your
Discourse, I see that] you ﬁrst admonish one’s personal assumption, but
while making a statement and presenting a discussion you unconsciously
change your mind, and you have difﬁculty in maintaining both your claim
and nominal deﬁnition. This is the seventh point I ﬁnd regrettable.
You say, furthermore, “The eight [diagrams] represent all foreign scriptures of the western region and describe both extensive things and small
things.” The Diamond Sutra (Skt. Vajracchedikāprajñapāramitā-sūtra; Jingang borejing) consists of less than a thousand sentences. Even the teachings
propagated by four-line verses (Skt. catuṣpādikā gāthā) encompass all existing
things. [Scriptures of Buddhism and Daoism] explain both coarse and sublime

263

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

[things], and contain both complicated and simple [matters]. There are minute
teachings and detailed precepts [in Buddhism], and ritual codes go into particulars [in Daoism] as well. [Nevertheless,] you say that exquisite and coarse
[things] arise in total disregard of law [in Buddhism]. This statement goes
against reality. This is the eighth point I ﬁnd regrettable.
Moreover, you say, “Observing [the nature of] each country, the nonChinese country is of a cruel nature, while China is of a mild nature.” Let
me ask you a question. Would the torture called paoluo (forcing a person to
walk on a slippery metal beam placed above ﬁre) be a punishment carried
out in Samarkand or India?507 The sad [son who was whipped by his parents
and who] shed blood was a boy in China.508 The miserable destruction of
scraping [a fetus from a pregnant woman] was not in the minds of the nonChinese.509 [To moisten all things] with dew in fall and [to grant favors]
enduring disgrace are not done by a person who lives on the seacoast [and
who enjoys himself in forgetting the world].510 Examining the natures [of
the non-Chinese country and of China], the Chinese and the non-Chinese
have the same principles. You unfoundedly think that [the nature of the Chinese] is mild while [the nature of the non-Chinese] is harsh. This is the ninth
point I ﬁnd regrettable.
Moreover, you say, “One who plays the go game is wiser than one who
travels around. One who expounds and chants [Buddhist scriptures] is better
than one who makes quips and jokes.” Thinking this over, the reasons why
the reﬁned taste [of Buddhism] could be transmitted and why the scriptures
and writings were not abandoned are really due to [efforts] to make people
understand by expounding and chanting [Buddhist scriptures] and to attain
enlightenment through inquiring and seeking. Therefore, [Confucius] said,
“Not thoroughly discussing what is learned is the thing that occasions me
solicitude.”511 You, however, compare [expounding and chanting Buddhist
scriptures] with making quips and jokes. You are very rude in treating the
virtue [of the Sage]. Let me ask you a question. Where do you place a ﬁsh
trap (i.e., the tool) to lead [people] to wholesomeness? First of all, you want
to forget the words [of Buddhist scriptures] before you apprehend the ideas.
This is the tenth point I ﬁnd regrettable.
[Your Discourse] has these ten points that I ﬁnd regrettable. I cannot
resolve them myself. I hope that you, a gentleman, will explain them further

264

Fascicle Seven

for me. Mr. Xie [Zhenzhi] had a criticism and a different view [on your Discourse] as well. You refuted [his criticism] with detailed explanations. I focus
here only on what I want to ask, and will not take further risks.512

Doubts about the Discourse on the
Non-Chinese and the Chinese and
Inquiries to the Daoist Gu
by Zhu Guangzhi

I, Zhu Guangzhi, bow with my head to the ground.
I have had a look at the correspondence between you and Xie [Zhenzhi],
Attendant-in-Ordinary, regarding the Discourse on the Non-Chinese and the
Chinese, in which you clarify the meaning that [Buddhism and Daoism] are
united into one. It can be said that they are concise, detailed, and reﬁne discussions. With regard to deeply honoring the decorations of Chinese ceremonial robes and crowns, rejecting the simplicity of taking the tonsure, stating
that the manner of raising [a ceremonial tablet] and kneeling on the ground
is respectful, and disgracing the manner of sitting like a squatting fox, they
conﬁne the Chinese people and cut off their adoption of foreign methods.
Even though the metaphor of a boat and a carriage is skillful, the feeling of
impartiality and benevolence is not enough. You already leveled the origin
[that Buddhism and Daoism] reach and meet, but the way with which the
tool entrusts itself [in order to lead people to the origin] is blocked. In this
case, we only get a distant view of the awakening of the three vehicles in
this land, and the ferry of the six pāramitas is a long way off from us at the
present point. Those who open Buddhist scriptures and play with the doctrines
are greatly disappointed and discontented.
Mr. Xie looks down on the Way of [Divine] Transcendents (i.e., Daoism)
and praises Buddhism; he considers the art of sprouting wings [and ascending
to Heaven as a Transcendent] to be a groundless doctrine and takes the assertion of becoming a Buddhist monk as following the authentic text. It is as
if one knows his ﬁngers are ﬁngers and does not know there is no difference
from other people’s ﬁngers. Is this the reason to reach all aspects to grasp
the meaning, or the thought that [Buddhism and Daoism] are virtuously the
same?

265

44b

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

I was gradually educated in the Dharma early in my life and later enjoyed
the taste of Daoism. I always think that respecting the emptiness [of Buddhism]
and valuing the nothingness [of Daoism] are the same in the ultimate purport.
Both a snare and a net are laid; in principle there is no prejudice. Each person
should follow whichever teaching he can best understand and enter that way.
It is [important] that it be the place where the mind can be peaceful. Why is it
necessary to be able to inherit the emperor’s upper robe with the dragon ﬁgures
and yet be unable to ride on [a carriage decorated with] precious stones?
I have to work a lot because of my poverty. I am behind in my studies.
It has been more than ten years since I covered the boxes of my books and
writings. What I learned in my childhood and what I heard previously are
now all forgotten. I have spent years in idleness, having a willful mind. [Even
though] I wish to start studying, I have no means [to do so]. Every day I
lament by myself through the long night. Then I try to prompt myself until
daybreak, without sparing myself, but even though I try to purify my mind,
I am still far away from faith and increasingly suffer from deﬁlements. If
faith does not go along with the doctrine, it will be ﬁckle and have no subjectivity. Because of this, it causes guests who censure me to arise. Hence,
I am writing down my humble opinion, exhausting my poor ability. I hope
you will again give instruction for me and give guidance on the points about
which I am doubtful. I, Guangzhi, bow with my head to the ground.
The Discourse [on the Non-Chinese and the Chinese] says, “Raising [a
ceremonial tablet], kneeling on the ground, and bowing by completely bending
the [upper] body are respectful manners in the region near the imperial capital,
while squatting like a fox and crouching like a dog are reverential manners
in uncivilized places.”
My question is this: Each country has its own manners. Since it has been
this way for a long time, it is difﬁcult to equalize them. Regarding the point
that each person attains what he is content with, there is originally nothing
with which to argue [on this point]. As for the deportment in the regions near
the imperial capital, your statement is correct. Regarding the expression of
[squatting like] a fox and [crouching like] a dog, isn’t this said merely to
hurt [people’s feelings]?
The Discourse says, “Even if it is said that since the united point of the
teachings is equal, and that the teachings are interchangeable, is it possible

266

Fascicle Seven

to wade across the river by carriage or travel on land by boat? It is certainly
impossible.”
My question is this: Teaching is intended to follow human feelings, but
human feelings are not a teaching. Teaching has no ﬁxed pattern because
human feelings are not uniﬁed. What human feelings, which are not uniﬁed,
proceed to varies. They become strong as well as soft. If [strong and soft
feelings] are exercised together, the Chinese and the non-Chinese are assuredly
the same. Therefore, in [crossing over] a large river that ﬂows grandly, it is
not appropriate to use this (i.e., a carriage). In [traveling over] a prairie to a
remote land, why would we take that (i.e., a boat)? Why is it impossible to
use both forms of transportation, both boat and carriage?
The Discourse says, “[Everything] is neither completely the same nor
completely different. [Buddhist monks] abandon their wives and children in
token of a minor degree and discontinue their ancestor worship in token of
a major degree.”
My question is this: If one discontinues [ancestor] worship in token of
a major degree and yet is not able to abandon his family in token of a minor
degree, this means to intend the difference and yet enter the same. It is not
a fault of being the same. Would an ox used to plough a ﬁeld rather be forever
released from sacriﬁcial use since it is useless for an ancestral temple?
The Discourse says, “They fulﬁll all things they desire with the politeness
[of Confucianism], but they completely warp the rule of showing ﬁlial piety
and respect for one’s parents with the [Buddhist] Dharma. [Buddhists] go against
virtue and offend the [right] order and yet they have been unaware of it.”
My question is this: If [Buddhists] go against virtue and offend the [right]
order, they should make no action. Being benevolent, devoted, gentle, and
harmonious is the mind to keep one’s feet on the ground and holds true.
Therefore, having a simple meal and practicing the [Buddhist] Way are not
unfortunate signs, and being in full [ceremonial] dress and eating the bread
of idleness are not the ways to cultivate the right [mind]. Your opinion that
“They fulﬁll [all things they desire with the politeness of Confucianism, but
they completely] warp [the rule of showing ﬁlial piety and respect for one’s
parents with the Buddhist] Dharma” can be cut off here.
The Discourse says, “What should be valued in the ultimate principle
of the universe is the Way, and what should be despised in phenomena is

267

44c

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

secularity. Now if we reject Chinese [teachings] and devote ourselves to the
foreign [teaching], what does this mean? If it is because of the Way, the Way
is originally one. If it is because of secular [customs], the secular [customs
of Chinese and non-Chinese] are completely different [from each other].”
My question is this: Since the ultimate Way is void and comprehended,
it is honorable even without having a rank of nobility. Since secular [customs]
have nothing that is not stagnant, they are humble even if they are not rejected.
The humble is unable to have no trouble. The honored is naturally content
with itself. The state of being content with itself is already one. The sphere
of secular troubles is also equal. If the Way is one and [the sphere of secular]
troubles is equal, what is good and what is bad? (I.e., there is no distinction
between good and bad.) Therefore, they are all [the subject of] ediﬁcation
by sages. Only in the mental functions is there delusion. When delusion is
exhausted and intelligence arises, [the distinction between] oneself and others
is spontaneously forgotten. What are you worried about? Why do you hesitantly stay on the border between rejection of [the Chinese teachings] and
devotion to [the foreign teaching], and the righteousness of China and the
foreign [country]?
The Discourse says, “The teaching of nonarising (i.e., Buddhism) is
indirect, while the teaching of immortality (i.e., Daoism) is direct. The direct
teaching can promote modesty and suppleness [of human nature], while the
indirect teaching can restrain arrogance and toughness.”
My question is this: Nonarising is precisely immortality, and immortality
is nothing other than nonarising. The names differ but the contents are the
same. Is it possible to hold the distinction between the direct and the indirect?
If we separate the superior from the inferior because of the difference of their
later development, we should restrain toughness by the direct [teaching] and
promote suppleness by the indirect [teaching]. Therefore, Confucius said,
“Since [Ran] Qiu withdraws, I urge him forward. [Zhong] You (i.e., Zilu) is
busy with other people’s affairs. Therefore, I keep You back.”513 As for the
way to instruct people, isn’t this right?
The Discourse says, “Buddhism is elegant and extensive, while Daoism
is simple and exquisite. What is exquisite is not something in which clumsy
people believe, and what is extensive is not something that exquisite people
can handle.”

268

Fascicle Seven

My question is this: One who acquires extensive information and a retentive memory must go along with the mental function that is profound and
broad. If he sincerely cultivates good conduct, he must follow the principles
and reach the subtle [state of mind]. If his mental function is clear, he has
nothing that is not exquisite in principle. If his principles are exquisite, he
has nothing that is not exhausted in intelligence. In that case, what is exquisite
and what is extensive are equally meritorious and mutually make use of each
other. If the extensive means the exquisite, would [the extensive] still be
believed by clumsy people? If the exquisite means the extensive, would [the
exquisite] be wanted only by those who are broadly proﬁcient in [Buddhism]?
The Discourse says, “The words of the Buddhist teaching are splendid
and they promote [people to feel better], while the words of the Daoist teaching
are sincere and cause [people] to humble themselves. Since [the words of
the Daoist teaching] cause [people] to humble themselves, only the intelligent
advance; and since [the words of the Buddhist teaching promote people to
feel better,] the ignorant vie with each other in moving forward.”
My question is this: [The words of the Buddhist teaching] are splendid,
but they are not apart from the principles. They were molded by the One of
Transcendent Wisdom. [The words of the Daoist teaching] are sincere, but
they have not reached the void. Therefore, they were crafted by one who had
gained a good reputation. There is order in the relation between being molded
and crafted. Is it because [the teachings] are aimed at those whose natural
disposition is ignorant, or those who possess intelligence? If the teachings
are aimed at those whose natural disposition is ignorant, then not only the
intelligent advance. If [the teachings are] certainly aimed at those who possess
intelligence, the ignorant are unable to go forward. If both the intelligent and
the ignorant can [advance], why is it necessary to promote them [to feel
better] or [to cause them] to humble themselves? Your wonderful comparison
is not in a position to make clear the point. This is something about which
you ought to make a further argument.
The Discourse says, “Buddhist scriptures are complicated and illustrious,
while Daoist scriptures are concise and profound. Since [Daoist scriptures] are
profound, it is hard to discern the gate to the subtle [Way]. Since [Buddhist
scriptures] are apparent, it is easy to follow the road to true [awakening]. If
we follow [the road to] true [awakening], we will not get lost on our way

269

45a

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

home (i.e., the ultimate state of mind). If we discern [the gate to] the subtle
[Way], we will completely attain all thoughts.”
My question is this: Since [Daoist scriptures] are concise, it is easy to
follow them. Why do you say it is hard to discern [the gate to the subtle Way]?
If [Buddhist scriptures] are complicated, it would be difﬁcult to follow them
logically. How [then] could you easily follow [the road to true awakening]?
If we follow [the road to] true [awakening], we will not get lost on our way
home. We will be able to be led to the culmination of the [Buddhist] Way.
Even though [the Buddhist scriptures] are not profound and concise, we will
spontaneously reach there deeply. Why do you borrow a method that is difﬁcult
to clarify and replace it with this path that is easy to understand?
The Discourse says, “For those who are brutal and stubborn, it is the
best to be taught by the Buddha. For those who are kind and gentle and who
keep their minds free from preoccupation and open to receive [others’ inﬂuences], it is the utmost to follow Daoism.”
My question is this: Wrong views and the distortion of truth are what
the Dharma does not allow. Giving pleasure and happiness, relieving pain
and suffering, making other people happy, and giving up all attachments (i.e.,
the four immeasurable minds) are little by little recorded [in Buddhist scriptures]. Making other people happy means to be able to accept anything.
Giving up all attachments means that one must efface oneself. The meaning
of [the Daoist assertion] to keep one’s mind free from preoccupation and
open to receive [the inﬂuences of others] mysteriously matches [the meaning
of the Buddhist tenet to make other people happy and give up all attachments].
I do not know on what teaching brutal and stubborn people rely. If you say
that [the teaching that people] receive varies, you are rather like the one who
carved a mark on the side of his boat [to indicate the place where he dropped
his sword into the water]. How could there be a case in which [Buddhism
and Daoism] tally with each other?
The Discourse says, “Buddhism is the way to destroy evils, while Daoism
is the way to give rise to wholesomeness. Moreover, we should not imitate
the teaching of the western tribes with the nature of the Chinese people.”
My question is this: Your saying that [Daoism] is the way to give rise
to wholesomeness is very good, but your statement “We should not imitate
[the teaching of the western tribes with the nature of the Chinese people]”

270

Fascicle Seven

is disgraceful [to Buddhism]. I am unconvinced. Let me ask you a question
about the nature of the Chinese people and the nature of the western tribesmen.
You consider the nature of the Chinese people to be purely good, and that
of the western tribesmen to be fundamentally evil. If [the nature of the western
tribesmen] was fundamentally evil, how could it be broken by reason? If
[the nature of the Chinese people] was purely good, what signiﬁcance would
there be in giving rise to wholesomeness? Therefore, we know that if [people]
have evil, which can be broken, they have not left behind wholesomeness;
and if [people] have wholesomeness, which can arise, they have not escaped
from evil. In that case, wholesomeness and evil go together and mutually
align as deep or shallow.
Accordingly, the fact that Rāhula was benevolent and gentle is not the
inﬂuence of the light from the east (i.e., Chinese inﬂuence). King Jie and [the
robber] Zhi were ﬁerce and cruel; was this caused by a concentration of the
vapors of the west? Why do you evaluate highly only the Chinese tradition
and despise the teaching of the western tribes? If the wholesomeness of this
[land of China] is different from the wholesomeness of that [land of the western
tribes], and if the evil of that [land of the western tribes] differs from the evil
of this [land of China], in wholesomeness and evil [the Chinese people and
the western tribesmen] would be essentially against each other. [If this is so,]
could there then be a case where they reach the same point?
The Discourse says, “Regarding the manner of squatting and the incomprehensible foreign language that can be compared to the noisy chirping of
insects and birds, why is it worthy to imitate them?”
My question is this: Rites are to develop respect [in the mind], and music
is to perceive [the world of] harmony. Even though the respectful mind is
developed through rites, rites are not the same as the respectful mind. Although
the harmony [of sounds] is perceived through music, music is not the same
as harmony. Consequently, when a ruler sets[the people] at ease and the
people obey him, the gems and silk [used for rites] are kept in a bamboo
chest [because the rites are no longer necessary]. When manners and customs
are simple, sincere, and peaceful, bells and drums [for music] are no longer
sounded. Moreover, the use of bells and drums is not on the same level of
that of the two polarities (i.e., Heaven and Earth), probably because [bells
and drums] are used as tentative expedients from necessity in order to rescue

271

45b

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

[the disordered world]. In that case, as long as moral principles exist, [superﬁcial] form does not matter. If we return [to the foundation], we do not mind
whether [Chinese manners and customs] are the same as or different from
[those of the western tribes].
Now, as for squatting like a fox and crouching like a dog, who says
[these behaviors] are not respectful? With respect one straightens his mind.
Who says [such behaviors] are impolite? Politeness and respect profoundly
tally. Why do you reject [the manners and customs of the western tribes] in
vain? Among groups of those who bear consciousness, [only] human beings
show their nobility. The nobility [of human beings] does not consist in language. [The value of] language lies in treasuring principles. Therefore, since
the kylin and the male phoenix harbor benevolence in mind, they are valued
in sages’ books. The chimpanzee (xingxing) can speak [but he does not know
principles]. [Therefore,] he is laughed at in the Book of Rites.514 I do not
understand on what you rely for the meaning in your discourse. If one sticks
to language and removes principles, this is not what the wise depend on. He
who relies upon principles and goes beyond language breaks superﬁcial phenomena and clariﬁes the ultimate law of Nature. Accordingly even the
unchanging [way advocated by] the elder Li (i.e., Laozi) is beyond the desire
for fame.515 Vimalakīrti’s silence is not superceded by [all bodhisattvas’]
skillful speeches.516 If we inspect the words [of Buddhist and Daoist scriptures],
both his (i.e., Daoism) and mine (i.e., Buddhism) have aspects to be driven
away. If we examine their purposes, there is no boundary between those of
Laozi and those of Śākyamuni. When the aspects of both [Buddhism and
Daoism] are driven away, [struggling in vain, like] trying to moisten something
with tiny bubbles, should be rejected. If there is no boundary [between Laozi’s
purpose and that of Śākyamuni], neither goes against nobility. Why do you
view prajñā from a distance and say that it is not wisdom? Why do you
humiliate [the foreigners] and rigorously compare them to insects and birds?
I carefully examined your discussion repeatedly, day after day. I have not
yet been satisﬁed.
Moreover, according to regional custom there are different languages.
How then would [such a difference] be exclusively between the foreign country and China? Taking only China as a familiar example, Qi state and Lu

272

Fascicle Seven

state are not the same [in terms of dialect]. The use of the terms that mean
“to begin,” quanyu and chuluo, has also changed from ancient times to the
present. Since there is no harm in recording, both terms have been transmitted
in the world in practice. If that (i.e., Buddhism) is wrong, this (i.e., Daoism)
is not right either. If this is right, that alone cannot be wrong. Since both
cannot be right, they are equally wrong.
Imagine a case in which our Chinese spoken language ﬂows into that
[foreign] country. It will incur blame and be reproached [as “the] noisy chirping of insects and birds.” It can be seen that [the people of that country will
say that Chinese] is an incomprehensible foreign language. When we solely
clarify this point, beams and pillars become equal [in value].517 If [the biased
views of] both sides are concurrently removed, wouldn’t they then understand
each other? Principles are inmost, deep, and subtle; they are not what we
ought to take part in. I sincerely wish to discern the right profound teaching,
and for the time being I simply express [my thoughts] in a straightforward
manner. Standing far from you, I admire you wholeheartedly. I will await
your further instructions.

The Disputation on the Daoist Gu’s Discourse
on the Non-Chinese and the Chinese
by Huitong at Yecheng [Temple]

I was at leisure at the beginning of the summer, with nothing particular to do,
and I forgot the time passing by, when I opened Mr. Gu’s discourse, which is
so bright to inspire the ignorant. I saw that it discusses the origin of the differences and similarities [between the non-Chinese and the Chinese] and clariﬁes
the purport of right and wrong. The expressions are rich, the principles are evident, the writing is splendid, and [the content] is truly profound. Every time I
closely read it, I forget my fatigue. It comforts me just as the daylily does. It
is really the so-called reﬁned work by a distinguished literary person.
Nevertheless, when I examine the ultimate purpose, there are many
points that make me doubt and laugh. It is like the story of the blind man
who went to collect pearls and returned home with red beans, thinking that
he had obtained treasures, or the story of the deaf man who wanted to listen
to music—he hears a donkey braying, is delighted by it, and thinks that he

273

45c

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

understands music. Here, it is probably a major fallacy that you have discussed
the non-Chinese and the Chinese and consider that you have attained the
principles.
When I saw that you refer to Daoist scriptures in your discussion, I
became more confused. What Laozi composed in ancient times is only the
Five Thousand Words. Everything else is miscellaneous and they are dissolutely fallacious doctrines, yet you distinguish and call them Daoist scriptures. On what basis does this happen? Since they are not what Laozi composed, how can they be authentic statute books? I hope you will examine
this point thrice and remove the delusion soon.
The Discourse says, “If Confucius and Laozi were not the Buddha, who
else would this be applicable to? Daoism is precisely Buddhism; Buddhism
is none other than Daoism.”
Speaking about this statement, I am afraid that you are completely confused. [Buddhist] scriptures state, “Mahākāśyapa is called Laozi and Kumāra
Guangjing is called Confucius over there.”518 We know that Laozi is not the
Buddha. That is clear. In fact, your views about principles have not yet been
great. Therefore, you have an opinionated viewpoint—in this case, that Laozi
and Confucius were sent [to China] by the Buddha. They, moreover, propagated the virtue [of the Buddha], and showed [the law of] merit and demerit
of beings. Later Buddhism was transmitted.
Nevertheless, it is difﬁcult to observe the Great Way, while it is easy to
follow small comprehensions [of the mind]. This is a lamentation from ancient
times and not a lamentation with signs originated today. Laozi composed the
Five Thousand Words, but many people offer dubious explanations. Some
people set forth fallacies to confuse people’s minds, and some pass on licentious and cruel stories to arouse people’s nature. Hence those who perform
good deeds are few, while those who are steeped in vice are many. I think
that the decorative adornments of the ofﬁcial class, the respectful manner
of bowing by completely bending the [upper] body, the funeral rite—these
were probably [established] when the Great Way declined. Benevolence
and righteousness consequently arose, and ﬁlial piety and showing respect
for one’s parents emerged. Knowledge and desires arose and dishonest practices increased day after day. Sages accordingly prohibited these by ethical
education and controlled them through laws and institutions. Therefore,

274

Fascicle Seven

“propriety was established when faith and honesty became weak; it was the
commencement of disorder.”519
We have already lost wuwei and esteem phenomena (youwei; Skt.
saṃskṛta). Could there be more to add to this? Regarding the appearance of
shaving one’s head, bowing down to squat like a fox, and the custom of [water]
burial, I think that these are insufﬁcient in splendor; they are parsimonious.
[But] it is already true that wealth cannot be maintained. Laozi said that the
ﬁve colors (i.e., blue, yellow, red, white, and black) consequently cause people
to become blind,520 and that even if one amasses a lot of wealth he will certainly
lose it later.521 Accordingly, it is the highest degree of modesty to take the tonsure, put on a black robe, abandon one’s wealth, and leave behind the secular
world. For this reason, Confucius praised Taibo, whose virtue the people did
not [praise].522 This is but one of many examples.
The tribal custom of kneeling down with one’s right knee on the ground
began in India and people of the four regions followed it. India is the center
of the world where Buddhism originated. This [custom] indicates the good
order and solemnity of the Great Dharma and the gravity and reverence of
the highest teaching. You, [however,] compare it to a fox’s squatting. How
do you justify this? Hence, evil spirits assist vice and violent devils destroy
what is right. This refers to you. [Your action] is similar to using a ladle to
attempt to reduce [the volume of water in] a large river or the sea, or raising
a hand to block the light of the sun and moon. [Although you may do these
things,] you can neither reduce the water in a large river or the sea, nor shield
[your eyes from] the brightness of the sun and moon.
In early antiquity the nature of the people was still pure. People could be
bright without availing themselves of ethical education, and they were spontaneously well governed, without being inﬂicted with punishment. When a
man died [his body] was laid in an open ﬁeld. No mound was raised over it,
nor were trees planted around it, nor was there any ﬁxed period of mourning;523
whenever the people grieved, they cried. This is the pure practice of ancient
times. It is good enough to follow, yet you wish to deny it. What do you mean
[by this]?
Furthermore, you compare the two teachings of Daoism and Buddhism
to a boat and carriage. If knowledgeable people hear this, there is no one
[among them] who would not smile [ironically]. I think that the Way of

275

46a

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

Heaven keeps silent and sages have no attachment. Therefore, the Way is
enlarged by people; it is not that the Way enlarges people.524 In that case, the
Sage’s spiritual mirror (i.e., the mind) is proﬁcient in everything. How could
there be a case where their intellectual function does not embrace anything?
Nevertheless, referring exclusively to one [teaching], you say that it is impossible to practice both [teachings] for salvation.
It is just as when the wonderful sunshine appears in the morning it offers
illumination according to each thing, and when timely wind blows unceasingly
in the evening, things produce various sounds according to their shapes.
Accordingly, just as there are differences in shapes, the sounds are not the
same, and since things differ from each other, the way [the sun] illuminates
them also varies. The sun does not illuminate differently in accordance with
each thing. The wind does not cause things of various shapes to produce sound
differently in accordance with each shape. It is simply known that the sun is
one and the wind is one, but the things that receive them vary. You take up
the metaphor of a boat and carriage. How appropriate is your connotation?
The great teaching is impartial and the highest virtue is unbiased. There
is a common purport in educating sentient beings and the same destination
toward which to lead people. [Sages] make the sound [of teaching] equally
in the land of the western tribes as well as that of the northern tribes. They
have the same voice in the foreign land and in China. How could there be a
case where sages give a different teaching in each of the different lands and
a different ediﬁcation in each of the different regions? Would there be [a
teaching and an ediﬁcation] only for the non-Chinese? Could there be [a
teaching and an ediﬁcation] only for the Chinese?
In the past, when Gongming Yi [of Lu state] played the musical piece
Cao in the note qingjue for a cow, [the cow] just lowered her head and ate
[grass] as before. This does not mean that she did not listen to [the music],
but [the music] did not meet her ears. On the other hand, if there were the
buzz of a mosquito or gadﬂy or the lowing of an orphaned calf, she would
promptly prick up her ears, swish her tail, and stamp on the ground, listening
[intently] to it. What you hear now is probably something like the buzz of a
mosquito or a gadﬂy. What is your intention regarding the difference between
the foreign country and China?

276

Fascicle Seven

Furthermore, you say, “[Buddhist monks] abandon their wives and children in token of a minor degree and discontinue their ancestor worship in
token of a major degree. They fulﬁll all things they desire with the politeness
[of Confucianism], but they completely warp the rule of showing ﬁlial piety
and respect for one’s parents with the [Buddhist] Dharma.”
There is as much difference between the [Buddhist] Way and the secular
[way] as there is between night and day. The inner [way] is different from
the outer [way], just as speech differs from silence.
As for offering worship at the ancestral temple, one’s deceased father
is jointly worshiped [with all his ancestors].525 In that case, it is the highest
degree of showing ﬁlial piety and respect to one’s parent. People of the world
have nothing to add to this. If one burns incense at the altar in the evening,
intones a Buddhist scripture at the temple in the morning, worships, repents,
and entreats unceasingly, [the merit] will reach his relatives in successive
kalpas as a token of the great degree, and [will reach] all people of the world
as a token of the minor degree. The immensity of ﬁlial piety and benevolence
like this cannot be surmised by the ignorant. The nation avails of the people
and takes them as the foundation, and the ruler establishes [his power] depending on the people. The reason why the nation is peaceful is due to the power
of the people. I infer that your discussion seems to be an empty scheme.
In addition, you say that śramaṇas, [just like the one who] carved [a
mark on the side of] the boat [to indicate the place where he dropped his
sword into the water], and Daoists, [like the one who] waited by the stump
[hoping that other hares would come to the place where he had previously
caught a hare], ﬁght each other in vain for supremacy; they impeach each
other. I opened and read your discourse, which deeply relieved the hindrances
I had had for a long time. I pondered the sentences and looked for the meanings. What is your sincere conclusion?
People of the heretical way have been wanton for a very long time. They
have been submerged in darkness and do not move from there. They have
been engulfed in delusion. How could they return [from delusion]? They roam
around small villages and insincerely go beyond the border villages. In public
they follow the sacred practice but in private they conduct debauchery. If
attainment of the Way is like this, how shameful it would be!

277

46b

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

In former times a man of Qi state was fond of hunting, but he did not have
a dog or a deer at home. Even though he rushed around for many years, he
could not catch even a single animal. Thereafter he withdrew [from hunting]
and returned to tilling the land. Now that you are intelligent, if you go back
to tilling the land, you will attain good wisdom.
Moreover, you say, “The Great Way has already been obscured and small
comprehensions [of the mind] have risen one after another. Both eloquent
and awkward speakers exert themselves mutually in debate. Who can correct
them?”
The right path is difﬁcult to destroy, while wrong principles are easy to
reject. For instance, it is just as when light feathers meet with wind high above,
they are blown away; or when ﬁne stones enter the ﬂow of water from a mountain stream, they roll down [the stream]; yet Mount Tai remains unmoved in
a whirlwind and massive rocks are not swept away even by a rapid current.
Hence, it is true that when plum trees are nipped by the frost they become leafless, but pines and cypresses are hardly withered even in the coldest season of
the year. When a wicked method contacts a right [method], it is defeated. If
you have the Great Way, then who would have small comprehensions [of the
mind]? I think I will talk about this more and later I will make a judgment.
A fellow like Yan Hui observed Dongye Bi’s way of handling the horses
and he predicted [that the horses] would break down.526 Zigong witnessed
the manners of [Prince Yin of] Zhu state and [Prince Ding of] Lu state, and
discerned that [the two men] would certainly die.527 Why are you as ignorant
as this? Therefore, I will indicate the difference between the ignorant and
the intelligent, make clear that the wise differs from the mean, and show you
by presenting one corner of the subject for the time being. I hope you will
be able to reply to me about the other three [corners].528
Moreover, you say, “Either nirvana or the transformation of becoming
a Transcendent is a method [to unite with the Way]. In Buddhism it is called
right and true (zhengzhen), while in Daoism it is called right and one (zhengyi).
The term ‘one’ means to return to non-death and the term ‘true’ means to
meet nonarising” and “The teaching of nonarising (i.e., Buddhism) is indirect,
while the teaching of immortality (i.e., Daoism) is direct.” These [statements]
were probably made because you are astute, skillful in debate, and eloquent.
That a mean man is disdained is just like this. In that case, the doctrine of

278

Fascicle Seven

nirvana, extinguishing and crossing over [to the yonder shore], is written in
authentic Buddhist scriptures. As for the assertion of the transformation of
becoming a Transcendent and entering the [Daoist] way, however, on what
doctrine is it based?
Laozi said that those who endeavor excessively to perpetuate life must
nonetheless enter the jaws of death.529 He also said, “The reason why Heaven
and Earth endure and continue thus long is because they do not live of, or
for, themselves.”530 Those who forget life survive, while those who try to
sustain life must die. Since you are approaching death, you think that [the
teaching of non-death] is urgent.531 It is indeed urgent. As the saying goes,
“Pointing to the south which is in fact the north, one says to himself that he
is not confused. Pointing to the west which is in fact east, he says to himself
that he is not stupid.” You take mortality as going to be [re]born. Why do
you have such contrary thoughts? Therefore, you live in seclusion and abstain
from food in order to cultivate the art of the [Divine] Transcendents. I have
heard that Laozi has the admonition against the ﬁve ﬂavors (i.e., sweet, sour,
bitter, pungent, and salty),532 but gives no instruction about abstaining from
grain. For this reason, even though a cicada and a moth do not eat, who
among gentlemen values them? Although a frog and a python live in burrows,
why would sages attach importance to them?
Moreover, since ancient times, there is no one among the sages and wise
people who has not died in the end. Only you speak of “immortality.” Why
are you so reckless? Consequently, Emperor Shun’s tomb is in Cangwu;533
Emperor Yu’s mausoleum is in Guiji;534 there is a chapter in the record regarding the reburial of the Duke of Zhou;535 Confucius had a dream [before his
death, in which he sat between] two pillars;536 there is the expression “Uncover
my feet!” for Zeng Shen;537 and there are the records for Yan Yuan that [Confucius] said, “Unfortunately, he was short-lived.”538 Haven’t you heard of
these? Do they sound absurd to you?
Formerly a person who had not seen a kylin asked a person who had
seen one, “What kind [of animal] is a kylin?” The one [who had seen it]
answered, “A kylin is just like a kylin.” The man who had asked then said,
“If I had seen a kylin, then I would not have asked you the question. Nevertheless, you said that a kylin is just like a kylin. How can I understand this?”
[The one who had seen a kylin said,] “A kylin has a body like a roe deer, a

279

46c

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

tail like a cow, hooves like a deer, and a back like a horse.” The man who
had asked the question then clearly understood. Now, do you want to see a
kylin? Are you telling me [about a kylin] without ever having seen one?
In addition, you say, “Daoist scriptures are concise and profound. Since
[Daoist scriptures] are profound, it is hard to discern the gate to the subtle
[Way].”
I think Laozi’s teaching is contained in the Five Thousand Words and
anything other than this is not an authentic scripture. The more Daoist scriptures appear, the deeper my suspicions. Most [of these so-called Daoist scriptures] falsely consign beautiful expressions and vainly marshal [all sorts of]
ﬂowery words. This is similar to the story that a man of Zhou held out a
[dried-up] mouse in order to sell it as uncarved jade, but a man of Zheng saw
it and just withdrew.539 This is what it means. Speaking from this viewpoint,
how can [your statement] be appropriate?
Again, you say, “For those who are brutal and stubborn, it is the best to
be taught by the Buddha. For those who are kind and gentle and who keep
their minds free from preoccupation and open to receive [others’ inﬂuences],
it is the utmost to follow the [Daoist] way.”
Formerly, Laozi said, “Violent and strong men do not die a natural
death. I will make this the basis of my teaching.”540 Therefore, the reason
people widely circulate books of admonitions and make culture and education
known is for the sake of the ignorant; they do not do such things for those
of outstanding virtue and learning. When people go against [these statutes]
there must be misfortune, and when they follow them there must be [good]
fortune. People who are violent, strong, and stubborn are a group of the low
and the stupid. The great teaching (i.e., Buddhism) shows benevolence and
compassion and saves such people with expedients. Isn’t this the selﬂess
learning? Regarding [the statement] “Those who are kind and gentle and
who keep their minds free from preoccupation and open to receive [others’
inﬂuences],” I think that this should be considered empty talk. People who
learn Daoism today are against [the teaching]. [Daoists] make the Yellow
Books (Huangshu), which they consider to be authentic, public;541 they carry
a purple talisman, which they take as an efﬁcacious means; there is no distinction of sex [among them]; and there is discord in the family. Some Daoists
pray for longevity by ingesting drugs; some try to cure diseases by licentious

280

Fascicle Seven

means. How does your statement “Those who are kind and gentle [and who
keep their minds free from preoccupation and open to receive others’ inﬂuences]” hold water?
Moreover, [you say,] “The trace of Daoist teaching is esoteric and sublime. The proper implements for use of [the Daoist teaching] lies in oneself.”
Formerly Laozi said, “What makes me liable to great calamity is my having
the body [that I call myself]; if I did not have a body, what great calamity
could come to me?”542 Laozi took [having] a body as great calamity, but you
consider the body as something to maintain for a long time. What a major
contradiction this is! “[The sage] places himself behind everyone, and yet
he is always in the foremost position; he treats his body as if it were foreign
to him, and yet it is preserved.”543 You merely say, “[The proper implements
for use of the Daoist teaching] lie in oneself.” I do not know on what basis
you make this statement.
Furthermore, you say, “The incomprehensible foreign language entirely
derives from their customs. They understand it, but [to the Chinese people]
it sounds similar to the noisy chirping of insects and birds. Why is it worthy
of imitation?”
I think that those who eat bitter food do not know that bitter is bitter,
and they do not covet sweet and fragrant food; those who are delighted with
malodorous things are not aware that [such things are] stinky and they are
not addicted to [the fragrance of] pepper and orchids. It is as if you were to
indulge yourself in failing to follow the right path. How could you have a
thought about the Great Dharma?
The sacred teaching is subtle and unobstructed, and the ultimate Way is
profound and extensive. It can be said that they are neither existence nor
nonexistence. [In the sacred teaching of the ultimate Way] there is neither
the meaning of a confrontation between self and other, nor a view between
dissimilarity and similarity.
Speaking is similar to shooting. Once an arrow leaves the bow, even if
you feel sorry about [having shot it], it is too late. Why don’t you use prudence
in your speech? You say that “[the incomprehensible foreign language sounds
similar to] the noisy chirping of insects and birds.” What do you mean?
Recently Sun [En (?–402) of the Way of the Five Pecks of Grain] went
mad and openly acted outrageously. [His teaching] is weird and licentious and

281

47a

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

destroys proprieties. His cruel and disordered [behavior] rejects righteousness.
Only when people of high moral standing are united in common determination
will ignorant people stop [producing] falsehoods and reform themselves.
Vicious fellows ﬁlled a room and evil people overran the gates. There were
grievous sorrows in the towns and grudges about disastrous sufferings on
the streets. The Way of Heaven brings disaster to those who are arrrogant,
and spiritual beings bless those who are humble. Later [Sun En] brought ruin
down upon himself.

The Discourse on the Western Tribe and China
(Rong hualun), Breaking the Daoist Gu’s
Discourse on the Non-Chinese and the Chinese,
by Shi Sengmin at Guangling

Formerly Vimalakīrti availed himself of the lofty path in this world and displayed his merits outside of the phenomenal world. He lived in the secular
world, hiding his great talent; he exposed his aspiration only in the deep sea
(i.e., the Buddhist world); he sprinkled spiritual intelligence over the ten directions; and he regulated and corrected the world. Therefore his trace appeared
in the western land (i.e., India) where he joined others in the profound teaching.
If we speak of his mysterious supernatural powers, he was able to make Heaven
and Earth turn upside down or expand or contract things as he pleased. If we
speak of his natural disposition, beyond discretion, he profoundly concentrated
on the state of maintaining silence. People like this person can be called a
Buddhist layperson (jushi; Skt. gṛhapati). I have not understood the intention
behind your calling yourself a Buddhist layman.
You have not destroyed the high mountain of the seven kinds of selfconceit, you have not ﬁlled in the gorge of the ﬁve desires, the sunlight of
wisdom has not shone [within you], you have not cleared up the clouds of
ignorance, you have not stopped the winds of eternal darkness, and you have
not returned from the delusion of nocturnal roaming. Your understanding [of
Buddhism] is still on the ordinary level. Yet you still put on airs and call
yourself a Buddhist layman? I, one who has poor [knowledge of the Buddhist]
Way and who appreciates your ability from afar, have come to know that
you are not yet qualiﬁed to take possession of [the title of jushi]. Even though
this is the entry level in the Great Dharma, it cannot be easily assumed.

282

Fascicle Seven

I examined the intention of your Discourse on the Non-Chinese and the
Chinese, which completely illuminated your mind. I tried to fulﬁll my learning
at the altar to Heaven, hoping you would instruct on this issue. Regarding
your discussion, however, there is no natural ability to enjoy the elegance of
the writing, there is no knowledge to examine the efﬁcacy of profound issues,
there is not even a very small light in intellectual function, and the amount
of beneﬁt is less than the moisture in a dewdrop. It is deﬁcient in myriads of
ways. What signiﬁcance would there be?
Moreover, holding vague ideas within [the discussion] and an obscure
plot in mind, you play lightly with brush and ink and rely on and surmise
the sages’ purposes, or you mix up Daoism and Buddhism and say they are
the same; you discuss the depth of the teachings and say there are differences
between them; you speak of the spiritual lands and put one above the other;
and you slander in saying that there is falsehood in the clean, honest, and
just state (i.e., enlightenment).
A bitter plum tree is overburdened with fruit and its branches break.
Luan Da [of the Han dynasty] talked wildly and was decapitated. These are
entirely the established system of the prehistoric times and the beacon of the
Yin dynasty for the wise of later generations. I will now tell you the differences
between Daoism and Buddhism in both names and meanings.
The Buddha is the other name for the numinous being of right, perfect
enlightenment; the Way is a general term for a hundred paths. Laozi is a sage
who expounded one aspect [of phenomena], while the Buddha depended on
the foundation of myriad deities. In Daoism [the transformation of becoming]
a Transcendent is considered to be noble, but in Buddhism the exhaustion of
deﬁlement is taken as good. In the Way of [Divine] Transcendents there is a
thousand-year life span. In the exhaustion of deﬁlement, on the other hand,
there is a numinous eternal being. Because a numinous being is eternal, it is
outstanding and profound. Because [a Transcendent] has a thousand-year life
span, he rides on a dragon and controls the clouds. To control the clouds and
to ride on a dragon is the way of [those who undertake] birth and death.
The profound numinous being is permanently happy and eternally pure.
Now that it is like this, the movement of Heaven completely responded and
the trace [of the profound numinous being] (i.e., Śākyamuni) descended to the
imperial capital. He quietly disliked the palace, surrounded by watchtowers,

283

47b

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

and completely abandoned the palace. Therefore, he let go of his worldly
nations and made a vow to go beyond to the three kinds of emptiness. He
ﬂew like a dragon to the splendid house [of the Dharma] and readied a vehicle
[to go to] the place where he attained enlightenment.
Thereupon, he ﬁrst expounded at the Deer Park (Skt. Mṛgadāva), then
he had an assembly at the palace of the [Trāyastriṃśa] Heaven, then he propagated [his teaching] at Vulture Peak (Skt. Gṛdhrakūṭa), and later gloriﬁed
it near the Hiraṇyavatī (or Ajitavatī) River. Consequently, the great light [of
Dharma] illuminated even distant areas; the sun [seemed to] rest from shining;
the splendid carriages [of those who heard the teaching] covered the four
directions; a vehicle of the king of the Brahmā Heaven descended from
heaven; beings of the nine heavens together sang [of the Buddha’s virtue];
many hermits had an opportunity for realization; among those who made
bold to have a relationship [with the Buddhist Way], there was none who did
not gather together like clouds and take refuge in it.
Nevertheless, the emperor of the Zhou dynasty, a supreme ruler of an
outlying region, had not given rise to the aspiration for [the Buddhist] Way.
Therefore, the Tathāgata caused Samantabhadra to practice [the Buddha’s]
authority at the western road (i.e., India) and all of the three sages (i.e., Confucius, Yan Hui, and Laozi) to lead the people in the eastern metropolis (i.e.,
China). Therefore, a Buddhist scripture states, “Great being [Mahā]kāśyapa
is none other than Laozi.”544 Hence [Laozi] assisted and supported the world
of the Zhou period by means of the sophisticated teaching of the Five Thousand Words, and then returned to India, since his relationship to the ediﬁcation
[in China] had been used up. This is why there is [a legend that Laozi] left
Guan for the faraway west. Based on [this legend], the Chinese composed
the Scripture on Laozi who Ediﬁed the Barbarians (Laozi huahujing), which
makes those of little knowledge sigh in admiration for China.
You have not yet known the details of the profound purport. Why then
do you insist that Laozi and the Buddha are the same? When people hear
that the Great Sage (i.e., the Buddha) has manifested as the leader of the
circle of Confucian scholars, they take Zhuangzi, Confucius, the Duke of
Zhou, and Laozi to all be the Buddha. If this were the case, is it possible that
you are none other than Laozi as well?

284

Fascicle Seven

[You then say that] among sentient beings who transmigrate in the ﬁve
realms of existence there is no one who is not the Buddha. What do you mean
by this? [Your statement] is really [as reckless as] when Kuafu chased after
the sun and surely died from thirst. You say in the Discourse on the NonChinese and the Chinese that there are abominable people of Koguryo and
Paekche to the east, tribal people of Qiang and Rong to the west, unkempt
people to the north, and people who cut their hair and have tattoos on their
bodies to the south; on the other hand, since the Duke of Zhou and Confucius
created rules of decorum in China, there is a distinction between the nonChinese and the Chinese.
[My Discourse on] the Western Tribe and China advocates that the east
ends at a place where no one lives, the west ends at a solitary village, the
north goes beyond the sea, and the south comes to an end at the gate of a village with no inhabitants. Since the Tathāgata enhanced the ediﬁcation in
China, there is a difference between the western tribespeople and [the people
of] China. You condemn those who have the nature of the Chinese for learning
the teaching of the western tribes. This is because you have come out of the
deep pit of a well and have not yet seen a view of rivers and lakes. As a
Buddhist scripture says, “The Buddha occupies the center of the world and
leads the people of the ten directions to purity”;545 therefore, we know that
the land of India is the central kingdom.
The Duke of Zhou and Confucius have the graceful and upright system
[of propriety], while the Tathāgata has the law to transcend the secular world.
Since [the Chinese have] the graceful and upright system [of propriety], they
are different from the tribal people of the four directions. Since [the Tathāgata
has] the law to transcend the secular world, he is not the same as the Duke
of Zhou and Confucius. Since the [graceful and upright] system [of propriety]
diffuses to the tribal people of the four directions, the tribal people of every
direction praise the virtue [of the Duke of Zhou and Confucius]. Since the
law [to transcend the secular world] was appended to [the system of] the
Duke of Zhou and Confucius, Laozi returned to the west (i.e., India). Since
Laozi returned to the west, a large number of tribal people have arisen. Since
the tribal people of the four directions praise the virtue [of the Duke of Zhou
and Confucius], they (i.e., the Chinese) excessively increase confusion.

285

47c

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I

The upright decorum is unable to be changed, and the true Dharma does
not change. Since the upright decorum cannot be changed, Taibo straightened
his clothes even in [the uncivilized land of] Wu and Yue. Since the true Dharma
does not change, Buddhism was transmitted to the east without alteration.
Since [Taibo] straightened his clothes, he caused the people in the land where
they barely clothed themselves to follow the custom of appreciating clothing.
Since the Dharma does not change, it causes Chinese people of talent and
virtue to take the tonsure. Since [the people of Wu and Yue] had the custom
of appreciating clothing, it made their appearance closer to that of the people
of the Zhou dynasty. Since [talented and virtuous Chinese people] take the
tonsure, it makes them respectfully equal to the western tribal people in customs. Since the appearance [of the people of Wu and Yue] became close to
that of the people of the Zhou dynasty, it made them feel that their uncivilized
customs were useless and poor. Since [talented and virtuous Chinese people
who took tonsure] are equal to the faraway western tribal people in customs,
it makes all those who see them at close range believe [in Buddhism].
If you think that there is no ﬁxed rule in the Sage’s path and his response
varies according to each locale, then Taibo should have walked naked in the
lower reaches of the Yangzi River (i.e., the land of the Wu and Yue), and it
is possible that even today you do not wear clothes, either. Hence, even
though locality and race differ, the sacred Dharma does not. From where do
you take the basis of the meaning of your statement? You might say that you
rely on the right way.
Thus, [I would say that] Daoism depends on attaining the mystery (dongxuan) to be foremost, and Buddhism takes the emptiness of emptiness (Skt.
śūnyatā-śūnyatā) to be the ultimate law of Nature. Laozi considers the Grand
Void to be the essence, while the Buddha thinks that conforming to present
affairs is profound. Laozi thinks that nature gives rise to [all things], while
the Buddha considers that the unity of [cause and] condition gives rise to
[all things]. Daoism takes talismans to be effective, while Buddhism takes
leading [sentient beings] through explaining [Buddhist scriptures] to be
exquisite. Since [in Daoism] the Grand Void is considered to be the essence,
there are things to produce all things [in the Grand Void]. Since [in Buddhism]
conforming to the present affairs is profound, all things are essential. Since

286

Fascicle Seven

[in Laozi’s teaching] Nature gives rise to [all things], there is no heavenly
hall to which to ascend. Since [in Buddhism] the unity of [cause and] condition
gives rise to [all things], there are noble stages to which one can ascend.
Since talismans are considered to be effective, there is no efﬁcacious god in
Daoism. Since [in Buddhism] leading [sentient beings] through explaining
[Buddhist scriptures] is considered to be exquisite, people study the mind of
the Sage. Since there are things to produce all things [in the Grand Void],
Daoism is not great. Since all things are essential [in Buddhism], the path of
the Sage is lofty and vast. Since there is no heavenly hall to which to ascend,
it is said that it is fruitless [to practice Laozi’s teaching]. Since [in Buddhism]
there are noble stages to which one may ascend, intelligent people throw
themselves into [the Buddhist Way]. There is no efﬁcacious god [in Daoism].
Therefore, what are you fascinated by and what do you seek? Ever since
people began to study the mind of the Sage [in Buddhism], śramaṇas have
arisen like clouds.
Things are like this. Therefore, we know that the Daoist scriptures are
minor and shallow, while the Buddhist scriptures are extensive and deep; the
Daoist scriptures are few and vile, while the Buddhist scriptures are magnanimous and clean; the Daoist scriptures are disordered and lacking, while
the Buddhist scriptures are simple and pure; and the Daoist scriptures are
approachable and yet obscure, while the Buddhist scriptures are profound
and yet clear.
You should change your polluted robe (i.e., the Daoist robe) to a simple
one (i.e., the Buddhist robe) and faithfully take part in the lofty teaching [of
Buddhism]. Those who wear a yellow turban on the head look depraved.
Wearing a cap made of leather is really not a Chinese style. Selling [Daoist]
talismans and registers is an evil custom that deceives people of the world.
Patting the cheeks with both hands and grinding the teeth are the extremity
of confusion. Binding one’s hands behind one’s back and rolling on the ground
is a manner of hell. Talismans and the union of [yin and yang] vapors (i.e.,
the “art of the inner chamber,” sexual practices) are the most cunning craft.
In this way, [regarding Buddhism and Daoism,] light and darkness are
already evident and truth and falsehood are already obvious. You should lead
your friends in an orderly manner and walk across to the pure path (i.e.,

287

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume I
48a

Buddhism). I look after the graceful virtue in my mind, and at the same time
I receive with respect the truth of the Sage. Would this be bad? I think that
this must truly not be adverse to the distinguished instruction.
End of Fascicle Seven of The Collection for the Propagation
and Clariﬁcation [of Buddhism]

288

Notes
1

2

3

4

5
6
7

Two interpretations for the “six masters” are suggested in Kyōto Daigaku Jinbun
Kagaku Kenkyūjo Chūsei Shisōshi Kenkyū han, ed., Gumyōshū kenkyū (Kyoto: Kyōto
Daigaku Jinbun Kagaku Kenkyūjo, 1973–1975), vol. 2, p. 3, n. 10. First, the six nonBuddhist masters who were inﬂuential during the same time period as Śākyamuni:
Pūraṇa-kāśyapa, Maskarī-gośālīputra, Sañjayī-vairaṭīputra, Ajitakeśakambala, Kabudakātyāyana, and Nirgrantha-jñātiputra. Second, the group of six evil bhikṣus among
the Buddha’s disciples: Nanda, Upananda, Kālodāyin Udāyin, Chanda, Aśvaka, and
Punarvasu.
The original source of this phrase is found in the Lunyu, Yang Huo: “[The master]
hates for the color purple to overpower vermilion.” Vermilion (or deep red) is a
primary color, while purple is a secondary color. Therefore, vermilion represents
wholesomeness and purple represents unwholesomeness. For an English translation
of the phrase, see James Legge, The Chinese Classics with a Translation, Critical
and Exegetical Notes, Prolegomena, and Copious Indexes (Taipei: Wen shih che ch’u
pan she, 1972, second revised ed.), vol. 1, p. 326.

The bird called jingwei is a legendary small bird that was believed to have the habit
of dropping bits of wood and stone into the ocean, in the vain hope of ﬁlling it. This
story is found in the Beishanjing of the Shanhaijing. See Hsiao-Chieh Ching, HuiChen Pai Cheng, and Kenneth Lawrence Thern, trans., Shan hai ching: Legendary
Geography and Wonders of Ancient China (Taibei, Taiwan: Committee for Compilation
and Examination of the Series of Chinese Classics, National Institute for Compilation
and Translation, 1985), p. 60.

Cangwu is one of seven prefectures that belonged to Jiaozhou (present-day Guangdong
province, a southern part of Guangxi province, and Vietnam). The prefectural ofﬁce
of Cangwu was in present-day Guangxi province.

Mencius’ accusation against Yang Zhu and Mo Di is found in the Mengzi, Teng Wen
Gong, xia. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 2, pp. 282–284, n. 9–14.

See the Laozi, chapter 19. English translation in James Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi
quan ji (Taibei: Wen xing shu ju, 1963), p. 110, n. 1.

The term zhonglü, one of the twelve classical Chinese musical notes, is associated
with the fourth month of the year. The twelve classical Chinese musical notes consist
of six yang lü notes (huangzhong, dacu, guxi, ruibin, yize, and wuyi) and six yin lü
notes (dalü, jiazhong, zhonglü, linzhong, nanlü, and yingzhong). Each note corresponds
to one of the twelve months of the year: dacu to the ﬁrst month, jiazhong to the second

289

Notes

8

9

10

11
12

13
14
15

16

17

month, guxi to the third month, zhonglü to the fourth month, ruibin to the ﬁfth month,
linzhong to the sixth month, yize to the seventh month, nanlü to the eighth month,
wuyi to the ninth month, yingzhong to the tenth month, huangzhong to the eleventh
month, and dalü to the twelfth month.

The Chinese term wuwei is usually translated as “non-action,” “inactivity,” or “spontaneity.” In Buddhism wuwei is used, in addition to these meanings, as the Chinese
rendering of the Sanskrit term asaṃskṛta (“unconditioned”) and as another term for
nirvana. In this instance, the meaning intended here seems to be closest to “nirvana.”
However, I did not translate this term consistently as “nirvana” throughout the text,
since it is not always clear what the various authors intended.
See the Laozi, chapter 21. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 112, translates
this phrase as “The grandest forms of active force from [Dao] come, their only source”;
this interpretation differs from this context.

Gong and shang are the ﬁrst two of the ﬁve fundamental notes (gong, shang, jue, zhi,
and yu) that correspond to huangzhong, dacu, guxi, linzhong, and nanlü, respectively,
of the twelve classical Chinese musical notes. See note 7.

See the Laozi, chapter 25. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 115, n. 1–2.

According to the Liezi, the “primordial substance” (tianrui) is the stage where “things
have not only assumed deﬁnite shapes and forms but have taken on qualities,” and
“in the Primal Beginning, yin and yang divide, and their interaction produces limited
but identiﬁable shapes and forms.” English translation in Eva Wong, Liezi: A Taoist
Guide to Practical Living (Boston: Shambhala Publications, 1995), p. 28.
See Lunyu, Zizhang. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, chapter 22, p. 346, n. 2.

Lü Shang is a man for whom Taigong, King Wen’s grandfather, had waited (wang).
Therefore he is called Taigong Wang Lü Shang.

The meanings of the terms shiwen (the Chinese character for the number 10) and
erwu (2 and 5) are not clear. I refer to Sawada Mizuho’s Japanese translation in
Ressenden Shinsenden (Tokyo: Heibonsha, 1993), p. 142, n. 23, 24. The “Ten Celestial
Stems” are combinations of the ﬁve primary elements (i.e., metal, wood, water, ﬁre,
and earth) and either one of the two elements the former and the latter: jia (the former
wood), yi (the latter wood), bing (the former ﬁre), ding (the latter ﬁre), wu (the former
earth), ji (the latter earth), geng (the former metal), xin (the latter metal), ren (the
former water), gui (the latter wood). Furthermore, combinations of the ten celestial
stems and the twelve animals of the zodiac are used for the Chinese calendar and
directions.

See the Xiaojing. English translation in Henry Rosemont, The Chinese Classic of
Family Reverence: A Philosophical Translation of the Xiaojing (Honolulu: University
of Hawai‘i Press, 2009), p. 105.
See the Lunyu, Taibo. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 208.

290

Notes

18
19
20
21
22

23
24

25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40

See the Lunyu, Zi han. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 226.
See the Lunyu, Taibo. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 207.

See the Lunyu, Xian wen. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 279.

See the Laozi, chapter 44. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 135, n. 1.

The Marquis of Sui’s pearl (suihou zhi zhu or suizhu) is a pearl presented to the state
of the Marquis of Sui by a large serpent that had been cured of a grave injury by him.
The reference implies the greatest treasure of the world.

See the Lunyu, Shuer. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, chapter 14, p. 199, n. 2.

The phrase “with his garments hanging down (chui yichang)” derives from the passage,
“[Huangdi] (i.e., the Yellow Emperor), Yao, and Shun [simply] wore their upper and
lower garments [as patterns to the people], and good order was secured all under
heaven,” found in the Yijing, Xici, xia. English translation in James Legge, I ching:
Book of Changes (New Hyde Park, NY: University Books, 1964), pp. 383–384, n. 15.
See the Shangshu, Hongfan. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 3, p. 326, n. 6.
See the Lunyu, Yao yue. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 353, n. 2.

See the Laozi, chapter 38. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 128, n. 1.

The zhangfu was originally a formal cap during the Shang (Yin) dynasty. Confucius
later wore the cap, and since that time it was considered the Confucian cap.
See the Laozi, chapter 13. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 104, n. 2.
See the Laozi, chapter 9. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 101, n. 2.
See the Lunyu, Xianjin. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, pp. 240–241.

See the Xiaojing for both quotations. Rosemont, The Chinese Classic of Family Reverence, p. 116.
See the Shangshu, Jinteng. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 3, p. 354, n. 6.

See the Laozi, chapter 52. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 143, n. 2.
See the Laozi, chapter 52. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 143, n. 5.
See the Lunyu, Bayi. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 156.

See the Mengzi, Teng Wen Gong, shang. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 2, pp.
253–254, n. 12.
See the Lunyu, Zi han. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 221, n. 1–2.

See the Taizi Xudanajing (Skt. Jinapatra-arthasiddhi-sūtra), T.171.3:418c17–424a22.
See the Xiaojing. Rosemont, The Chinese Classic of Family Reverence, p. 110.

291

Notes

41
42
43
44
45

46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58

59

The phrase “a great hypocrisy” (dawei) derives from the Laozi, chapter 18. Legge,
Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 109, n. 1.
See the Lunyu, Shuer. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 207.

See the Zuozhuan, Zhuanggong’s twenty-fourth year. James Legge, The Chinese
Classics (Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press, 1960), vol. 5, p. 107.

This expression derives from the Mengzi, Gongsun Wu, xia. Legge, The Chinese
Classics, vol. 2, p. 232, n. 2.

The text has only taigong (“grandfather“). Based on the exposition of the Shiji (thirtysecond fascicle, Qi taigong shijia), Kagaku Kenkyūjo Chūsei Shisōshi Kenkyū han,
ed., Gumyōshū kenkyū, vol. 2, p. 35, n. 5, interprets it to be Taigong Wang Lü Shang.
I follow this.
See the Zuozhuan, Xigong’s twenty-third and twenty-eighth years. Legge, The Chinese
Classics, vol. 5, p. 187 (left column) and p. 208 (right column).

See the Zuozhuan, Xuangong’s second year. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 5, p.
290 (right column).
See Lunyu, Xueer. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 137, n. 3.

See the Laozi, chapter 5. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 98, n. 2.

See the Laozi, chapter 32. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 123, n. 5.
See the Lunyu, Weizheng. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 145.

See the Lunyu, Zizhang. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 343, n. 2.

See the Lunyu, Xiangdang. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 232, n. 1.
See the Lunyu, Liren. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 166, n. 1.

See the Laozi, chapter 12. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 103, n. 1–2. See
note 10 for the ﬁve notes of traditional Chinese music.
See the Mengzi, Jinxin, xia. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 2, p. 466.

See the Mengzi, Teng Wen Gong, xia. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 2, chapter
7, p. 276, n. 2.

This sentence presents a series of things done contrary to established practice: the
sacriﬁcial stand and pot should be placed in a palace hall, while military ﬂags and
banners are supposed to be hoisted at a camp gate; wearing a fur robe in hot weather
and light linen clothing in cold weather are also contrary actions. So these are all
examples of “actions that are perverse in the orientation of time and place.”
See the Laozi, chapter 41. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 132, n. 1.

292

Notes

60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69

70
71
72

73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80

See the Laozi, chapter 51. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 148, n. 1.
See the Laozi, chapter 45. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 136, n. 1.
See the Lunyu, Xian wen. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 286.

See the Laozi, chapter 9. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 101, n. 2.

See the Lunyu, Wei Linggong. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 296, n. 2, translates the name as Qu Boyu.
See the Lunyu, Gongzhi Chang. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 180.
See the Lunyu, Wei Linggong. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 297.

See the Wenxuan (compiled by Prince Zhaoming of the Liang dynasty), fascicle 45,
dui Chu wang wen.

See the Lunyu, Weizi. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, pp. 332–333, n. 1–2.

Bian He, a man of Chu, obtained a jade on Mount Chu and presented it to King Li
and King Wu, but both kings thought that it was only a stone and He’s legs were
amputated as punishment. Later, King Wen realized that it was a real jade. This story
is found in the Han Feizi, Heshi. See Burton Watson, trans., Han Feizi: Basic Writings
(New York: Columbia University Press, 2003), pp. 81–82.
This story implies that even a divine turtle cannot change his fate. See the Zhuangzi,
Waiwu. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, pp. 576–577.

The term tianjing refers to a celestial body. I translate the term here as “high above
the earth.”

This is not a precise quotation. Kyōto Daigaku Jinbun Kagaku Kenkyūjo Chūsei
Shisōshi Kenkyū han, ed., Gumyōshū kenkyū, vol. 1. p. 48, n. 4, suggests that a similar
expression is found in the Laozi, chapter 44. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji,
pp. 135–136, n. 1–3.
This passage is not found in the Laozi.

See the Kongzi Jiayu, fascicle 6, Zhipei.

See the Laozi, chapter 48. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 138, n. 2.
See Lunyu, Weizheng. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 146, n. 4.

See the Laozi, chapter 30. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 121, n. 4.

Laozi’s view of this is found in the Laozi, chapter 13. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi
quan ji, p. 104, n. 2.

See the Shangshu, Jintengpian. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 3, pp. 351–356.
See the Lunyu, Shuer. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 206.

293

Notes

81
82
83

84

85
86
87
88
89
90
91

92
93
94

95

96
97

See the Huainanzi, Xiuwu xun. See Evan Morgan, Tao, The Great Luminant: Essays
from Huai nan tzu (Shanghai: Kelly & Walsh Ltd., 1934), pp. 220–221.

This is based on the description found in the Mengzi, Teng Wen Gong. Legge, The
Chinese Classics, vol. 2, pp. 282–284, n. 9–14.

This expression derives from a story found in the Huainanzi, Xiuwu xun. Lord Ping
of Jin state made a large bell, but the music master Kuang asked the lord to recast
the bell because it had a poor tone and it might disgrace his name in later generations.
See Morgan, Tao, The Great Luminant, p. 241.
This expression also derives from the description found in the Huainanzi, Fanlun
xun: “The diamond-cutter may mistake a piece of jade, thinking it to be an imitation
stone, the Pi. But I, Tun (Dun), alone, would never miss the luster”; Morgan, Tao,
The Great Luminant, p. 170.
See the Lunyu, Yang Huo. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 326.

In the Lunyu, Gongzhi Chang, Confucius criticizes Zang Wen Zhong and Weisheng
Gao. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 179 and pp. 181–182, respectively.
See the Lunyu, Weizheng. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 149.
See the Huainanzi, Qisu xun.

See the Zhuangzi, Dasheng. In the Zhuangzi Dongye Bi is called Dongye Ji. See
Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 463, n. 11.

See the Zuozhuan, Dinggong’s ﬁfteenth year. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 5,
p. 791 (left column).

See the Shiji, fascicle 47, Kongzi shijia. Hsien-yi Yang and Gladys Yang, trans., Selections from Records of the Historian (Peking: Foreign Languages Press, 1979), pp.
13–14.

See the Zuozhuan, Xianggong’s twenty-ninth year. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol.
5, p. 549, right column, to p. 550, left column.

See the Xiaojing. Rosemont, The Chinese Classic of Family Reverence, p. 110.

When Confucius was the Minister of Justice in Lu state, Qi ofﬁcials gave girls, music,
and horses to the Duke of Lu (i.e., Ji), who, after receiving them, neglected state
affairs. Consequently, Confucius left Lu state. See the Shiji, fascicle 47, Kongzi shijia.
Yang and Yang, Selections from Records of the Historian, pp. 8–11.

The king of Wu took Pi’s advice and rejected Wuzi Xu’s advice. See the Shiji, fascicle
66, Wuzi Xu liezhuan. Yang and Yang, Selections from Records of the Historian, pp.
41–42.

See the Laozi, chapter 23. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, pp. 113–114, n. 1.
See the Lunyu, Xian wen. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 290, n. 1.

294

Notes

98
99
100
101
102

103

104
105

106

107
108

109
110

111
112

See the Lunyu, Yong ye. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 188.
See the Lunyu, Taibo. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 208.

See the Lunyu, Yong ye and Xianjin. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 185, and
p. 239, respectively.
See the Lunyu, Zi han. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 223.

The Huainanzi, Shuoshan xun, states, “Observing ﬂoating driftwood, boats were
devised, looking at rolling mugwort, wheels were invented, and seeing bird tracks,
[the Chinese] written language was created.”

The Sanskrit term for the thirty-seven elements of enlightenment is sapta-triṃśad-bodhipakṣa, which was translated into Chinese as sanshiqi daopin, sanshiqi juefen, or sanshiqi
puti fenfa. It refers to the practices that lead to the attainment of nirvana: the four bases
of mindfulness, the four bases of transcendental knowledge, the four right efforts, the
ﬁve roots of wholesomeness, the ﬁve powers obtained through practicing the ﬁve roots
of wholesomeness, the seven factors of wisdom, and the eightfold holy path.
The Daodejing consists of the Daojing, the ﬁrst thirty-seven chapters, and the Dejing,
the remaining forty-four chapters.

The same quotation is found in the Bianwei lu (T.2116.52:760b3–4) compiled by
Xiangmai in 1291, and the Fozu lidai tongzai (T.2036.49:717c20–22) compliled in
1341. According to these two sources, the title of this sutra is Laozi xishengjing,
which appears to be an indigenous Chinese scripture.

The sentence “to use the road [of the other state] in order to carry out an atrocity
[against its own enemy]” refers to the story of the Marquis of Jin who dug a tunnel
through Yu to attack Guo. See the Zuozhuan, Xigong’s ﬁfth year. Legge, The Chinese
Classics, vol. 5, p. 145, par. 9.

This story is found in the Zuozhuan, Xianggong’s twenty-seventh year. Legge, The
Chinese Classics, vol. 5, p. 532 (right column) to p. 533 (left column).

Bai Qi’s biography is found in the Shiji, fascicle 73, Bai Qi Wang Jian liezhuan. See
William H. Nienhauser, ed., The Grand Scribe’s Records (Bloomington, IN: Indiana
University Press, 1994–2011), vol. VII, pp. 167–173.
Dong Zhuo’s biography is found in the Hou Hanshu, fascicle 102, Dong Zhuo liezhuan.

The phrase “displace violence with violence” (yi bao yi bao) derives from the Shiji,
fascicle 61, Boyi liezhuan. See Nienhauser, ed., The Grand Scribe’s Records, vol.
VII, p. 3: “He replaces tyranny with tyranny.”

See the Loutanjing, T.23.1:293b14, for the ﬁrst half of the quotation; the latter half
is not found in the Taishō canon.

The Chinese term shide (“ten virtuous acts“) is interpreted as the ten wholesome acts
(shishan).

295

Notes

113
114

115
116
117

118
119

120
121
122
123
124
125
126
127
128
129

See the Xiaojing. See note 93.

In Liezi, Tianrui, Confucius asked Rong Qiqi why he looked so happy and Rong Qiqi
replied, “Among living creatures I have secured the lot of a human being; among
human beings I am a man; and I have reached the age of ninety years old.” Wong,
Liezi: A Taoist Guide to Practical Living, p. 37.
The Wuling xiajing is a Daoist scripture that is no longer extant.

See the Zuozhuan, Huangong’s second year. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 5, p.
40 (left column).

The Chinese zither qin is smaller than the se; usually the qin has one, ﬁve, or seven
strings, while the se has ﬁfteen, twenty-ﬁve, or ﬁfty strings. The expressions in this
sentence and the sentence before this derive from the Liji, Yueji: “When the ruler
hears the sound of the lute and [zither], he thinks of his ofﬁcers who are bent on righteousness. . . . When the ruler hears the sounds of his drums and tambours, he thinks
of his leaders and commanders.” See Max Müller, ed., The Sacred Books of the East
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1879–1910), vol. 28, pp. 120–121.
See Shiji, fascicle 105, Bian Que Canggong liezhuan.

The phrase “an insane person who runs toward the east” is found in the Huainanzi,
Shuoshan xun: “An insane person runs toward the east. A pursuer runs toward the
east, too. Even though the action, running toward the east, is the same, [each person’s]
reason for the action is different from the other’s.”
See the Zhuangzi, Dasheng. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 451.
See the Lunyu, Xianjin. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 239.

See the Shangshu, Yaodian. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 3, p. 24.

See the Zhuangzi, Dao Shi. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 611.

The Yellow Emperor fought against Yandi in the wilds of Banquan. See the Shiji,
fascicle 1, Wudi benji. Nienhauser, ed., The Grand Scribe’s Records, vol. I, p. 2.

The phrase “there was still something for which he had to wait” (youdai) derives from
the Zhuangzi, Xioayao you. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 217, n. 3.

This expression is based on the phrase “[The master] hates for the color purple to
overpower vermilion” found in the Lunyu. See note 2.
See the Laozi, chapter 31. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 121, n. 1.

See the Laozi, chapters 10 and 28. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, pp. 101–102,
n. 1 and p. 119, n. 1, respectively.
See the Shiji, fascicle 3, Yin benji. Nienhauser, ed., The Grand Scribe’s Records, vol.
I, p. 51.

296

Notes

130
131
132
133
134
135
136
137
138
139
140
141
142
143
144
145

146
147
148
149

See the Lunyu, Yong ye. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 192.

This idea is found in the Zhuangzi, Yangshengzhu. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi
quan ji, p. 249.

See the Zhuangzi, Dianzifang. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 483, n. 2.
See the Shiji, fascicle 117, Sima Xiangru liezhuan, for the quotation.

The ﬁght between Chu state and Man state is described in the Zhuangzi, Zeyang.
Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 559.

See the Mengzi, Jinxin, shang. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 2, p. 463, n. 1.

See the Yijing, Xici, shang. Legge, I ching: Book of Changes, p. 355, n. 24; p. 357,
n. 32.

See the Daode zhengjing zhigui, fascicle 8. The phrase “One produces two” is found
in the Laozi, chapter 42. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 133, n. 1.

This passage is probably the summary of the section in the Taizi ruiying benqi jing,
T.185.3:472c4–6.

This episode is found in the Lunyu, Yong ye. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p.
188.
See the Yijing, Xici, xia. Legge, I ching: Book of Changes, p. 382.

The phrase “the spirit that attained the One” is found in the Laozi, chapter 39. Legge,
Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 130, n. 1.
See the Yijing, Shuogua. Legge, I ching: Book of Changes, p. 427.

See the Zhuangzi, Geyi. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 415.

The expressions quoted here derive from the Yijing, Xici, shang. Legge, I ching: Book
of Changes, p. 370, n. 63.

The phrase buji buxing (“not to hurry, not to go”) derives from the phrase buji er su
buxing er zhi (“one goes fast although he does not hurry and arrives although he does
not go”) found in the Yijing, Xici, shang. Legge, I ching: Book of Changes, p. 370,
n. 64, translates the phrase as “make speed without hurry, and reached their destination
without traveling.”

See the Liji, Jiaotesheng. Müller, ed., The Sacred Books of the East, vol. 27, p. 448.

See the Liji, Tangong, xia. Müller, ed., The Sacred Books of the East, vol. 27, p. 193.

The phrase “to reach the Way by one change” (yibian zhi yu dao) derives from the
Lunyu, Yong ye. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 192.

Using the Chinese term qing (“feeling”), Zong Bing probably intends to explain mental
functions such as sense, perception, and impression, which arise out of contact with

297

Notes

150

151
152
153
154
155
156
157

158

external objects, known as the Chinese shou and the Sanskrit vedanā. There is, however,
no example of the Chinese qing being used to refer to vedanā, “feeling,” one of the
ﬁve skandhas in Buddhist scriptures. The term qing encompasses this meaning. Taking
into consideration the fact that this text written in the early ﬁfth century reﬂects contemporary Chinese Buddhists’ understanding of Buddhism, I would like to be faithful
to the original text and so translate qing as “feeling.”
The expression “when a male and a female unite their essences, all creatures are incarnated” (nannü goujing wanwu huasheng) derives from the Yijing, Xici, xia. Legge, I
ching: Book of Changes, p. 393, n. 43.
See the Laozi, chapter 48. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 138, n. 2.
See the Yijing, Xici, shang. Legge, I ching: Book of Changes, p. 374, n. 73.

In the Shiji, fascicle 2, Xia benji, Emperor Shun bestowed on Yu a jade tablet. Nienhauser, ed., The Grand Scribe’s Records, vol. I, p. 32, n. 77.
See the Shiji, fascicle 3, Yin benji. Nienhauser, ed., The Grand Scribe’s Records, vol.
I, p. 46.

See the Shiji, fascicle 4, Zhou benji. Nienhauser, ed., The Grand Scribe’s Records,
vol. I, p. 60, n. 120.

See the Zuozhuan, Xuangong’s third year. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 5,
p. 293, from the bottom of the left column to the upper right column.

In sutras there are a number of instances of the transformed body separate from a
buddha or bodhisattva and an auspicious object that springs out from the earth. For
instance, in the Lotus Sutra, Śākyamuni Buddha created a myriad of buddhas from
his body (T.262.9:41a4), an immeasurable number of bodhisattvas spring out from
the earth (T.262.9: 39c29–40a1 and 51c9-10), and a seven-treasure stupa springs out
from the earth in front of the Buddha (T.262.9:32b17–18). Kyōto Daigaku Jinbun
Kagaku Kenkyūjo Chūsei Shisōshi Kenkyū han, ed., Gumyōshū kenkyū, vol. 2, p.
95, interprets fenshen yongchu as “[The Buddha] has an immeasurable number of
bodhisattvas, the transformed bodies from his own body, spring out from the earth”
but there is no such phrase in the sutra.

Kyōto Daigaku Jinbun Kagaku Kenkyūjo Chūsei Shisōshi Kenkyū han, ed., Gumyōshū
kenkyū, vol. 2, p. 95, interprets this phrase as “moving Merupradīparāja Buddha’s
great world in a moment into Vimalakīrti’s ten-foot-square room.” In the Vimalakīrtinirdeśa-sūtra (Foshuo Weimojiejing, T.474.14:527a25–26, and Weimojie suoshuojing,
T.475.14:546b5–6, respectively), there is a passage describing that Merupradīparāja
Tathāgata sent Vimalakīrti thirty-two thousand buddha seats. In addition, the Vimalakīrtinirdeśa-sūtra, T.474.14:529a10–11 and 548b18–19, indicate that one of the eight
unprecedented matters is that all the decorated heavenly palaces and all the buddhas’
pure lands are revealed and miraculously contained in Vimalakīrti’s ten-foot-square
room.

298

Notes

159
160
161
162

163

164
165
166
167
168

169
170
171
172
173
174
175
176
177

See the Vimalakīrtinirdeśa-sūtra, T.474.14:527b18–19, 546b29–c1.

This expression is found in the Lunyu, Xianjin. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1,
p. 243, n. 1.

See the Zhuangzi, Yangshengzhu, for the good cook. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi
quan ji, pp. 246–247.

This expression is based on the passage found in the Lunyu, Taibo: “Possessed of
much, and yet putting questions to those possessed of little; having, as though he had
not; full, and yet counting himself as empty; offended against, and yet entering into
no altercation.” Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 210.
This expression, based on the Huainanzi, Shuoshan xun, means that while each person
runs toward the east in the same manner, each has his own reason for doing so. See
note 119.
See the Zhuangzi, Dazongshi. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 290, n. 6.

The expression “the deepest profundity” (xuan zhi you xuan) derives from the Laozi,
chapter 1. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 95, n. 4.

See the Zhuangzi, Zhibeiyou. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 511, n. 10.

This expression derives from Confucius’s answer to Ran Qiu when Ran Qiu asked
for the second time how it was before Heaven and Earth. See note 166.

The phrase “[a sage] is simply moved and later responds” (gan er hou ying) is found
in the Zhuangzi, Keyi. Legge translates it as “He responds to the inﬂuence acting on
him, and moves as he feels the pressure” (Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 413,
n. 2).
See note 168.

Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, pp. 64–65.

See the Lunyu, Wei Linggong. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 297.

See the Laozi, chapter 37. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 127, n. 1.
See the Foshuo Chaoriming sanmei jing, T.638.15:543b1.

The two quotations regarding the Yellow Emperor are found in the Shiji, fascicle 1,
Wudi benji. Nienhauser, ed., The Grand Scribe’s Records, vol. I, p. 1.

See the Shiji, fascicle 1, Wudi benji. Nienhauser, ed., The Grand Scribe’s Records,
vol. I, p. 5, n. 13.
See the Shiji, fascicle 1, Wudi benji. Nienhauser, ed., The Grand Scribe’s Records,
vol. I, p. 5, n. 11.
See the Shiji, fascicle 1, Wudi benji. Nienhauser, ed., The Grand Scribe’s Records,
vol. I, p. 6, n. 15.
299

Notes

178
179
180
181
182
183
184
185
186
187
188
189
190

191

192
193
194

195

See the Shiji, fascicle 1, Wudi benji. Nienhauser, ed., The Grand Scribe’s Records,
vol. I, pp. 3–4.
See the Shiji, fascicle 1, Wudi benji. Nienhauser, ed., The Grand Scribe’s Records,
vol. I, p. 5, n. 11.
See the Shiji, fascicle 1, Wudi benji. Nienhauser, ed., The Grand Scribe’s Records,
vol. I, p. 17, n. 46.

See the Zhuangzi, Xuwugui. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 536, n. 3.
See the Zhuangzi, Xiaoyaoyou. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, pp. 218–219,
n. 5.

See the Zhuangzi, Zaiyou, for Guang Chen’s statements. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi
quan ji, p. 346.
See the Zhuangzi, Zaiyou. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, pp. 347–348.

See the Zhuangzi, Xuwugui. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, pp. 536–537, n. 3.
See the Shanhaijing, Haineijing. Ching, Cheng, and Thern, Shan hai ching, p. 255.

See the Shiji, fascicle 63, Laozi Han Fei liezhuan. Nienhauser, ed., The Grand Scribe’s
Records, vol. VII, p. 22, n. 2141.
See the Gaosengzhuan, T.2059.50:323a19–23.

See the Gaosengzhuan, T.2059.50:385b23–24.

Bai Qi buried four hundred thousand people and Xiang Ji buried two hundred thousand
people. See the Shiji, fascicle 73, Bo Qi Wang Jian liezhuan (Nienhauser, ed., The
Grand Scribe’s Records, vol. VII, p. 171), and the Hanshu, fascicle 3, Xiang Ji zhuan,
respectively.

See the Huainanzi, Lanming xun. English translation in Charles Le Blanc, Huai-nan
tzu. Philosophical Synthesis in Early Han Thought: The Idea of Resonance (kanying) with a Translation and Analysis of Chapter Six (Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press, 1985), pp. 105–106, 2a.6.
See the Hou Hanshu, fascicle 49.
See the Hou Hanshu, fascicle 71.

See the Vimalakīrtinirdeśa-sūtra, T.474.14:527b17, 546b25–26, for the phrase “to
put Mount Sumeru into a poppy seed”; the Liudujijing, T.152.3:2b8–26, 1b12–c25,
for the stories of the tiger and the dove, respectively.

There is no sutra that has this expression in the Taishō canon. The phrase “As [the
Buddha’s] toes touch the earth, a trichiliocosm quakes” is found in several sutras,
including the Vimalakīrtinirdeśa-sūtra, T.474.14:520c7–8, 538c20–21, but the following passage is not found in any sutra.

300

Notes

196
197
198
199
200

201
202

203
204
205
206
207
208
209

210

211
212
213

See the Laozi, chapter 37. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 127, n. 1.
See the Lunheng, Dingxian.

See the Miaofa lianhuajing, T.262.9:32c12–20.
See note 158.

The phrase “The gentleman among men is, in fact, the small man of Heaven” derives
from the Zhuangzi, Dazongshi: “The small man of Heaven is the superior man among
men; the superior man among men is the small man of Heaven!” Legge, Dao de jing
ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 301.
See the Yijing, Qian, Xiangzhuan. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 213, n. 4.

See the Hanshu, fascicle 71: Through Lord Yu’s virtue, his son Yu Dingguo became
the prime minister; and fascicle 74: Emperor Xuan later appointed Bing Ji the Marquis
of Boyang.

See the Zuozhuan, Xigong’s twenty-ninth year. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 5,
pp. 214, par. 5.
See the Han Feizi, Shuolin, shang.

This expression derives from an episode about King Hui of Liang found in the Mengzi,
Liang Huiwang, shang. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 2, pp. 140–141, n. 8.
See the Mengzi, Liang Huiwang, shang. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 2, p. 138,
n. 4 to p. 141, n. 8.
See the Zengyi Ahanjing, T.125.2:693b11–c9.

See the Shiji, fascicle 73, Bai Qi Wang Jian liezhuan. Nienhauser, ed., The Grand
Scribe’s Records, vol. VII, pp. 170–171.

This expression is based on a passage in the Zhuangzi, Qiwu lun. Legge translates it
as “When [the wind ] blows, [the sounds from] the myriad apertures are different,
and [its cessation] makes them stop of themselves” (Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji,
p. 226, n. 1).
In the Lunyu, Shuer, Confucius lamented that his aging caused him to not dream of
the Duke of Zhou as frequently as he had previously. Legge, The Chinese Classics,
vol. 1, p. 196.

See the Shiji, fascicle 3, Yin benji. Nienhauser, ed., The Grand Scribe’s Records, vol.
I, p. 48.

The phrase “robbers and boasters” derives from the Laozi, chapter 53. Legge, Dao
de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 145.

This expression derives from the Zhuangzi, Dachongfu. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi
quan ji, p. 275.

301

Notes

214
215
216
217
218
219
220

221

222
223
224
225
226
227
228
229
230
231

232

The quoted passages are not found in any sutra in the Taishō shinshū daizōkyō.

In the Lunyu, Zilu, Confucius said that Fan Xu is a mean man. Legge, The Chinese
Classics, vol. 1, p. 265, n. 2.

The Sanskrit name of Jiantuole is unknown. His biography is found in the Gaosengzhuan, T.2059.50:388c20–389a2.
See the Shiji, fascicle 61, Boyi liezhuan. Nienhauser, ed., The Grand Scribe’s Records,
vol. VII, p. 4.
See the Yijing, Kun, Wenyan. Legge, I ching: Book of Changes, p. 419, n. 5.

See the Mengzi, Jinxin, shang. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 2, p. 463, n. 1.

The Shiji, fascicle 3, Yin benji, states that when Jiandi, the second wife of Emperor
Ku, went out to bathe, she saw a black bird lay an egg; Jiandi swallowed it, became
pregnant, and gave birth to Xie. Nienhauser, ed., The Grand Scribe’s Records, vol.
I, p. 41.

The Shiji, fascicle 4, Zhou benji, states that Jiang Yuan, the primary wife of Emperor
Ku, saw a giant footprint in the wilderness ﬁeld, stepped in it, became pregnant, and
gave birth to Houji. Nienhauser, ed., The Grand Scribe’s Records, vol. I, p. 55.

The phrase “he who is marvelous since he has gotten the One” is found in the Laozi,
chapter 39. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 130, n. 1.
See the Shangshu, Shundian. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 3, p. 49, n. 24.

See the Yijing, Shuogua zhuan. Legge, I ching: Book of Changes, p. 422, n. 1.
See the Lunyu, Xianjin. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 241.

See the Lunyu, Xianjin. The original passage is “While you are not able to serve men,
how can you serve their spirits?” Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 240.
See the Lunyu, Gongzhi Chang. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 177.
See the Dazhidulun, T.1509.25:74c8–75a3.

The two passages derive from the Yijing, Jiaren. Legge, I ching: Book of Changes,
p. 137, n. 3.

The phrase “a white colt’s passing a crevice” derives from the Zhuangzi, Zhi bei you.
Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 505.

This probably refers to Marquis Wen of Jin state who heard the soldiers singing to
themselves. See the Zuozhuan, Xigong’s twenty-eighth year. Legge, The Chinese
Classics, vol. 5, p. 209, right column.
This episode is found in the Shiji, fascicle 10, Xiaowen benji. When a director of the
Imperial of Granaries of the Han dynasty was punished, his daughter Tiying petitioned

302

Notes

233
234
235
236
237

238

239
240

241
242
243
244

the emperor to try to expiate her father’s crime; the emperor, impressed by her ﬁlial
piety, thereafter abolished corporal punishment. Nienhauser, ed., The Grand Scribe’s
Records, vol. II, pp. 170–171.
This expression is often found in the Laozi Daodejing and the Zhuangzi. For example,
see Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 127, n. 1; p. 138, n. 2; p. 528.

There are several different kinds of the ﬁve different types of penalties, according to
each dynasty. The example shown here is from the Zhou dynasty.
See the Shiji, fascicle 56, Chen chengxiang shijia.

See the Shiji, fascicle 73, Bai Qi Wang Jian liezhuan. Nienhauser, ed., The Grand
Scribe’s Records, vol. VII, p. 176.

Wei Ke’s father had a beloved concubine. First Ke’s father told him to have the concubine remarry after his death, but when his illness became serious he asked Ke to
have her immolated to follow him into the grave. Ke, however, followed his father’s
initial request and did not have the concubine immolated. Later, when Ke fought the
Qin army, an old man (the ghost of father of the concubine), helped Ke out of diffculty
by making a trap to capture the general of Qin state, and consequently Ke could capture
the general. See the Zuozhuan, Xuangong’s ﬁfteenth year. Legge, The Chinese Classics,
vol. 5, p. 328, right column.

This story of Bao Zidu is found in the Lieyizhuan (a collection of extraordinary
stories), authorship of which was attributed to Cao Pi (187–226). Zidu comforted a
man who was dying on a street; after his death the man became a horse and led Zidu
to the capital where Zidu was summoned as an ofﬁcial.
This story is found in the Shiji, Qi Taigong shijia. Nienhauser, ed., The Grand Scribe’s
Records, vol. I, pp. 52–54.

Prince Mu of Qin state gave grain to Jin state when the Jin people were suffering
from a famine. Two years later, when the Qin people were starving, Prince Hui of
Jin state took advantage of the situation and invaded Qin state. See Zuozhuan, Xigong’s
thirteenth and ﬁfteenth years. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 5, p. 161; p. 169,
left column.
See the Zuozhuan, Xuangong’s second year. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 5, p.
290, right column.

See the Shiji, fascicle 92, Huaiyin hou liezhuan. Nienhauser, ed., The Grand Scribe’s
Records, vol. VIII, pp. 70, 95.

See the Shiji, fascicle 47, Kongzi shijia. Yang and Yang, Selections from Records of
the Historian, p. 8.

See the Shiji, fascicle 33, Lu Zhougong shijia. Nienhauser, ed., The Grand Scribe’s
Records, vol. V, pt. 1, p. 135.

303

Notes

245

246
247
248

249
250
251
252

253
254
255
256

257

258
259
260

The term “the politeness of providing a way of escape” (sanqu zhi li) derives from
the Yijing, Bi, “The king urging his pursuit of the game [only] in three directions, and
allowing the escape of all the animals before him.” Legge, I ching: Book of Changes,
p. 75.
This expression derives from the Lunyu, Shuer. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1,
p. 203.

See the Laozi, chapter 10. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 102, n. 3.

A similar passage, “The common people, acting daily according to it, yet have no
knowledge of it,” is found in Yijing, Xici, shang. Legge, I ching: Book of Changes,
p. 356, n. 26.
See the Mengzi, Wangzhang, xia. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 2, p. 363, n. 5.
This expression derives from the Lunyu, Xueer. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1,
p. 139.

See the Xiaojing. Rosemont’s translation differs slightly from this context; see The
Chinese Classic of Family Reverence, p. 115.

See both the Xiaojing and the Mengzi, Lilou, shang. Rosemont, The Chinese Classic
of Family Reverence, chapter 11, p. 112; Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 2, chapter
26, p. 313, n. 1.
See the Xiaojing. Rosemont, The Chinese Classic of Family Reverence, p. 105.
See the Liji, Jiyi. Müller, ed., The Sacred Books of the East, vol. 28, p. 228, n. 14.

See the Xiaojing. Rosemont, The Chinese Classic of Family Reverence, p. 105.

This expression derives from the Zhuangzi, Yangshengzhu. The original reads: “To
be in accordance with the central element [of our nature] is the regular path to save
the body, to complete the life, to nourish our parents, and to complete our term of
years.” Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 246, n. 1.

This expression derives from the Laozi, chapter 52. The original is: “The perception
of what is small is [the secret of] clear-sightedness; the guarding of what is soft and
tender is [the secret of] strength. Who uses well his light/Reverting to its [source so]
bright/Will from his body ward all blight/And hides the unchanging from men’s
sight.” Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 143, n. 4.
See the Zuozhuan, Yingong’s ﬁrst year. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 5, p. 5,
right column, to p. 6, right column.

See the Zuozhuan, Yingong’s fourth year. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 5, p. 16,
right column, to p. 17, right column.

See the Zuozhuan, Xigong’s twenty-third year. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 5,
p. 186, left column.

304

Notes

261
262
263
264
265
266
267

268
269

270

271

272
273
274

275

See the Hou Hanshu, fascicle 56, Wei Biao Zhuan.

See the Shiji, fascicle 2, Xia benji. Nienhauser, ed., The Grand Scribe’s Records, vol. I,
p. 21.

See the Shiji, fascicle 31, Wu Taibo shijia. Nienhauser, ed., The Grand Scribe’s
Records, vol. V, pt. 1, pp. 1–2.
See the Lunyu, Taibo. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 207.

See the Lunyu, Gongzhi Chang. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 181.

This expression derives from the Yijing, Kun, Tuanzhuan. Legge, Dao de jing ji
Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 214, n. 2.

The Chinese term datong is originally found in the Zhuangzi, Dazongshi, and Qiushui.
According to Ogawa Tamaki, in Rōshi Sōshi (Tokyo: Chūō Kōronsha, 1998), pp.
278, 396, it refers to the great way beyond all discriminations. Legge says that it is
another denomination of the Dao, and “is also explained as meaning, ‘the great void
in which there is no obstruction’” (Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quanji, p. 305, n. 2). Following Legge, I translate datong as “Great Pervader.”
See the Yijing, Jiqi, xiangci. Legge, I ching: Book of Changes, p. 346, n. 5.

The expressions “to be disrespectful to great men” and “to disgrace the ordinances
of Heaven” derive from passages found in the Lunyu, Jishi. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 313, n. 2.

The Zhuangzi, Xiaoyaoyou, has: “In the south of Chu there is the [tree] called Mingling, whose spring is 500 years, and its autumn the same.” Legge, Dao de jing ji
Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 214.
The Chinese term youdi is known as jiadi (“truth of temporariness”), which is one
of the triple truths, namely: all existences are temporary manifestations produced by
causes and conditions.

The term wudi, one of the triple truths, is also called kongdi (“truth of emptiness”),
since all existences are empty and nonsubstantial in essence.

See the Zhuangzi, Tianxia, in which the two sentences are in reverse order. Legge,
Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 669.

See the Zuozhuan, Zhaogong’s twentieth year; Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 5,
p. 684, right column. When the Marquis of Qi state said how happy he would be if
there was no death, Yan Ying, the prime minister, told him that if there was no death,
he could not enjoy his present life and the Shuangjiu family that had occupied the
Marquis’ territory would enjoy it instead.

See the Zhuangzi, Dazongshi, for the story of a man who hid a boat in a ravine for
safekeeping, but during the night the boat was carried away by a strong man. Legge,
Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 290, n. 6. See also note 164.

305

Notes

276
277
278
279

280
281
282

283

284
285

286

287
288

289
290

See the Zhuangzi, Tian Zifang. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 486, n. 3.
Yu Gong, father of Yu Dingguo, was a just and fair warden. His virtue led his family
to prosperity. See the Hanshu, chapter 71, Yu Dingguo zhuan.
See the Hanshu, chapter 90, Kuli zhuan.

Chunyu Sheng (Chunyu Kun) was a man of Qi state in the Warring States period. He
loved joking and talking. He once satirized King Wei of Qi state in secret language.
See the Shiji, fascicle 126, Huaji liezhuan. Yang and Yang, Selections from Records
of the Historian, pp. 403–409.

The Chinese character shi (“true”) is added between the characters ke (“possible”)
and the ﬁnal particle zai, according to the original sentence found in T.2102.52:18a22.

The allegory of the sword called Moye derives from the Zhuangzi, Dazongshi. See
Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, pp. 297–298.

The allegory of those who retreated ﬁfty steps (in a battleﬁeld) who laughed at those
who retreated a hundred steps derives from the Mengzi, Liang Huiwang, shang. Legge,
The Chinese Classics, vol. 2, pp. 129–130, n. 2.

See the Zhuangzi, Dazongshi. Here is a difference in interpretation from the original
passage; Legge’s translation of this section reads: “Mang-sun presented in his body
the appearance of being agitated, but in his mind he was conscious of no loss. The
death was to him like the issuing from one’s dwelling at dawn, and no [more terrible]
reality” (Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quanji, p. 302).
See the Hanshu, fascicle 48, Jia Yi zhuan.

The sounds of metal and stone are two of the eight kinds of musical sounds produced
from musical instruments made out of calabash gourd, earthenware, stretched hides,
wood, stone, metal, silk strings, and bamboo, respectively.

He Chengtian cites Zong Bing: “The sage has no invariable mind of his own; he
simply accommodates himself to other people’s minds,” but changes the word “mind”
to the word “nature.” Zong Bing’s original statement is at T.2102.52:18c19.

See the Shangshu, Zhoushu, Jiugao. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 3, pp. 399–
412.

The phrase, “[The ruler of a state,] during the spring hunting, will not surround a
marshy thicket,” derives from the Liji, Qu li, xia. See Müller, ed., The Sacred Books
of the East, vol. 27, p. 106.
The laws of the ﬁve offenses in hunting are not to hunt fawns, not to take eggs, not to
kill pregnant animals, not to kill young animals, and not to destroy nests.

There are several different interpretations for the three numinous beings. For instance,
it may refer to Heaven, Earth, and human beings, or the sun, moon, and stars.

306

Notes

291
292

293
294

295
296
297
298
299
300
301

302
303

304

305
306

Zilu asked Confucius about spirits and death in the Lunyu, Xianjin. Legge, The Chinese
Classics, vol. 1, pp. 240–241.

In the Liji, Jiyi, Confucius says that the energy of all living creatures becomes the
fumes that rise as the vapor after death. Müller, ed., The Sacred Books of the East,
vol. 28, p. 220, translates the phrase “the fume rising as the vapor” as “the vapours
and odours which produce a feeling of sadness (and arise from the decay of their substance).”
See the Lunyu, Gongzhi Chang. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 178.

The phrase “to make an exhaustive discrimination of what is right, and effect the
complete development of every nature, till they arrive at what is appointed for it [by
Heaven]” derives from the Yijing, Shuogua. Legge, I ching: Book of Changes, p. 422,
n. 3.
See the Gaosengzhuan, T.2059.50:350b26–27.
See note 186.

See the Shijing, Xiaoya, xiaowan. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 4, p. 334, n. 3.

See the Zuozhuan, Zhuanggong’s the fourth month of the seventh year. Legge, The
Chinese Classics, vol. 5, p. 80, VII, 2.
See the Sanguozhi, fascicle 11.

Both Wang Xiang and Guo Ju are known as ﬁlial sons. See the Jinshu, fascicle 33,
Wang Xiang zhuan, for Wang Xiang, and the Soushenji for Guo Ju.

The Shangshu, Jinteng, states that when the Duke of Zhou (the uncle) assisted King
Cheng (the nephew) after the death of King Wu, three of the Duke of Zhou’s brothers
spread a false rumor to cause difﬁculties for the duke. Legge, The Chinese Classics,
vol. 3, p. 357, n. 12.

The expressions “to ascend to the hall” and “to pass into the inner apartments” derive
from the Lunyu, Xianjin. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 242, n. 2.

See the Lunyu, Zi han, for the difﬁculties faced by Confucius in Kuang and the Wei
Linggong for his difﬁculties in Chen. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, pp. 217–
218 and p. 294, respectively.

This statement is not found in the Shanhaijing. In the Nanshanjing (“Southern Mountains”) section of the Shanhaijing, however, it is recorded that there is the lu ﬁsh that
dies in winter and lives in summer. Ching, Cheng, and Thern, Shan hai ching, p. 2.
See the Zuozhuan, Zhaogong’s seventh year. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 5, p.
617, right column.

See the Zuozhuan, Xigong’s tenth year. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 5, p. 157,
left column.

307

Notes

307
308
309

310

311
312
313

314
315
316

317
318
319

320
321
322
323
324

See the Zuozhuan, Zhaogong’s seventh year. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 5, p.
618, left column.

The authorship of the Zuozhuan is attributed to Zuo Qiuming, a former disciple of
Confucius.

Kyōto Daigaku Jinbun Kagaku Kenkyūjo Chūsei Shisōshi Kenkyū han, ed., Gumyōshū
kenkyū, vol. 2, p. 192, n. 29, suggests that “a daring soldier of the city of Pu” refers
to Zilu, who was the chief magistrate of Pu.

This statement is made on the basis of the description found in the Liji, Wangji, “When
the otter sacriﬁced its ﬁsh, the foresters entered the meres and dams. When the wolf
sacriﬁced its prey, the hunting commenced.” See Müller, ed., The Sacred Books of
the East, vol. 27, p. 221, n. 25.
The song “Rushes” is found in the Shijing, Daya. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol.
4, pp. 472–475.
See note 289.

Emperor Tang stopped the people from praying to be able to catch game by setting a
net in all directions, and changed it to praying for the ability to catch game by leaving
one side of the net open so that some animals could escape. See the Shiji, fascicle 3,
Yin benji. Nienhauser, ed., The Grand Scribe’s Records, vol. I, p. 43, n. 95.

See the Shijing, Daya, Hanlu. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 4, p. 446, n. 6.
See the Shijing, Daya, Wen Wang. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 4, p. 458, n. 1.

The notes of beilü refer to ruibin, linzhong, yize, nanlü, wuyi, and yingzhong. The
note of gong is the ﬁrst of the ﬁve notes (gong, shang, jue, zhi, and yu) of traditional
Chinese music. It is equivalant to huangzhong of the six yang lü notes. See note 7.
See note 7 for the lü of yin notes and the lü of yang notes.

See the Yijing, Xici, xia. Legge, I ching: Book of Changes, p. 381, n. 10.

This expression is based on a statement by Mencius, “The trees of the Niu mountain
were once beautiful. Being situated, however, in the borders of a large state, they
were hewn down with axes and bills, and could they retain their beauty?” Legge, The
Chinese Classics, vol. 2, p. 407, n. 1.
See the Lunyu, Xianjin. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, pp. 240–241.

See the Lunyu, Gongzhi Chang. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 177.
See the Hanshu, fascicle 71, Yu Dingguo zhuan.
See the Hanshu, fascicle 74, Bing Ji zhuan.

Qu Boyu is a wise man of Wei state, whom Confucius respected. In the Lunyu, Xianwen, there is a conversation between Qu Boyu’s messenger and Confucius. Legge,
The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, pp. 285–286.

308

Notes

325
326

327

328
329
330

331

332
333
334

335
336
337

338
339

See the Yijing, Qian, jiuer. Legge, I ching: Book of Changes, p. 57, n. 2.

The phrase “transformation and shaping” (hua er caizhi) derives from the Yijing, Xici
shang, “Transformation and shaping is what we call change.” Legge, I ching: Book
of Changes, p. 377.
See the Hou Hanshu, fascicle 79, Zhong Changtong zhuan, and fascicle 113, Jiao
Shen zhuan, respectively. The practice of guiding the breath (daoyin) is one of the
Daoist practices to preserve one’s health by controlling the breath.
See the Zhuangzi, Zeyang. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 561, n. 6.
See the Hanshu, Jingfazhi.

The expression “grand submission [to the natural course] (dashun)” is found in the
Zhuangzi, Tiandi, and the Laozi, chapter 65. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji,
p. 157, p. 365, n. 8.

This expression is based on the phrase “Zuo Qiuming was ashamed of them. I also
am ashamed of them” found in the Lunyu, Gongzhi Chang. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 182.

See the Yijing, Qian, Wenyan chujiu. Legge, I ching: Book of Changes, p. 409, n. 4.

See the Yijing, Qian, Wenyan jiusan. Legge, I ching: Book of Changes, p. 410, n. 6.

As for the Chinese term huncheng zhi wu (“something undeﬁned and complete”), the
Laozi, chapter 25, explains that “There was something undeﬁned and complete,
coming into existence before Heaven and Earth. How still it was and formless, standing
alone, and undergoing no change, reaching everywhere and in no danger [of being
exhausted]! It may be regarded as the Mother of all things.” Legge, Dao de jing ji
Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 115, n. 1.
See the Zhouli, Chunguan Zong Bo.

See Zhuangzi, Yangshengzhu. See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 248.

The Chinese term santong (“three foundations”) refers to the ﬁrst month of the year
in the calendar systems used in the Xia, Yin (Shang), and Zhou dynasties. The ﬁrst
month of the year in the Xia dynasty is called rentong (“the foundation of men”);
that of the Yin dynasty (equivalent to the twelfth month of the Xia calendar) is called
ditong (“the foundation of Earth”); and that of the Zhou dynasty (the eleventh month
of the Xia calendar) is called tiantong (“the foundation of Heaven”). Here, this term
is used to refer to the three powers instead of the term sancai.

See the Zuozhuan, Wengong’s twelfth year. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 5, p.
261, right column.

The Chinese term sanpin zhi huo (“the threefold use of game in hunting”) derives
from the Yijing, Xun. Legge, I ching: Book of Changes, p. 190, n. 4.

309

Notes

340
341
342

343

344
345
346
347
348
349
350
351

352
353
354

355

356
357

See the Ji Kang ji, fascicle 8.
See the Baopuzi, Lunxian.

Teng Xiu did not believe that some shrimp have barbels longer than ten feet, but later
it was reported to him that a shrimp with barbels over twenty feet long was caught
in the eastern sea. See the Taiping yulan, fascicle 943.

The Chinese fangshu (“square documents”) refers to local gazettes, texts of divination,
texts of medical practice, or texts of prescriptions. Here it probably means scriptures
of doctrines and policies.
The term yao consists of the yang yao (solid single line) and the yin yao (divided
line).
See the Yijing, Qian. Legge, I ching: Book of Changes, pp. 57–58, n. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7.

See Yijing, Wenyan. Legge, I ching: Book of Changes, p. 409, n. 6; p. 410, n. 4; and
p. 414, n. 19.

The phrase “a new thought of spring and autumn,” found in the preface of the Chunqiu
Zuoshizhuan by Du Yu, simply means the new thought of a later generation.
See the Laozi, chapter 25. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 116, n. 3.
See the Lunyu, Liren. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 165.

See the Liji, Zhongyong. Müller, ed., The Sacred Books of the East, vol. 28, p. 314,
n. 12.

See the Liji, Biaoji. Müller, ed., The Sacred Books of the East, vol. 28, p. 333, n. 14,
translates the passage as “those who fear the guilt of transgression practice it by constraint.”
See the Zhuangzi, Quqie. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 332.

See the Shijing, Zhaonan. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 4, pp. 22, 25.

See the Shiji, fascicle 57, Jiang hou Zhou Bo shijia, for Zhou Yafu, and fascicle 91,
Qingbu liezhuan for Ying Bu. Nienhauser, ed., The Grand Scribe’s Records, vol. VIII,
pp. 45–46.

The Chinese term ruosang, which means to leave one’s native place or homeland
when young, is originally found in the Zhuangzi, Qiwulun. In the Zhuangzi, “homeland”
refers to death, while the author here refers it to as the truth. Legge, Dao de jing ji
Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 242.
See the Zhuangzi, Xuwugui. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 548.

See the Zuozhuan, Yingong’s eleventh year. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 5, p.
32, right column.

310

Notes

358
359
360

361

362

363

364
365

366

367
368

369

370
371
372

See the Yijing, Xici, xia. Legge, I ching: Book of Changes, p. 390, n. 34.

See the Yijing, Shuogua zhuan. Legge, I ching: Book of Changes, p. 422, n. 3.

The Yijing, Xici, shang, states, “Therefore in (the system of) the Yi there is the Grand
Terminus, which produced the two elementary Forms.” Legge, I ching: Book of
Changes, p. 373, n. 70.

These two sentences in all versions of the Hongmingji have three Chinese characters for
huo (“ﬁre”), but this does not make sense. Kyōto Daigaku Jinbun Kagaku Kenkyūjo
Chūsei Shisōshi Kenkyū han, ed., Gumyōshū kenkyū, vol. 2, p. 256, n. 9) suggests the
ﬁrst of two instances of huo should be shui (“water”). I follow this.

This expression is based on a passage found in the Zhuangzi, Dazongshi: “When we
once understand that Heaven and Earth are a great melting pot, and the Creator a
great founder, where can we have to go to that shall not be right for us?” Legge, Dao
de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, pp. 297–298.

The Chinese character xing (“nature”) here does not make sense. Following Kyōto
Daigaku Jinbun Kagaku Kenkyūjo Chūsei Shisōshi Kenkyū han, ed., Gumyōshū
kenkyū, vol. 2, p. 259, n. 3), I read it as guai, “strange.”
The Chinese character wei (“to do”) is read as wu (“nothing”).

This statement is based on a passage found in the Zhuangzi, Xiaoyaoyou: “I was
frightened by them; they were like the Milky Way that cannot be traced to its beginning
or end.” Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 218, n. 5.

See the Anshi Chunqiu, Neipian, Jianpian, in which the last sentence, “those who
are not virtuous consider [that death is simply] to go away,” is given as “those who
are not virtuous consider [that death is simply] to lie down.”

Both discussions appear in Fascicle 12 in the Collection for the Clariﬁcation and
Propagation of Buddhism, Volume II (forthcoming).

The Daodejing states, “Therefore the Dao is great; Heaven is great; Earth is great;
and the [sage] king is also great. In the universe there are four that are great, and the
[sage] king is one of them.” See also note 348.

See the Yijing, Xici, xia. Legge translates this passage as “The great attribute of heaven
and earth is the giving and maintaining [of] life” (I ching: Book of Changes, p. 381,
n. 10).

See the Zhuangzi, Shanxing. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 419, n. 3.
See the Zhanguoce, Zhao ce.

The expressions “By teaching love on the basis of the feeling of intimacy” and “By
teaching respect on the basis of sternness” derive from the Xiaojing. Rosemont’s
translation differs slightly from this context; see The Chinese Classic of Family Reverence, p. 110.

311

Notes

373

374
375
376

377
378
379
380
381

382

383

384
385

386
387
388
389

This expression is based on the Zhuangzi, Tianyun: “One, traveling to the south,
comes [at last] to Ying, and there, standing with his face to the north, he does not see
Mount Ming. Why does he not see it? Because he is so far from it.” Legge, Dao de
jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 395.
See the Laozi, chapter 39. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 130, n. 1.
See the Lunyu, Taibo. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 214, n. 1.

This expression derives from the Zhuangzi, Qiwulun: “Therefore the knowledge that
stops at what it does not know is the greatest.” Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan
ji, p. 238.
See the Zhuangzi, Tiandao. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 385.

See the Zhuangzi, Qiwulun, for this quotation and the following two quotations.
Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 237.

This is a summary of the passage found in the Taizi ruiying benqi jing (T.185.3:
473b1–11).
See note 267 for the Great Pervader.

The expression “the spirit is the most mysterious of a myriad of things” is based on
a passage found in the Yijing, Shuogua zhuan. Legge translates this as “When we
speak of Spirit we mean the subtle [presence and operation of God] with all things”
(I ching: Book of Changes, chapter 6, p. 427, n. 10).
The expression “By a transformation a person is born. By another transformation a
person dies” derives from the Zhuangzi, Zhibeiyou. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi
quan ji, p. 505.

Here, the translation of the phrase ruo si sheng wei bi tu ku should be “if death and
life are vainly suffering for them (i.e., collection and dispersion).” This does not make
sense. It should be ruo si sheng wei tu (“if death and life are the same category”), as
found in the Zhuangzi, Zhibeiyou. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 499.
Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 290, n. 6.

In the Zhuangzi, Dazongshi, when Sang Hu died, two men sang, “Ah! Come, Sang
Hu! Ah! Come, Sang Hu! You already returned to the truth, but we are still in the
human [world]. Ah!” Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 299.
See the Wenzi, Shoupu pian.

See the Zhuangzi, Dazongshi. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 291, n. 6.

See the Zhuangzi, Qiwulun. Legge translates it as “now life and now death.” Legge,
Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 230.

Kimura Eiichi refers to Liu Shao’s Renwuzhi and concludes that the Chinese character
shu (“number” or “fate”) is used as an equivalent to the character shi (“consciousness”

312

Notes

390
391

392
393
394
395
396
397

398
399
400

401
402

403
404

or “intelligence”) here. See Kimura, Eon kenkyū, ibun-hen (Kyoto: Kyōto Daigaku
Jinbun Kagaku Kenkyūjo, 1960), p. 396, n. 49.
See note 267 for the “great truth.”

The expression “the way of ‘forgetting both’” derives from passages found in the
Zhuangzi, Tianyun: “If it were easy to make my parents forget me, it is difﬁcult for
me to forget all the people of the world. If it were easy to forget the people of the
world, it is difﬁcult to make the people of the world forget me.” Legge, Dao de jing
ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 395.
The year of efeng is the year of jia of Taisui (Jupitor), considered to be a powerful
time. The third year of Yuanxing is the year of jia-chen in the Chinese calendar.
See the Liji, Tangong, xia. Müller, ed., The Sacred Books of the East, vol. 27, p. 169,
n. 29.

See the Laozi, chapter 31. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, pp. 121–122.

Confucius had his right hand uppermost at a mourning rite. See the Liji, Tangong,
shang. Müller, ed., The Sacred Books of the East, vol. 27, pp. 137–138, n. 19.
See the Yijing, Bi. Legge, I ching: Book of Changes, p. 75, n. 5.

To strip off the upper garment is a token of sincere apology. To load a cofﬁn on one’s
carriage means to show one’s determination to succeed on an undertaking or die. See
the Zuozhuan, Xigong’s sixth year and Xuangong’s twelfth year. Legge, The Chinese
Classics, vol. 5, p. 316, left column, and p. 147, right column, respectively.
See the Lunyu, Shuer. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 203.

The expression “reducing day by day to attain wuwei” derives from the Laozi, chapter
48. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 138, n. 2.

The expression “have not been out from the closed world from the beginning” (wei
shi chu yu youfeng) is based on the expression “Things exist, but they have no boundary
with others from the beginning” (youwuyi er wei shi youfeng) found in the Zhuangzi,
Qiwulun. Legge translates this as “There was something, but without any responsive
recognition of it [on the part of men]” (Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 233, n. 5).
I translate the Chinese term youfeng as “the closed world.”
See the Zhuangzi, Dazongshi. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 300.

This phrase is based on a statement found in the Zhuangzi, Qiwulun: “There is further
the great awakening. Later we will know that this [life] is a great dream.” Legge,
Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 243, n. 9.
See the Ruhuan sanmei jing, T.342.12:150c12–15.

This expression is based on a statement found in the Yijing, Xici, shang. Legge
translates it as “They (i.e., sages) [thus] stimulated [the people] as by drums and

313

Notes

405
406

407

408

409

410

411

412

413

dances, thereby completely developing the spirit-like [character of the Yi]” (I ching:
Book of Changes, p. 377, n. 76).
See the Shangshu, Dayumo. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 3, p. 66.

This expression is also based on a statement found in the Yijing, Xici, xia: “Good
fortune and ill, occasion for repentance or regret, all arise from these movements.”
Legge, I ching: Book of Changes, p. 380, n. 3.
This statement is based on a passage found in the Laozi, chapter 58: “The delusion
of the people (on this point) has indeed subsisted for a long time.” Legge, Dao de
jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 150, n. 2.

The expression “to honor the talented and virtuous, bear with all people” derives
from the Lunyu, Zi Zhang: “The superior man honors the talented and virtuous, and
bears with all.” Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 340.

This statement is based on a passage found in the Lunyu, Shuer: “When I have presented one corner of a subject to any one, and he cannot from it learn the other three,
I do not repeat my lesson.” Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 197.
See the Lunyu, Xianjin and Weizheng, respectively; the source for the phrase “Ran
Boniu looks like the ignorant” is unknown. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, pp.
240–241, and p. 149, respectively.

The “Five Kinds of Vermin” in the Han Feizi (fascicle 49) reads: “These are the customs of a disordered state: Its scholars praise the ways of the former kings and imitate
their benevolence and righteousness, put on a fair appearance and speak in elegant
phrases, thus casting doubt upon the laws of the time and causing the ruler to be of
two minds. Its speechmakers propound false schemes and borrow inﬂuence from
abroad, furthering their private interests and forgetting the welfare of the state’s altars
of soil and grain. Its swordsmen gather bands of followers about them and perform
deeds of honor, making a ﬁne name for themselves and violating the prohibitions of
the ﬁve government bureaus. Those of its people who are worried about military
service ﬂock to the gates of private individuals and pour out their wealth in bribes to
inﬂuential men who will plead for them, in this way escaping the hardship of battle.
Its merchants and artisans spend their time making articles of no practical use and
gathering stores of luxury goods, accumulating riches, waiting for the best time to
sell, and exploiting the farmers.” Watson, Han Feizi: Basic Writings, pp. 117–118.

This expression is based on a phrase found in the Zhuangzi, Dazongshi: “When [Wuzhuang] lost his beauty, [Ju Liang] his strength, and [Huangdi] (the Yellow Emperor)
his wisdom, they all [recovered them] under the molding [of your system].” Legge,
Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 304, n. 13.

See the Yijing, Xici, xia. Legge translates it as “The course cannot be pursued [without
them (i.e., proper men)]” (I ching: Book of Changes, p. 399, n. 56).

314

Notes

414

415

416

417

418

419

420
421
422

423
424
425
426
427
428

The expression “attend to their own ambition in a lofty spirit” derives from the Yijing,
Gu, “in a lofty spirit prefers [to attend to] his own affairs.” Legge, I ching: Book of
Changes, p. 96, n. 6.

This is the medical treatment for controlling the vapor of the body: treating with cold
for illness caused by cold and with heat for illness caused by heat. It is also found in
the third fascicle of this text. Zong Bing responded to He’s letter, “[Furthermore,] when
a doctor [practicing the medical science] of admonishing the vapor makes water or ﬁre
in the mind, [the patient’s body] always responds to it by becoming cold or warm.”
The expression “Even though one tries to keep his shadow tied up, he catches [only]
the wind” may derive from the expression “Even though one tries to keep the wind
tied up, he catches his shadow” found in the Qian Han ji, Xiaocheng huangdi ji 3.

This expression is based on the passage “When I have presented one corner of a
subject to any one, and he cannot from it learn the other three, I do not repeat my lesson” found in the Lunyu, Shuer. See note 409.

This expression is based on Confucius’s statement in the Lunyu, Zi han: “The prosecution of learning may be compared to what may happen in raising a mound. If there
want but one basket of earth to complete the work, and I stop, the stopping is my
own work. It may be compared to throwing down the earth on the level ground.
Though but one basketful is thrown at a time, the advancing with it is my own going
forward.” Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, pp. 222–223.

This expression is based on the passage found in the Yijing, Xiangzhuan: “A sack
tied up— there will be no error; this shows how, through carefulness, no injury will
be received.” Legge, I ching: Book of Changes, p. 269, n. 4.
In the Lunyu, Taibo, Confucius says, “Is not the saying that talents are difﬁcult to
ﬁnd, true?” Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 214, n. 3.
See the Lunyu, Yong ye. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 188.

The six extreme sufferings refer to disease, anxiety, poverty, evil, weakness, and misfortune, including premature death. Yan Hui died young. See the Lunyu, Xianjin.
Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 239.

Confucius’s advice to Zixia is found in the Lunyu, Zilu. Legge, The Chinese Classics,
vol. 1, p. 270.
See the Lunyu, Xianjin. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 243.

See the Lunyu, Gongzhi Chang. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 176, n. 1.
See the Lunyu, Gongzhi Chang. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, pp. 174–175.
See the Lunyu, Xianjin. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, pp. 242–243.
See the Lunyu, Yong ye. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 186.

315

Notes

429
430
431
432
433
434
435
436
437
438
439

440
441
442
443
444

445
446
447
448

449

See the Shiji, fascicle 83, Lu Zhong Lian Zou Yang liezhuan. Nienhauser, ed., The
Grand Scribe’s Records, vol. VII, p. 286.
See the Zhuangzi, Tiandi. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 363, n. 7.
See the Lunyu, Weizi. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, pp. 333–334.

See the Shiji, fascicle 129, Huozhi liezhuan. Yang and Yang, Selections from Records
of the Historian, pp. 413–414.
See the Lienuzhuan, Xianming, Chu Yuling qizhuan.

See the Liexianzhuan (Biographies of Arrayed Transcendants).
See the Hanshu, fascicle 72 (xu).

See the Hou Hanshu, Zhang Hengzhuan.

See the Lunyu, Gongzhi Chang. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 183.
See the Lunyu, Shuer. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 202.

This refers to an incident in which Guanshu and Caishu made a false accusation
against the Duke of Zhou. See the Shujing, Jinteng. Legge, The Chinese Classics,
vol. 3, pp. 357–358, n. 12.

See the Shujing, Shundian. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 3, pp. 39–40, n. 12.
See the Laozi, chapter 17. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 109, n. 2.

Duangan Mu, a man of Wei state, leaped over the wall of his house to avoid a prince
who had come to invite him to court. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 2, p. 270, n. 2.
See the Zhuangzi, Gengsang Chu. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, pp. 514–
515.

The expression “we occupy our thoughts, but do not discuss anything” is based on a
passage found in the Zhuangzi, Qiwulun: “Outside the limits of the world of men,
the sage occupies his thoughts, but does not discuss about anything.” Legge, Dao de
jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 237.
See the Beijing chao, translated by Zhi Jian (T.790.17:729a3–736b1).

See the Yijing, Xici, shang. Legge, I ching: Book of Changes, pp. 375–376, n. 75.

See the Zhuangzi, Gengsang Chu. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 523, n. 8.

The term “three revered ones” (sanzun) refers to: (1) the primary revered one (often,
a buddha) and his two attendant bodhisattvas; (2) a buddha, a pratyekabuddha, and
an arhat; or (3) Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha, i.e., the Three Treasures. From the
context, the third interpretation is most appropriate here.

See the Laozi, chapter 42. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 133, n. 2.

316

Notes

450
451
452
453
454
455

456
457
458

459
460
461
462

463
464

465

See the Han Feizi, Heshi. See note 69.

See the Taizi ruiying benqi jing, T.185.3:479b26–28.

This story is found in several different sutras. For example, see the Chang Ahanjing,
T.1.1:25a2–25b25.

See the Zhuangzi, Qiwulun. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 236, n. 6.
See the Taizi ruiying benqi jing, T.185.3:473b10.

The phrases “the Way is helpful to all in the world” and “its knowledge embraces all
things” derive from the Yijing, Xici shang. Legge, I ching: Book of Changes, p. 354,
n. 22.
See the Yijing, Ge. Legge, I ching: Book of Changes, p. 168, n. 6.

This statement is based on Confucius’s answer to Zhuan Sun’s question. See the
Lunyu, Weizheng. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 153.

In the Lüoan (Lüshi chunqiu), Chajin, there is a story that a man of Chu, when crossing
a river aboard a boat, dropped his sword into water; he then marked the side of the
boat at the point where the sword fell in order to be able to ﬁnd it, not considering
that the boat was moving. This fable describes a person who lacks adaptability.

This is a story of another man lacking adaptability, found in the Han Feizi, Wudu.
Watson, Han Feizi: Basic Writings, p. 98.
See the Laozi, chapter 39. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 130, n. 1.
See the Laozi, chapter 33. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 123, n. 2.

This statement is based on the phrase “Dao becomes obscured through the small comprehension [of the mind]” found in the Zhuangzi, Qiwulun. Legge, Dao de jing ji
Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 230.

The expression “striking one’s root deeply in oneself and being perfectly still” derives
from the Zhuangzi, Shanxing. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 419, n. 3.

The Chinese term haoran zhi qi (“the great primordial vapor”) is found in the Mengzi,
Gongsun Chou. Legge translates this term as “ﬂowing passion-nature” (The Chinese
Classics, vol. 2, pp. 189–190, n. 11–14).

This statement is based on a passage found in the Liji, Yueji: “When the [ancient]
kings had accomplished their undertakings, they made their music [to commemorate
them]; when they had established their government, they framed their ceremonies.
The excellence of their music was according to the greatness of their undertakings;
and the completeness of their ceremonies was according to the comprehensiveness
of their government. The dances with shields and axes did not belong to the most
excellent music, nor did the sacriﬁces with cooked ﬂesh mark the highest ceremonies.
The times of the ﬁve Dis were different, and therefore they did not each adopt the

317

Notes

466
467

468
469
470

471
472

473
474
475

476
477
478

479

music of his predecessor. The three kings belonged to different ages, and so they did
not each follow the ceremonies of his predecessor.” See Müller, ed., The Sacred Books
of the East, vol. 28, pp. 101–102, n. 26–27.
Shanci is Zhou Yong’s pseudonym.

This statement is based on the the Lunyu, Taibo: “When a bird is about to die, its
notes are mournful; when a man is about to die, his words are good.” Legge, The
Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 209, n. 3.
This expression is based on a phrase found in the Zhuangzi, Dazongshi, “to hide a
boat in a narrow ravine and to hide a hill in a marsh.” See notes 164, 275.
All these expressions except “staying in the void to let the animation act at will”
derive from the Laozi, chapter 10. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 101.

This statement is based on a story found in the Zhuangzi, Tiandi, about the Yellow
Emperor who lost his dark-colored pearl. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, pp.
359–360, n. 4
I follow the interpretation for this sentence in Kyōto Daigaku Jinbun Kagaku Kenkyūjo
Chūsei Shisōshi Kenkyū han, ed., Gumyōshū kenkyū, vol. 3, p. 369, n. 11.

This expression derives from the Zhuangzi, Tian Zifang. Legge translates it “As soon
as my eyes lighted on that man, the [D]ao in him was apparent” (Dao de jing ji
Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 484, n. 2).
The Shiji, Zhou benji. See Nienhauser, ed., The Grand Scribe’s Records, vol. I, p. 58,
in which King Wen is referred to as the Lord of the West.
See the Taizi ruiying benqi jing, T.185.3:473b10.

This expression is based on a passage found in the Zhuangzi, Xiaoyao you: “When the
sun and moon have come forth, if the torches have not been put out, would it not be
difﬁcult for them to give light?” Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 217, n. 4.

The Chinese character bu (“not”) is deleted according to the previous discussion
(T.2101.52:39c5, 40c21).

In the Discourse on the Non-Chinese and the Chinese Gu Huan says, “Daoism is precisely Buddhism; Buddhism is none other than Daoism.”

The Chinese term guan ju derives from a poem found in the Shijing, Guan ju: “Guanguan go the ospreys, /On the islet in the river./The modest, retiring, virtuous, young
lady:/For our prince a good mate [is] she.” Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 4, p.
1. The four states are found in Shijing, Binfeng. According to Kyōto Daigaku Jinbun
Kagaku Kenkyūjo Chūsei Shisōshi Kenkyū han, ed., Gumyōshū kenkyū, vol. 3, p.
377, the four states refer to Guan, Cai, Shang, and Yan.

This expression is based on a phrase found in the Chuci, Buju: “The sound huangzhong
is abrogated and an earthen pot sounds very loud” (a metaphor for the case where a

318

Notes

480
481

482

483

484
485

486
487

488
489
490
491
492
493

494

gentleman is rejected and a petty man becomes dominant). The term huangzhong
refers to the ﬁrst note of the twelve classical Chinese musical notes; see note 7.

This expression derives from the Laozi, chapter 38. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi
quan ji, p. 128, n. 6.

This expression is based on a passage found in the Laozi, chapter 48: “He who devotes
himself to the Dao [seeks] from day to day to diminish [his doing].” Legge, Dao de
jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 138, n. 2.

This expression is based on another passage found in the Laozi, chapter 48: “He who
devotes himself to learning [seeks] from day to day to increase [his knowledge].”
Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 138, n. 1.

This expression is based on a passage found in the Zhuangzi, Qiwulun: “When they
were dreaming they did not know it was a dream; in their dream they may even have
tried to interpret it; but when they awoke they knew that it was a dream. And there
is the great [awakening], after which we shall know that this life was a great dream.”
Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, pp. 242–243.
The expressions “carve a mark on a boat” and “wait by the stump” are used to indicate
a person who lacks adaptability. See notes 458, 459.

This expression is based on a phrase found in the Zhuangzi, Qiwulun: “Under Heaven
there is nothing greater than the tip of an autumn down, and the Tai mountain is
small.” Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 236.
See the Yijing, Xici shang. Legge, I ching: Book of Changes, p. 366, n. 56.

The interpretation of this sentence is based on a passage found in the Lunyu, Yang
Huo: “Are there not gamesters and chess players? To be one of these would still be
better than doing nothing at all.” Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 329.
See the Zhuangzi, Yufu. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 637.

See the Zuozhuan, Zhuanggong’s tenth year. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 5, p.
86, left column.
See the Miaofa lianhuajing, T.262.9:38c22–29.

The Chinese term chaosan (“the deception of the inconsistency”) derives from the
Zhuangzi, Qiwulun. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 233.
This expression is based on the Yijing, Xici, shang. See note 360.

The phrase “the ﬂesh of birds and beasts, drinking their blood, and swallowing [also]
the hair and feathers” derives from the Liji, Liyun. Müller, ed., The Sacred Books of
the East, vol. 28, p. 369, n. 8.

This expression is based on a conversation between Duke Wei of the Zhou dynasty
and Tian Kaizhi, found in the Zhuangzi, Dasheng. Responding to Duke Wei’s question

319

Notes

495
496
497

498

499
500

501
502
503

504
505

506

507
508

about the subject of life, Kaizhi said, “I have heard my master say that they who skillfully nourish their life are like shepherds who whip up the sheep that they see lagging
behind” and “Bao nourished his inner man, and a tiger ate his outer; while Yi nourished
his outer man, and disease attacked his inner. Both of them neglected whipping up
their lagging sheep.” Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, pp. 456–457.

The Chinese character bu (“not”) is read as the character qian (“thousand”), since
this sentence appears to be a repetition of the previous sentence.
See note 69.

See the Zuozhuan, Chenggong’s eighth year. Legge translates it as “He followed the
wise and good, as in the course of a stream, and right it was [that he should be so
successful]” (The Chinese Classics, vol. 5, p. 367, left column).
The phrase “to open up [knowledge of the issues of] things and accomplish the undertakings [of men]” derives from the Yijing, Xici shang. Legge, I ching: Book of Changes,
p. 371.
The emperor’s formal robe with dragon patterns is called gun and a crown with a
square-shaped top is called mian.

The Chinese term zhongmiao zhi men (“gate of many wonders”) derives from the
Laozi, chapter 1. Legge translates it as “the gate of all that is subtle and wonderful”
(Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 95, n. 4).

The tongren hexagram comes after the pi hexagram. See Yijing, shangjing. Legge, I
ching: Book of Changes, p. xii.
The term “the center of the ring [of thought]” derives from the Zhuangzi, Qiwulun.
Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 231.

Shangchen forced his father King Cheng to strangle himself. See the Shiji, fascicle
40, Chu shijia. For an English translation, see Nienhauser, ed., The Grand Scribe’s
Records, vol. I, pp. 392–393.
See the Lunyu, Xianjin. See note 31.

If the term dao is taken to mean Daoism here, the following statement does not make
sense. It is possible that Gu Huan originally meant dao to indicate Daoism and the
author took its meaning as “the Way.”

This expression derives from the Yijing, Xici shang. Legge translates it as “The nature
[of man] having been completed, and being continually preserved” (I ching: Book of
Changes, p. 360, n. 37).
The punishment called paoluo was invented by King Zhou of the Yin dynasty.

See the Liji, Neize. Müller, ed., The Sacred Books of the East, vol. 27, pp. 456–457,
n. 15.

320

Notes

509
510

511
512

513
514
515
516
517

518

519
520
521
522
523
524
525
526

This evil act was carried out by King Zhou of the Yin dynasty. See Shujing, Zhoushu,
Taishi. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 3, p. 285, n. 5.

The expression “a person who lives on the seacoast and who enjoys himself in forgetting
the world” is based on a passage found in the Mengzi, Jinxin, shang: “. . . living somewhere along the seacoast. There he would have been all his life, cheerful and happy,
forgetting the kingdom.” Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 2, p. 470.
See the Lunyu, Shuer. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 195.

The Chinese term daijiang (“instead of a carpenter”) derives from a passage found
in the Laozi, chapter 74: “Seldom is it that he who undertakes the hewing, instead of
the great carpenter, does not cut his own hands!” Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi
quan ji, p. 165. Hence I translate it as “taking risks.”
See the Lunyu, Xianjin. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, pp. 244–245.

See the Liji, Quli, shang. Muller, ed., The Sacred Books of the East, vol. 27, p. 64,
n. 21.
See the Laozi, chapter 1. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 95, n. 1.
See the Weimojie suoshuojing, T.475.14:550b29–551c26.

This expression is based on a statement found in the Zhuangzi, Qiwulun: “Therefore,
this being so, if we take a stalk of grain (“beams” in my translation) and a [large] pillar,
a loathsome [leper] and [a beauty like] Xi Shi, things large and things insecure, things
crafty and things strange; they may in the light of the Dao all be reduced to the same
category (of opinion about them).” Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 232.

This is found in indigenous Chinese texts such as the Qingjing faxingjing (Sutra of
Pure Dharma Acts) and the Laozi daquan pusajing. See the Weimojing xuanshu,
T.1777.38:523a15–18, the Guang Hongmingji (Extensive Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism), T.2103.52:162b17, and the Poyelun,
T.2109.52:477c22–23.
See the Laozi, chapter 38. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 128, n. 6.
See the Laozi, chapter 12. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 103, n. 1.

See the Laozi, chapter 44. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 135, n. 1–2.
See the Lunyu, Taibo. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 207.

See the Yijing, Xici xia. Legge, I ching: Book of Changes, p. 385, n. 22.

See the Lunyu, Wei Linggong. Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 302.

In the ancestral sacriﬁces the father is called “‘the sovereign father” (huangkao). See
the Liji, Quli, xia. Müller, ed., The Sacred Books of the East, vol. 27, pp. 117–118.
See note 89.

321

Notes

527
528

529
530
531
532
533
534
535
536
537
538
539
540
541
542
543
544

545

See note 90.

This expression is based on Confucius’s statement in the Lunyu, Shuer. Legge translates
it as: “When I have presented one corner of a subject to any one, and he cannot from
it learn the other three, I do not repeat my lesson” (The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p.
197).

See the Laozi, chapter 50. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, pp. 140–141.

See the Laozi, chapter 7. For Legge’s translation, see Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan
ji, p. 100, n. 1.

The Chinese character qie has several different meanings. The Daoist Gu uses it in
his discourse as “direct,” but Huitong takes it to mean “urgent.”

See the Laozi, chapter 12. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 103, n. 1.

See the Liji, Tangong, shang. Müller, ed., The Sacred Books of the East, vol. 27, p.
132, n. 29.
See the Shiji, Xia benji. Nienhauser, ed., The Grand Scribe’s Records, vol. I, p. 36.

The record is found in the last section of the Shujing, Zhouguan. Legge’s translation
in The Chinese Classics, vol. 3, pp. 523–534, does not include it.

See the Liji, Tangong, shang. Müller, ed., The Sacred Books of the East, vol. 27, p.
139, n. 20.
See note 99.

See note 100.

See the Zhanguoce, Qin Zhaoxiangwang, xia.

See the Laozi, chapter 42. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 133, n. 3.

The Yellow Books are generally known as instruction books for the arts of the bedchamber. Presently, only four texts called Huangshu are extant in the Daozang.
See the Laozi, chapter 13. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 104, n. 2.
See the Laozi, chapter 7. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 100, n. 2.

This passage is found in the Nanatsudera manuscript of the Qingjing faxingjing (Sutra
of Pure Dharma Acts): “Mahākāśyapa is called Laozi over there.” See Makita Tairyō
and Ochiai Toshinori, ed., Nanatsudera koitsu kyōten kenkyū sōsho, vol. 2. Chūgoku
senjutsu kyōten (sono 2) (Tokyo: Daitō Shuppansha, 1996), p. 13.
See the Taizi ruiying benqi jing, T.185.3:473b12–20, for an example of this.

322

Glossary
bhikṣu (biqiu): A mendicant monk; a Buddhist monk. See also four kinds of Buddhist
disciples.
bhikṣuṇī (biqiuni): A Buddhist nun. See also four kinds of Buddhist disciples.

dharmakāya (fashen): The Dharma body. There are various interpretations for this term.
In the Sarvāstivādin school, it refers to the true Dharma expounded by the Buddha
or the collection of the auspicious qualities of the Buddha, including his wisdom,
compassion, and various powers. In the Mahāyāna the term evolved into a kind of
cosmic principle that was regarded as the true nature of the Buddha or the body of
ultimate reality and the source from which his other forms derived. For instance,
the dharmakāya is one of the two kinds of buddha bodies along with the physical
form (rūpakāya), or of the three kinds of buddha bodies along with the enjoyment
or reward body (saṃbhogakāya) and the accommodative body (nirmāṇakāya), or
of the four kinds of buddha bodies along with the enjoyment or reward body, the
accommodative body, and the transformed body, or of the ten kinds of buddha
bodies, two versions of which are presented in the Huayanjing (Garland Sutra)..

Daodejing (Scripture of the Way and Its Virtue): The foundational Daoist scripture
authored by Laozi.

eight kinds of gods and demigods who protect Buddhism (babuzhong): gods (devas),
demigods (asuras), dragons (nāgas), demons (yakṣas), divine musicians (gandharvas), mythical birds (garuḍas), half-horse, half-human beings (kiṃnaras), and
great serpents (mahoragas).

eight difﬁculties (ba’nan): The eight conditions in which one is unable to encounter a
buddha or hear the Dharma: being in hell; being in the state of an animal; being in
the state of a hungry ghost; being in the heaven of long life or in Uttarakuru, the
continent to the north of Mount Sumeru where people always enjoy great happiness
(people in these worlds would not therefore be motivated to seek truth); being deaf,
blind, and mute; being knowledgeable about worldly affairs and eloquent (which
may defer people from following the true path); and living during the period before
or after the Buddha’s appearance in the world.

eight kinds of suffering (baku): The suffering brought about by birth, aging, illness,
death, separation from what one loves, encountering what one despises, not ﬁnding
what one seeks; and the ﬁve skandhas. See also ﬁve skandhas.

323

Glossary
eight precepts: (bajiezhai): Not to kill, not to steal, not to commit sexual conduct, not to
use false speech, not to ingest intoxicants, not to perform such acts as wearing bodily
decoration, using perfume, singing and dancing, and going to see dances or plays,
sleeping in a raised bed, and eating after noon. See also ﬁve precepts; six puriﬁcation
days.

ﬁve cardinal duties (wudian): A father’s righteousness, a mother’s benevolence, an elder
brother’s love, a younger brother’s respect, and a son’s ﬁlial piety.

ﬁve cardinal virtues (wuchang): Benevolence, justice, politeness, wisdom, and ﬁdelity.

Five Classics: The Confucian canon comprising the Book of Changes (Yijing or Zhouyi),
which looks into the law between Heaven, Earth, and human beings by asserting
that all phenomena of the universe come from changes caused by the union and
separation of yin and yang; the Book of History (Shujing or Shangshu), a record of
two ideal rulers, Yao and Shun, and the three dynasties of Xia, Yin (Shang), and
Zhou; the Book of Odes (Shijing or Maoshi), a collection of three hundred odes
composed prior to Confucius’s time; the Spring and Autumn Annals (Chunqiu),
which discerns virtue and vice in various historic events that happened in all states
for a period of two hundred and forty-two years, from the ﬁrst year of Lord Yin up
to Lord Ai of Lu state; and the Book of Rites (Liji), a compilation of records of
theory and practice regarding rites.

ﬁve desires (wuyu or wuqing): Desires that arise in connection with the ﬁve senses of
sight, sound, smell, taste, and touch; or desires for wealth, sex, food and drink,
fame, and sleep.

ﬁve penalties (wuxing): Branding, cutting off the nose, cutting off the feet, castration,
and death. The earliest record that describes wuxing is the Canon of Shun in the
Book of History, in which Gao Yao carried out these penalties at Shun’s command.

ﬁve precepts (wujie; Skt. pañcaśīla): Not to kill, not to steal, not to use false speech, not
to commit sexual misconduct, and not to ingest intoxicants. These are the ﬁve basic
precepts taken by laypeople on entering the Buddhist path.

ﬁve primary elements (wuchang): Fire, wood, earth, metal, and water. See also four great
elements.
ﬁve realms of existence (wudao, wutu, or wuqu): The realms of hell, hungry ghosts, animals, human beings, and heavenly beings. See also six realms of existence.

ﬁve roots of wholesomeness (wugen): 1) Belief in the Three Treasures, 2) making efforts
to practice good, 3) being mindful of the true Dharma, 4) concentration, and 5) the
investigation of the true nature of things. (Volume II)

Five Sacred Mountains (wuyue): The Eastern Mountain (Mount Tai), the Southern Mountain (Mount Heng or Huo), the Western Mountain (Mount Hua), the Northern Mountain (Mount Heng), and the Central Mountain (Mount Song).

324

Glossary
ﬁve skandhas (Skt. pañcaskandha; wuyin or wuyun): The ﬁve constituent elements of
existence that produce various kinds of suffering: matter or form (rūpa), perception
(vedanā), conception (samjñā), volition (samskāra), and consciousness (vijñāna).

Five Thearchs (wudi): Five legendary emperors: Yellow Emperor (Huangdi), Emperor
Gaoyang (Zhuanxu), Emperor Gaoxin (Diku), Emperor Yao, and Emperor Shun.

four devils (Skt. māras; simo): Deﬁlements (Skt. kleśas), the ﬁve skandhas, death (Skt.
maraṇa), and the king of devils, Māra, in the Paranirmitavaśavartin Heaven, who
tries to thwart one’s attempts to carry out good acts.

four fruits (siguo): The four stages of spiritual attainment in the Hinayana: the fruit of
entering the stream of the sacred Dharma (Skt. srota-āpanna), the fruit of only one
more rebirth (Skt. sakṛdāgāmin), the fruit of not returning (Skt. anāgāmin); and the
fruit of arhatship.

four gravest offenses (Skt. pārājika; boluoyi): Engaging in sexual intercourse, stealing,
taking life, and lying about one’s spiritual attainment. Monks who commit even
one of these offences is permanently expelled from the sangha.

four great elements (sida): Earth, water, ﬁre and wind. See also ﬁve primary elements.

Four Holy Rivers (sidu): The Yangzi River, the Yellow River, the Huai River, and the Ji
River.

four immeasurable minds (Skt. catur-apramāṇa or catvāry apramāṇāni; sidengxin or
siwuliangxin): Benevolence (ci), or giving pleasure and happiness to others; compassion (bei), or removing others’ pain and suffering; taking joy in making other
people happy (xi); and giving up all attachments (she or hu).

four kinds of Buddhist disciples (sizhong): Monks (bhikṣus), nuns (bhikṣuṇīs), laymen
(upāsakas), and laywomen (upāsikās).

Grand Terminus (taiji): In Daosim, the origin of all things in the universe.

icchantika (yichanti): One who has no good roots and has no possibility of becoming a
buddha.

kalpa (jie): An eon, an immeasurably long period of time.

Mount Sumeru (Xumishan): In Buddhist cosmology, the highest mountain that rises
from the center of the world.

nine kinds of Buddhist scriptures (jiubujing): The ﬁrst nine of the twelve kinds of Buddhist
scriptures. See twelve kinds of Buddhist scriptures.

nine realms of the transmigration of birth and death (jiudi): Subdivisions of the three
realms of samsaric existence, consisting of the realm of desire, the four meditation
heavens of the realm of form, and the four domains of the realm of nonform. See
also three realms of existence.

325

Glossary
nine schools (jiuliu): Confucianism, Daoism, the school of Yin-Yang, Legalism, the Nominalist school, the school of Mo Di (i.e., Mohism), the school of the Political Strategists, the school of Miscellaneous Thoughts, and the school of the Farming Life.
nirvana (niepan): The ultimate goal of Buddhism, where delusions are extinguished and
the highest wisdom is attained.

pure speech (qingtan): Discourse following doctrines or theories found in the Laozi
Daodejing and the Zhuangzi without regard to its practicality. The earliest example
is that carried out by Fu Gu and Xun Can in the ﬁrst year of the Taihe era (227). It
was popular during the period from the Wei kingdom (220–265) through the Jin
dynasty (265–420).

Seven Classics: The Five Classics plus the Book of Music (Yuejing), no longer extant,
and the Analects (Lunyu) of Confucius. See also Five Classics.

seven kinds of self-conceit (qiman): The feeling of superiority toward those who are
inferior; the feeling of superiority toward those who are one’s equals; the feeling
of superiority toward those who are superior to oneself; being proud of oneself and
despising others; considering oneself to be more worthy or virtuous than one actually
is; false humility, i.e., feeling pride at one’s humility; and proudly thinking that one
is virtuous although, in fact, one is a person of little virtue.

six arts (liuyi): Six areas in which a reﬁned person must be skilled: rites, music, archery,
driving a chariot, learning, and mathematics.
Six Classics: The Five Classics plus the Book of Music. See also Five Classics.

six domestic animals: Horse, cattle, sheep, chickens, dogs, and pigs.

six extreme evils (liuji): Misfortune that results in shortening one’s life, sickness, mental
distress, poverty, wickedness, and weakness. Also called the six feelings (liuqing).

six pāramitās (liuboluomi or liudu): The six qualities or “perfections” a bodhisattva practices in order to attain nirvana: (1) generosity (Skt. dāna), giving property, the
Dharma, and peace; (2) morality (Skt. śīla), observing precepts; (3) forbearance or
patience (Skt. kṣānti); 4) diligence or effort (Skt. vīrya); (5) meditation (Skt. dhyāna);
and (5) wisdom (Skt. prajñā).

six puriﬁcation days (liuzhai): The eighth, fourteenth, ﬁfteenth, twenty-third, twentyninth, and thirtieth days of the month, during which laypeople observe eight precepts
(the ﬁve basic precepts along with additional proscriptions against indulging in
adornment or perfume, entertainment, sleeping in a raised bed, or eating after
midday) in order to purify themselves. See also ﬁve precepts.

six realms of existence (liudao or liuqu): The six realms into which sentient beings are
reborn in the course of samsaric existence: the realms of hell, hungry ghosts, animals,
humans, asuras, and heavenly beings.

326

Glossary
six relations (liuqin): Father, mother, elder and younger brothers, wife, and children.

six sense organs (liugen): Eyes, ears, nose, tongue, the tactile body, and mind.

six supernatural powers (liutong or liushentong): (1) The ability to go anywhere at will
and to transform oneself or objects at will; (2) the capability of seeing anything at
any distance; (3) the capability of hearing any sound at any distance: (4) the ability
to know others’ thoughts; (5) the ability to know one’s own and others’ former lives;
and (6) the ability to destroy all evil passions.
śramaṇa (shamen): A Buddhist monk.
śrāmaṇera (shami): A male novice.

śrāmaṇerikā (shamini): A female novice.

tathāgata (rulai): One of ten epithets for a buddha, construed as “one who comes from
thusness.”

ten epithets for the Buddha (shihao): Thus-come One, One Worthy of Alms, Fully Enlightened, One Having Wisdom and Practice, One who Has Attained Emancipation,
Knower of the World, Unsurpassed, Tamer of Humans, Teacher of Gods and Humans,
and Enlightened and World-honored One.

ten powers (shili): Ten powers attributed to a buddha: (1) distinguishing right and wrong;
(2) knowing the karma of all sentient beings of the past, present, and future, and its
outcome; (3) knowing all forms of meditation; (4) knowing the greater and lesser
capacities of sentient beings; (5) knowing the thoughts and desires of sentient beings;
(6) knowing the different levels of existence of sentient beings; (7) knowing the
results of various methods of practice; (8) knowing the transmigratory states of all
sentient beings and the courses of karma they follow; (9) knowing the past lives of
all sentient beings and the nirvanic state of nondeﬁlement; and (10) knowing how
to destroy all evil passions.

ten wholesome acts (shishan): Not killing living beings, not stealing, not committing
adultery, not telling lies, not uttering harsh words, not uttering words that cause
enmity between people, not engaging in idle talk, not being greedy, not being angry,
and not holding wrong views.

Three Augusts (sanhuang): Three legendary monarchs of ancient China. There are several
different theories about the identity of these ﬁgures. For instance, Sima Qian’s Shiji
lists Tianhuang (Emperor of Heaven), Dihuang (Emperor of Earth), and Renhuang
(Emperor of People) in the Sanhuangji (Chronicles of the Three Augusts), and Tianhuang, Dihuang, and Qinhuang (the ﬁrst emperor of the Qin dynasty) in the Qin
Shihuangji (Chronicles of the First Emperor of the Qin Dynasty). The Chunqiu wei
(a book about charms and omens circulated in the Han dynasty as appendices to
the Spring and Autumn Annals) lists Fuxi, Shen Nong, and Nüwa as the Three
Augusts.

327

Glossary
three kinds of emptiness (sankong): The three gates of emancipation: emptiness (kong),
devoid of characteristics (wuxiang), and absence of aspiration (wuyuan).

three lowest realms of existence (santu, sanqu, or san’e): The realms of hell, hungry
ghosts, and animals. See also six realms of existence.

three most revered people (zaisan): The sovereign, one’s parents, and one’s teacher.

three periods of existence (sanshi): Past, present, and future.

three periods of the Dharma: The period of the True Dharma (zhengfa), when the Buddha’s
teaching is properly practiced and enlightenment can be attained; the period of the
Semblance Dharma (xiangfa), when the teaching is practiced but enlightenment is
no longer attainable; and the last period of the Decadent Dharma (mofa), when only
the teaching still exists but practice and attainment are no longer possible.

three poisons (sandu): Greed, anger, and stupidity.

three powers (sancai): Heaven, human beings, and Earth.

three realms of existence (sanjie): The realm of desire (Skt. kāmadhatu), which comprises
the realms of hell, hungry ghosts, animals, asuras, and human beings, and a part
of heaven; the realm of form (Skt. rūpadhātu), which includes part of a lower heaven
and in which there are only reﬁned types of form without sexual desire and other
appetitites; and the realm of nonform (Skt. arūpyadhātu), in which there is no
material form, only meditative states.

three transcendental knowledges (sanda or sanming): The ability to know one’s former
lives and those of others, the ability to know one’s future destiny and that of others,
and the ability to know about all the suffering of the present life and to remove its
root cause.

three vehicles (sansheng): The three kinds of teaching and paths of practice for śrāvakas,
pratyekabuddhas, and bodhisattvas.

trichiliocosm (Skt. tri-sāhasra-mahāsāhasra): In ancient Indian cosmology, the entire
universe in which a thousand worlds make a small one-thousand world; a thousand
of these make a medium one-thousand world; and a thousand of these make a great
one-thousand world.

Tripiṭaka (sanzang): The three “baskets,” or collections, of the Buddhist teachings; Sutra
(discourses of the Buddha), Vinaya (monastic rules), and Abhidharma (treatises).
twelve causations (Skt. pratītyasamupāda; shieryinyuan): A foundational Buddhist
teaching on the twelvefold links of cyclic existence: (1) ignorance (avidyā), (2)
volition (saṃskāra), (3) consciousness (vijñāna), (4) mental functions and the formation of physical elements (nāmarūpa), (5) six senses (āyatana), (6) contact with
sense objects (sparśa), (7) sensation or feeling (vedanā), (8) craving (tṛṣṇā), (9)
grasping what one desires (upādāna), (10) existence (bhava), (11) birth (jāti), and
(12) old age and death (jāramaraṇa).

328

Glossary
twelve gates of meditation (shiermen): Three groups of the four stages of meditation:
the four stages of meditation in the realm of form, the four immeasurable virtues
attained through meditation, and the four stages of meditation in the realm of nonform.

twelve kinds of Buddhist scriptures (shierbujing): (1) sūtra, the Buddha’s exposition of
the Dharma in prose; (2) geya, verses that repeat the ideas already expressed in
prose; 3) gāthā, verses containing ideas not expressed in the prose section of a sūtra;
(4) nidāna, narratives of past occurrences that explain a person’s present state; (5)
itivṛttaka, narratives of past lives of the Buddha’s disciples; (6) jātaka, narratives
of the Buddha’s past lives; (7) adbhuta-dharma, accounts of miracles performed
by the Buddha or other deities; (8) avadāna, exposition of the Dharma through allegories; (9) upadeśa, discussions of doctrine, often in question-and-answer form;
(10) udāna, exposition of the Dharma by the Buddha without awaiting questions
or requests from his disciples; (11) vaipulya, full-length, in-depth exposition of
principles of truth; and (12) vyākaraṇa, the Buddha’s predictions of his disciples’
attainment of buddhahood.

upāsaka: A layman. See also four kinds of Buddhist disciples.

upāsikā: A laywoman. See also four kinds of Buddhist disciples.

Way of the Spirit (shendao): In Daoism, the unfathomed mysterious way, the transcendental
religious world, or a synonym for a supreme spiritual being.

329

Bibliography
Chūgoku Shūkyō Bunka Kenkyūkai, trans., and Shōjirō Abe, ed. “Kōkan hotei yakuchū
Sō Hei ‘Myōbutsuron’ (4),” Tōyō Daigaku Daigakuin kiyō 28 (1992): 219–240.
—. “Kōkan hotei yakuchū Sō Hei ‘Myōbutsuron’ (5),” Tōyō Daigaku Daigakuin kiyō
29 (1992): 247–269.

—. “Kōkan hotei yakuchū Sō Hei ‘Myōbutsuron’ (6),” Tōyō Daigaku Daigakuin kiyō
31 (1994): 423–452.

—. “Kōkan hotei yakuchū Sō Hei ‘Myōbutsuron’ (7),” Tōyō Daigaku Daigakuin kiyō
32 (1995): 233–256.

—. “Kōkan hotei yakuchū Sō Hei ‘Myōbutsuron’ (8),” Tōyō Daigaku Daigakuin kiyō
33 (1996): 253–279.

Chūgoku Shūkyō Bunka Kenkyūkai, trans., and Shōkō Kanaoka, ed. “Kōkan hotei
yakuchū Sō Hei ‘Myōbutsuron’ (1),” Tōyō Daigaku Bungakubu kiyō 37 (1984):
23–40.
—. “Kōkan hotei yakuchū Sō Hei ‘Myōbutsuron’ (2).” Tōyō Daigaku Daigakuin kiyō
26 (1989): 345–369.

—. “Kōkan hotei yakuchū Sō Hei ‘Myōbutsuron’ (3),” Tōyō Daigaku Daigakuin kiyō
27 (1990): 259–279.
The above eight issues of Tōyō Daigaku Bungakubu kiyō and Tōyō Daigaku
Daigakuin kiyō comprise the Japanese translation of Zong Bing’s Mingfolu,
T.2102.52:9b5–16a24.

Hsiao-Chieh Cheng, Hui-Chen Pai Cheng, and Kenneth Lawrence Thern, trans. Shan
hai ching: Legendary Geography and Wonders of Ancient China. Taibei: Committee
for Compilation and Examination of the Series of Chinese Classics, National Institute
for Compilation and Translation, 1985.
Inagaki, Hisao. A Dictionary of Japanese Buddhist Terms. Berkeley: Stone Bridge Press,
1992.

Keenan, John P. How Master Mou Removes Our Doubts: A Reader-response Study and
Translation of the Mou-tzu Li-huo lun. Albany, NY: State University of New York
Press, 1994. T.2102.52:1a29–7a22.

Kimura, Eiichi. Eon kenkyū, ibun-hen. Kyoto: Kyōto Daigaku Jinbun Kagaku Kenkyūjo,
1960.

331

Bibliography
Kopecki, Andrew Joseph. Cultural Adaptation in the Chinese Acceptance of Buddhism:
Selections from the “Hongmingji“: A Thesis. Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard University,
Cambridge, 1981. Pp. 65–131: T.2102.52:35a9–11; pp. 185–197: 48a12–23; pp.
294–327: 95a2–96b2.

Kyōto Daigaku Jinbun Kagaku Kenkyūjo Chūsei Shisōshi Kenkyū han, ed. Gumyōshū
kenkyū, 3 vols. Kyoto: Kyōto Daigaku Jinbun Kagaku Kenkyūjo, 1973–1975. Japanese translation of the entire text of the Hongmingji.

Le Blanc, Charles. Huai-nan tzu. Philosophical Synthesis in Early Han Thought: The
Idea of Resonance (kan-ying) with a Translation and Analysis of Chapter Six. Hong
Kong: Hong Kong University Press, 1985.

Legge, James, trans. Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji. Taibei: Wen xing shu ju, 1963.

—. I ching: Book of Changes. Ch’u Chai with Winberg Chai, ed. with introduction and
study guide. New Hyde Park, NY: University Books, 1964.

—. The Chinese Classics: With a Translation, Critical and Exegetical Notes, Prolegomena, and Copious Indexes, vols. 1–4. Taipei: Wen shih che ch’u pan she, 1972,
second revised ed.

—. The Chinese Classics: With a Translation, Critical and Exegetical notes, Prolegomena, and Copious Indexes, vol. 5. Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press,
1960.
Liebenthal, Walter. “The Immortality of the Soul in Chinese Thought,” Monumenta Nipponica 8 (1/2) (1952): 341–395. Pages 341–342: T.2102.52:3b10–23, 6b27–28,
6c29–7a2; pp. 343–353: 27b14–29a16; pp. 354–365: 30c1–17, 31b15–32a6, 33b9–
34c25; pp. 376–395: 54b1–c19, without Shen Ji’s annotation, 9b6–11b11, 21a7,
18a11, 18a25.

Liu Lifu. Hongdao yu mingjiao: “Hongmingji” yanjiu. Beijing: Zhongguo Shehui Kexue
Chubanshe, 2004.

—. “Hongmingji” yanjiu. Gaoxion Xian Dashu Xiang: Foguangshan Wenjiao Jijinhui,
2004.

Makita, Tairyō, and Toshinori Ochiai, eds. Nanatsudera koitsu kyōten kenkyū sōsho, vol.
2. Chūgoku senjutsu kyōten (sono 2). Tokyo: Daitō Shuppansha, 1996.

Masuda, Koh, editor-in-chief. Kenkyūsha’s New Japanese-English Dictionary. Tokyo:
Kenkyusha Ltd., 1974, fourth edition.

Morgan, Evan, trans. Tao, The Great Luminant: Essays from Huai nan tzu. Shanghai:
Kelly & Walsh Ltd., 1934.

Müller, F. Max, ed. The Sacred Books of the East, 50 vols. Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1879-1910.

Nienhauser, William H., Jr., ed. The Grand Scribe’s Records, 9 vols. Bloomington, IN:
Indiana University Press, 1994–2011.

332

Bibliography
Ogawa, Tamaki. Rōshi Sōshi. Tokyo: Chūō Kōronsha, 1998.

Ōta, Teizō, trans. Kokuyaku issaikyō. Wa-Kan senjutsu bu. Gokyōbu 1. Tokyo: Daitō Shuppansha, 1936. Japanese translation of the entire text of the Hongmingji.

Rosemont, Henry, trans. The Chinese Classic of Family Reverence: A Philosophical
Translation of the Xiaojing. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press, 2009.

Sawada, Mizuho. Ressenden Shinsenden. Tokyo: Heibonsha, 1993.

Schmidt-Glintzer, Helwig. Das Hung-ming chi und die Aufnahme des Buddhismus in
China. Wiesbaden: Steiner, 1976.

Wang Zhimei. Cong “Hong ming ji” kan fo jiao Zhongguo hua. Taibei: Taibei Xian
Yonghe Shi: Hua mu lan wen hua gong zuo fang, 2008.

Watson, Burton, trans. Han Feizi: Basic Writings. New York: Columbia University Press,
2003.

Wong, Eva, trans. Liezi: A Taoist Guide to Practical Living. Boston: Shambhala Publications, 1995.

Yang, Hsien-yi, and Gladys Yang, trans. Selections from Records of the Historian. Peking:
Foreign Languages Press, 1979.

Yoshikawa, Tadao, trans. Gumyōshū Kōgumyōshū. Daijō butten: Chūgoku Nihon hen,
vol. 4. Tokyo: Chūō Kōronsha, 1988. T.2102.52:1a29–7a22, 16b7–17c25, 29c19–
32b11, 34b3–c25, 70a26–72a19, 76c11–77a12, 77c1–79b11, 95a2–96b2.

Zürcher, Erik. The Buddhist Conquest of China: The Spread and Adaptation of Buddhism
in Early Medieval China. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1959. Pp. 160–163: T.2102.52:79b13–
80b10; pp. 164–176: 86a23–89b2.

333

Index
A

dog(s), 74, 125, 142, 155, 261, 266,
272, 278
domestic, six/three, 40, 140, 150, 151,
156
ﬁsh, 11, 23, 75, 76, 82, 91, 113, 126,
139, 142, 148, 155, 194, 264,
307n304, 308n310
fox, 29, 42, 261, 265, 266, 272, 275
hog(s)/pig(s), 74, 75, 113, 140, 142,
150, 155
killing/slaughter of, 22, 74, 75–76, 94,
128, 131, 135, 140, 142, 143, 151, 252
hare(s), 76, 225, 277
horse(s), 6, 13, 23, 41, 42, 103, 280,
294n94
and Dongye Bi, 34, 278
Kaṇṭhaka, 7, 8
Qiji, 11
and Zidu, 92, 303n238
insects, 35, 41, 74, 85, 88, 94, 99, 119,
126, 173, 246, 250, 251, 271, 272,
273, 281, 308n313
otter(s), 75, 126, 135, 308n310
pregnant and baby/young animals, 75,
94, 113, 306n289
sacriﬁce, 100, 140, 150, 156
sheep, 11, 74, 76, 125, 140, 143, 150,
253, 319n494
shrimp, barbels of, 144, 310n342
snake(s), 27, 55, 126
tiger(s), 15, 30, 63, 70, 74, 77, 94, 216,
300n194, 319n494
twelve, of the Zodiac, 290n15

Afang Palace, 106
Āgama sutras, 248
aging, 32, 170, 171, 173, 301n210
See also causation(s), twelve
Ajitakeśakambala, 289n1
Analects (Lunyu), 23, 26–27, 97
See also Seven Classics
animals, 7, 22, 35, 40, 41, 63, 75, 84, 91,
94, 113, 125, 132, 135, 139, 142, 148,
155, 194, 246, 248, 279
badger, 29, 42
birds/fowl, 36, 42, 44, 55, 57, 74, 75,
89, 94, 112, 126, 143, 173, 231, 246,
248, 251, 272, 272, 273, 281,
295n102, 302n220, 318n467,
319n493
dove, 70, 77, 300n194
hedan, 4
jingwei, 4, 289n3
owl(s), 35, 212, 263
swallow(s), 55, 230, 233, 235, 237,
238, 243
wild duck(s), 230, 233, 235, 237,
238, 243
wild geese/goose, 55, 112, 230,
2133, 235
zhen, 263
chimpanzee, 272
cows, 22, 23, 140, 150, 211, 280
music played for, 29, 276
deer, 12, 23, 37, 75, 278, 279, 280

335

Index
animal(s) (continued)
wolf/wolves, 75, 126, 135, 216,
308n310
See also ﬁve supernatural animals;
hunting
Anguo. See Sun Sheng
An Qisheng, 79
Aśvaka, 289n1
See also bhikṣu(s), six evil
Avalokiteśvara, 88
Avīci Hell, 219

B

Bai Qi, 77, 295n108
cruelty of, 38, 70, 73–74, 116, 300n190
sending provisions to King Zhao, 102,
109
suicide of, 38–39
Bailun, 80
Ban Si, 65
Bao Zidu, 92, 303n238
Ba River, 69
Bei, 216
Beijing chao, 316n445
beilü. See twelve classical Chinese musical notes
Beishan jing, 289n3
bhikṣu(s) (biqiu), 69, 89, 117, 122, 175
six evil, 289n1
See also Buddhist clergy; four kinds of
Buddhist disciples; śramaṇas
Bian He, 27–28, 219, 255, 293n69
Bian Que, 12, 43–44, 76–77
Bianwei lu, 295n105
Bi Gan, 47
Bimbisāra, King, 76
Bing Ji, 74, 301n202
Biographies of Arrayed Transcendents
(Liexianzhuan), 69, 159, 316n434
See also Liu Xiang

336

birth and death, 40, 53, 57, 85, 86, 149,
161, 162, 167, 168, 169, 177,
178–180, 183, 184, 185–187, 188,
189, 195, 199, 201, 247, 283
See also rebirth; transmigration
Bo, 55
boat, metaphors of:
and carriage, 11, 225, 248, 276
carving a mark on the side of, 225,
250, 270, 277, 317n458, 319n484
hidden in a ravine, 60, 103, 104, 110,
231, 305n275, 318n468
Bocheng Zigao, 213
body and spirit, 164, 165, 168, 170–172
See also New Discourse on Body and
Spirit
Bo Fazu, 106
Book of Changes (Yijing), 51, 64, 74, 86,
91, 100, 127, 138, 145, 147, 161, 174,
208, 217, 251
“Commentary of Appended Judgments”
(Xicizhuan), 145
diagrams/hexagrams/lines/symbols of,
64, 126, 133, 138, 145, 185, 198, 260
“Explanation of the Words and Sentences” (Wenyan), 145
See also Five Classics
Book of History (Shujing, Shangshu), 12,
15, 28, 51, 52, 155
Announcement about Drunkenness
(Jiugao), 113
Canon of Shu (Tangdian), 67
Canon of Yu (Yudian), 67
Hongfan chapter, 58, 169
Kong Anguo’s preface (Shangshu xu),
66
See also Five Classics
Book of Mountains and Seas (Shanhaijing), 68, 117, 121, 159
See also Shanhaijing

Index
Book of Music (Yuejing), 12, 51
See also Six Classics
Book of Odes (Shijing), 12, 15, 23, 28,
51, 119, 126
See also Five Classics
Book of Rites (Liji), 12, 51, 52, 68, 190,
193, 272
See also Five Classics
Bo, Princess, 14, 98
Bo Qi, 300n190
Boyang, 228, 235, 241, 242
See also Laozi
Boyang, Lord/Marquis, 132, 301n202
See also Bing Ji
Boyi, 22, 68, 81
and Shuqi:
death of, on Mount Shouyang, 15,
22, 35–36, 47, 212
exemplary lives of, 21, 24, 73, 98
See also Book of Mountains and Seas
Boyou, 121
Bo Yu, 36
Brahmā Heaven, king of, 220, 284
Buddha, xv, 11, 17, 19, 30, 33, 39, 40, 41,
46, 47–48, 49, 59, 63, 64, 67, 69, 71,
72–73, 76–77, 79, 80, 81, 84, 85, 86,
87, 88, 91, 94, 101, 102, 103, 106, 108,
109, 110, 120, 134, 137, 143, 158, 182,
189, 190, 201, 217, 221, 222, 226, 229,
230, 234, 244, 250, 251, 254, 261, 262,
263, 270, 280, 284, 285, 298n157,
300n195
biography of, 7–9, 98–99
and Confucians/Daoists, 12, 16, 23,
37, 43, 65, 77, 95, 104, 246, 253, 260,
274, 283, 284, 286
disciple(s), 47, 220, 289n1
image/relics of, 25, 42, 43, 69, 80, 81
light/marks/qualities/powers/virtue of,
3, 9, 12–13, 25, 30, 58, 70, 99, 104,
110, 120, 122, 207, 274, 284

teaching/voice/words, 28, 43, 45, 72,
79, 95, 99, 103, 108, 117, 120, 121,
164, 169, 174, 190, 220, 223, 224,
226, 227, 247
See also Śakyamuni
Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha, 316n448
See also three revered ones; Three
Treasures
Buddhism, 65, 67, 68, 80, 85, 102, 104,
106, 110, 111, 116, 119, 126, 136,
144, 175, 191, 192, 197, 201, 203,
205, 206, 207, 208, 215, 219, 220,
221, 222, 229, 232, 253, 269, 275,
280, 282, 283, 286, 287, 288, 290n8,
297n149
adoption/transmission in China/Chinese, xvi, xvii, 25, 69, 80–81, 116,
260, 261–262, 264, 274, 286
and Confucianism/Daoism, 20–21, 28,
34, 51–52, 58, 62, 65, 87, 95, 106,
107–108, 114, 115, 121, 132, 134, 144,
153, 159, 169, 183, 184, 190, 193–194,
205, 208, 221, 223, 224, 226, 227,
230–232, 234, 235, 237–241, 243–247,
250, 251, 254, 257–260, 262, 264–266,
268, 270, 272–275, 278, 283, 286–287,
318n477
criticism/doubts/negative views of, xv,
7, 24, 27, 29, 30, 42, 45, 49, 70, 73,
79–80, 100, 106, 115, 185, 190, 216,
227, 246
as heretical/foreign, 3, 12, 118, 134,
270–271
protection/promulgation of, xv, xvi, 4,
30, 33, 91, 129, 175–190
Buddhist(s), xvi, xvii, 17–18, 20, 21, 31,
32, 34, 42, 44, 51, 67, 68, 71, 79, 81,
96, 102, 105, 106, 109–110, 112, 113,
115, 129, 175, 190, 225, 236, 237,
242, 242, 246, 249, 253, 267,
297n149

337

Index
Buddhist(s) (continued):
clergy/monk(s), xv, xvi, 4, 42, 69, 73,
99, 117, 144, 159, 160, 174, 177–178,
180, 214, 224, 225, 230, 232–233,
246, 248, 249–250, 260, 261, 265,
267, 277
lay/laypeople, xv, xvi, xvii, 4, 36, 73,
101, 175, 176, 177, 282
See also bhikṣus; four kinds of
Buddhist disciples; śramaṇas
Buddhist doctrine(s)/teaching(s), xv, xvi,
12, 45, 50, 64, 66, 68, 78, 81, 85, 86,
87, 89, 100, 102, 106, 109, 112, 121,
137, 143, 157, 158, 167, 168, 170,
175, 206, 233, 237, 249, 250, 254,
262, 269
and Confucianism/Daoism, 28, 82,
182, 207, 220, 240
geyi interpretation of, xvii, 65
Buddhist scripture(s)/texts, xv, xvii,
xviii, 10, 11, 12, 18, 19, 22, 24, 25,
28, 29, 30, 36, 40, 46, 47, 50, 59, 60,
64, 69, 71, 89, 102, 103–104, 107,
110, 116, 118, 120, 122, 132, 137,
177, 186, 196, 202, 203, 206, 215,
217, 222, 241, 247, 248, 263, 264,
265, 269, 270, 272, 274, 277, 279,
284, 285, 286, 287, 297n149
twelve kinds of, 8, 100
Bu Shang. See Zixia

C

Caishu Du, 19, 21, 93, 136, 144, 160,
215, 316n438
Cai state, 318n478
Cai Yin, 25
cakravartin. See wheel-turning king
Cang Jie, 89, 250
Cangwu prefecture, 5, 289n4
Emperor Shun’s tomb, 35, 279

338

Canon of Filial Piety, 11–12, 13, 14, 15,
18
See also Confucius; Xiaojing
Cao Gui, 251
Cao Pi, 303n238
Cao state, 22
causation(s), 121, 205, 223
twelve, 105, 116
Celestial Ofﬁcer/Thearch, 41
Chanda, 289n1
See also bhikṣu(s), six evil
Chandaka, 7, 8
Chang, 20
Chang Ahanjing, 317n452
Chang Ju, 213
Changping, 76
Chaofu, 24, 67, 208, 216
Chang Ju, 213
Chen county/region, 121, 170, 307n303
Cheng, Emperor, 174
Cheng, King, 36, 82, 169, 307n301,
320n503
Chen Xiang, 18, 19
Chisongzi, 30, 45, 52, 208
Chuci, 318n478
Chunqiu. See Spring and Autumn Annals
Chunqiu Zuoshizhuan (Spring and Autumn
with Commentary), 42, 69, 97, 120
Du Yu’s preface, 310n347
See also Zuo Qiuming
Chunyu Sheng (Chunyu Kun), 108, 110,
306n279
Chu state, 27, 30, 38, 51, 82, 105, 123,
148, 169, 193, 219, 230, 233, 255,
257, 261, 293n69, 297n134, 305n270,
317n458
Ku county, 236, 240, 244
Ying (capital city), 27, 205
See also Mount Chu
Classics, 5, 12, 24–25, 28–29, 30, 36, 38

Index
See also Five Classics; Seven Classics;
Six Classics
Collection for the Propagation and
Clariﬁcation of Buddhism (Hongmingji), xv–xviii, 4
See also Sengyou
Collection of Records Derived from the
Tripiṭaka (Chusanzangjiji), xviii
See also Sengyou
Confucian, 118, 144, 178, 226
cap, 91, 291n28
doctrines/teachings, 34, 79, 82, 120,
127, 182, 234, 239
literature/texts, 52, 141, 153
scholars, 29, 52, 66, 126, 216, 222,
241, 284
See also Confucianism/Confucianist(s)
Confucianism/Confucianist(s), 33, 51, 52,
58, 65, 108, 115, 134, 144, 153, 159,
183, 193, 194, 196, 204, 205, 206,
207, 215, 218, 220, 225, 230, 231,
232, 233, 238, 246, 259, 260, 277
compared with Buddhism, 3, 234, 239,
267
and Daoism/Daoists, xv, xvi, xvii, 239,
245, 260
and the Five Classics, 9, 11
See also Confucius; Legalists; Nominalists; nine schools; Six Classics
Confucius, 9–10, 12, 13, 16, 18, 19, 21,
24, 30, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 43, 45, 51,
57, 58, 65, 66, 81, 118, 121, 126, 131,
136, 150, 192, 193, 214, 223, 228,
231, 236, 240, 249, 261, 284, 291n28,
294nn86, 94; 307nn292, 303;
313n395, 322n528
books/writings of, 12, 15, 31, 49, 51,
83, 118
and Boyi and Shuqi, 15, 47, 98
cited/quoted, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19,
21, 23, 25, 26, 31, 33, 35, 36, 44, 47,

62, 64, 81–82, 87, 113, 264, 268, 279,
315nn418, 420
disciple(s), 21, 120–121, 211, 308n308
dream of, 35, 77, 279, 301n210
and the Duke of Zhou, 3, 49, 51, 77,
80, 88, 91, 93, 94, 95, 101, 106, 108,
112, 113, 114, 117, 118, 120, 121,
142, 147, 153, 155, 164, 170, 215,
246, 285
and Fan Xu, 80, 302n215
and the Five Classics, 9, 11
and Jie Yu, 27
and Laozi, 12, 64–65, 66, 68, 229,
253, 257, 260, 274
and Qu Boyu, 308n324
and Ran Boniu, 53, 205
and Ran Qiu, 62, 268, 299n167
and Rong Qiqi, 296n114
and Shaozheng Mao, 93
and Taibo, 14, 97, 275
and Xiang Tuo, 47
and Xu You, 15
and Yan Hui, 205, 228
and Yan Yuan/Yanzi, 36, 44, 47, 59, 279
and Yao, 143, 182, 183, 228, 249
and Zhuan Sun/Zichang, 12, 225,
317n457
and Zilu, 18, 32, 87, 113, 131, 205,
261, 268, 307n291
and Ziyou, 12
and Zixia, 315n423
See also Analects; Canon of Filial
Piety; Five Classics; Spring and
Autumn Annals
Cui Wenzi, 213

D

Dan, 12, 18, 44
See also Zhou, Duke of
Danzhu, 21, 170, 188

339

Index
dao/Dao, 147, 290n9, 305n267, 311n368,
317n462, 318n472, 319n481,
320n505, 321n517
Daoan, xvi, xvii, 89, 106
Daodejing, 6, 26, 31, 37, 65, 68, 232,
235, 244, 253, 311n368
Daojing (Dao) and Dejing (De) divisions of, 244, 295n104
See also Laozi; Laozi/Laozi Daodejing
Daode zhengjing zhigui, 297n137
Daohan, 114
Daoheng, 207
See also Discourse to Elucidate the
Refutation
Daoism/Daoist teaching, xv, xvi, xvii,
xviii, 35, 36, 47, 65, 74, 106, 107,
221–224, 226–227, 230–235, 237–241,
243–246, 249–252, 254, 257, 259–260,
262–266, 268–270, 272–275, 278–281,
283, 286–287, 318n477, 320n505
inactivity/vacancy in, 65, 236, 240,
242, 266
See also nine schools; wuwei
Daoist(s), 3, 5, 33, 92, 222, 227, 236, 241,
244, 249, 253, 257, 258, 277, 280, 287
monk(s), 221, 225, 230, 232–233, 250
Daoist practices and rituals:
unity of the yin-yang vapors (heqi), xvii
guiding the breath (daoyin), 309n327
mud and ash fête (tutanzhi), xvii
Daoist schools:
Shangqing (Supreme Purity), 253
Way of the Celestial Master (Tianshidao),
xvii
Way of the Five Pecks of Grains
(Wudoumidao), xvii, 281
Daoist scripture(s), xviii, 221, 249, 253,
269, 270, 272, 274, 280, 287, 290n115
See also Daodejing; Laozi Daodejing;
Liezi; Sequel Scripture of No Spirit;

340

Scripture of the Yellow Court; Scripture on Laozi who Ediﬁed the Barbarians; Wonderful Scripture of the Truth
of the Numinous Jewel
Daoxuan, xviii
See also Extensive Collection for the
Propagation and Clariﬁcation of
Buddhism
Dawang, 126
Dawei, 67
Dayuezhi (Central Asia), 25
Dazhidulun, 80, 302n228
Deer Park (Mṛgadāva), 284
Devadatta, 219
Dharma, xv, 4, 76, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 89,
116, 120, 122, 176, 182, 188, 206,
250, 284, 286
Great, 3, 175, 275, 281, 282
Semblance, 3
See also Buddha, Dharma, and
Sangha; Buddhist teaching; Dharmanature
dharmakāya, 57, 58, 65, 104–105, 111,
116, 119, 147, 323
Dharma King. See Buddha
Dharma-nature, 118, 232, 236, 240, 242,
243, 244
dharmas, 244
Diamond Sutra (Vajracchedikāprajñāpāramitā-sūtra; Jingang borejing), 263
Dian region, 62
Ding, 60
Ding, Prince, 34, 278
Discourse on Buddhist Laymen and
Clergy (Baiheilun):
He Chengtian’s critique/responses,
100–101, 107–115, 123
Zong Bing’s responses, 101–107,
115–122
See also Huilin

Index
Discourse on Health Care (Yangshenglun), 135
See also Zhongsan
Discourse on Regeneration (Gengshenglun), 161–162
Luo Junzhang’s response to Sun
Sheng, 163
Sun Changsha’s letter to Luo Junzhang, 162–163
See also Luo Junzhang
Discourse on the Clariﬁcation of Reward
and Retribution (Ming Baoyinglun)
196–202
See also Huiyuan
Discourse on the Elucidation of Delusions
(Lihuolun), 5–36
See also Mouzi Bo
Discourse on the Equality of Good (Junshanlun). See Discourse on Buddhist
Laymen and Clergy
Discourse on the Five Kinds of Perversions, 207
Discourse on the Full Understanding of
Life (Daxinglun), 125–127
He’s responses to Yan Yanzhi,
129–132, 138–144
Yan Yanzhi’s expiations of, 127–128,
132–137, 144–160
See also He Chengtian
Discourse on the Immortality of the
Spirit (Shen bumielun), 164–170
See also Zheng Daozi
Discourse on the Non-Chinese and the
Chinese (Yi xialun), 221, 318n477
Huitong’s disputation of, 273–282
Ming Zhengjun’s response, 221–229
Shi Shengmin’s response, 282–288
See also Discourse on the Western
Tribe and China
Xie Zhenzhi’s response, 245–255

Zhu Guangzhi’s doubts about, 265–
273
Zhu Zhaozhi’s critique, 257–265
See also doubts about Buddhism; Gu
Discourse on the Śramaṇa’s Robe Worn
with a Bared Shoulder (Shamen
tanfulun), 190–192
He Wuji’s crticism, 192–193
Huiyuan’s reeponse, 193–196
See also Huiyuan
Discourse on the Way and the Wise, 114
See also Sun Chuo [Xinggong]
Discourse on the Way to Reach the Origin of the Two Teachings, 232, 234,
239–245
See also Discourse to Rectify [the
Argument on] the Two Teachings
Discourse on the Western Tribe and
China (Rong hualun), 282–288
See also Sengmin
Discourse on Three Periods of Reward
and Retribution (Sanbaolun), 202–
206
See also Huiyuan
Discourse on Three Sects (Sanzonglun),
240, 243
See also Zhan Yong
Discourse on Why Śramaṇas Do Not
Bow to the Sovereign (Shamen bujing
wangzhelun) 174–190
See also Huiyuan; śramaṇas
Discourse to Clarify Buddhism (Mingfolun), 49–90, 107, 115, 122
See also Zong Bing
Discourse to Correct Faulty Accuusations
[against Buddhism] (Zhengwulun),
37–48
Discourse to Elucidate the Refutation
(Shibolun), 297–221
See also Daoheng

341

Index
Discourse to Explain the [Buddhist] Way
(Yudaolun), 91–100
See also Sun Chuo [Xinggong]
Discourse to Rectify [the Argument on]
the Two Teachings (Zheng erjiaolun),
221–229
See also Discourse on the Way to Reach
the Origin of the Two Teachings; Ming
Zhengjun
Di state, 19, 317n465
Divine Book (Shenshu), 30–31
See also Gan Ji
Divine Transcendents, 35, 279
See also Way of the Divine Transcendents
Dongfang Shuo, 68
Dongguan Library, 29
Dongye Bi, 34, 278, 294n89
Dong Zhuo, 39
Dou Ying, 75
Duangan Mu/Mu of Duangan, 24, 215,
316n442
Du Fang, 170
Duyou, 39
Du Yu, 310n347

E

eight kinds of gods and demigods, 220,
323
See also gods
eight difﬁculties, 215, 323
eight kinds of suffering, 105, 120, 323
See also aging; birth; death; ﬁve skandhas; illness
eight wise men, 80, 116–117, 211
emptiness, 27, 60, 61, 63, 103, 109, 118,
171, 249
and Daoist concepts of nothingness/
vacancy/void, 110, 236, 266
of emptiness (śūnyatā-śūnyatā), 286

342

and form, 116, 118, 236, 239, 240
three kinds of, 284
truth of, 305n272
enlightenment, 59, 63, 64, 189, 210, 219,
247, 264, 283
of Buddha, 99, 284
path/way to, 8, 98, 189, 191, 195, 222
right, perfect/supreme, 99, 253, 258,
261, 283
thirty-seven elements of, 36, 215,
295n103
See also nirvana
Extensive Collection for the Propagation
and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism (Guang
Hongmingji), xviii, 321n518
See also Daoxuan

F

Fa, 44
See also Wu, King
Fajing, xviii
Zhongjing mulu, xviii
Falang, King, xviii
Family Law (Menlü), 230–231
See also Zhang Rong
fangshu (“square documents”), 144,
310n343
Fan Xu, 80, 302n215
Fei Changfang, xviii
ﬁlial piety, xvii, 12, 13, 14–15, 43,
54–55, 66, 85, 95, 96, 99, 178, 218,
225, 226, 267, 274, 277, 302n232
See also Canon of Filial Piety
First Emperor of the Qin dynasty, 102,
106, 109, 115, 118
See also Qin dynasty
ﬁve cardinal duties (wudian), 81, 323
ﬁve cardinal virtues, 10
Five Classics, 6, 9, 11, 13, 20
and Buddhist scriptures, 5, 28, 50,
224, 259–260

Index
and Confucian teachings, 83, 118
See also Book of Changes; Book of
History; Book of Odes; Book of Rites;
Seven Classics; Six Classics; Spring
and Autumn Annals
ﬁve desires (wuyu or wuqing), 282, 324
See also sexuality
ﬁve penalties (wuxing), 21, 112, 113,
215, 303n234
ﬁve powers, 30, 295n103
ﬁve primary elements, 131, 134, 164,
290n15
ﬁve realms of existence, 40, 53, 76, 285,
324
Five Sacred Mountains, 10–11, 54
See also Mount Heng; Mount Hua;
Mount Song; Mount Tai
ﬁve skandhas (pañcaskandha; wuyin or
wuyun), 251–252, 298–299n149, 324
Five Thearchs, 9, 41, 52, 56, 66, 68, 230,
232, 233, 237
books by, 67
See also Gaoxin; Gaoyang; Shun; Yao;
Yellow Emperor
Five Thousand Words, 6, 26, 31, 253,
274, 280, 284
See also Daodejing
Foshuo Chaoriming sanmei jing, 299n173
Fotudeng, xvii, 69, 106
four devils (māras; simo), 3, 324
four fruits, 238, 245, 325
four gravest offenses (pārājika; boluoyi),
101
four great elements, 147, 174, 196–200,
229
Four Holy Rivers, 54
four immeasurable minds, 175, 193, 250,
262, 270
four kinds of Buddhist disciples, 81
See also bhikṣu; Buddhist(s), clergy/
monks, lay/laypeople; śramaṇa

four sages, 57–58
See also Confucius; Duke of Zhou;
Shun; Yellow Emperor
four states, 318n478
See also Cai state; Guan state: Shang
state; Yan state
four supernatural animals, 125
dragon(s), 13, 35, 42, 55, 57, 58, 125,
145, 262, 283, 284
kylin, 12, 22–23, 125, 138, 228, 272,
279–280
phoenix(es), 11, 12, 35, 121, 125, 228,
272
turtle(s), 27–28, 35, 125, 293n70
Flying Emperor, 67
See also wheel-turning king
Foshuo Chaoriming sanmei jing,
299n173
Fozu lidai tongzai, 295n105
Futu. See Buddhism
Fuxi, 13, 52, 142, 146, 155, 251, 259
See also Three Augusts
Fuyan, 78
Fu Yue, 77–78
Fu Yi, 25

G

Ganges River, 51, 61
Gan Ji, 30
Gaosengzhuan, 300nn188, 189;
302n216, 307n295
Gaoxin, Emperor, 66, 211
Gao Xing, 14, 98
Gaoyang, Emperor, 66, 211
Gao Yao, 21
Gaozong, Emperor, 77, 79
Gaozu, Emperor, 116, 123
Gan Bao, 69
Ge Gong, 65
Gelu, 75
Geng Gong, 70, 77
343

Index
Gengsang Chu, 215
Ge Xuan, 227
go ( yi), 50, 101, 264
god(s), 8, 9, 21, 25, 100, 190, 205, 214,
220, 287
See also eight kinds of of gods and
demigods
gong. See twelve classical Chinese musical notes
Gong, Duke of, 14
Gonggong, 215
Gongli (Zhong Changtong), 135
Gongming Yi, 29, 276
Gongshu Ban, 21, 212
Gongsun Yang, 24
Gongyang, 69
See also Spring and Autumn Annals
Grand One, 259
grand submission to the natural course,
137, 143, 157, 309n330
Grand Terminus (taiji), 166, 251,
311n360
Grand Void, 51, 286, 287
Great Model (Hongfan), 15
Great Pervader, 100, 184, 188, 305n267
Great Sage. See Buddha; Sage
Great Way, 19, 20, 26, 28, 31, 50, 60, 66,
72, 83, 91, 181, 205, 210, 220, 226,
259, 263, 274, 278
See also Way, the
Guang Cheng, 67, 300n183
Guangdong province, 289n4
See also Jiaozhou
Guangdu, 121
Guang Hongmingji. See Extensive Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism
Guangling, 282
Guangxi province, 289n4
See also Jiaozhou

344

Guanshu Xian, 19, 21, 93, 136, 144, 160,
215, 316n438
Guan state, 284, 318n478
Guan Youan, 120
Guanzhong, 221
See also Shansi province
Gu/Gusou, 19, 53, 72, 170, 188
Gu Huan, 245, 251, 257, 260, 265, 273,
282, 318n477, 320n505, 322n531
See also Discourse on the Non-Chinese
and the Chinese
Guiji, 35, 279
Guiyang, 6
Guliang, 69
See also Spring and Autumn Annals
Gun, 97, 121
Gunyu, 215
Guo Ju, 120, 307n300
Guo Linzong, 65
Guo Pu, 68, 118
Guo state, 295n106
Guo Wenju, 80, 106
Guzhu, 98

H

Han dynasty/land/period/state, xv, xvi,
19, 25, 45, 49, 68, 70, 74, 77, 79, 83,
89, 116, 123, 131, 154, 222, 259, 283,
302n232
See also Later Han dynasty
Han Fei, 27, 216, 217
Han Feizi:
“Five Kinds of Vermin,” 207, 216,
314n410
Heshi, 293n69, 316n450
Shoulin, 301n204
Wudu, 317n459
Han Xin, 93
Hanyuan, 93
Heavenly Master. See Buddha; Yellow
Emperor

Index
He Chengtian, 306n286, 314n414
Discourse on the Full Understanding
of Life, 125–127
Response to Yan of Yongjia, 129–132
Second Response to Yan of Yongjia,
138–144
Elucidation of the Criticism on [the
Discourse] on the Equality of Good,
107–115
Letter to Zong Bing, 100–101
Second Response to Zong Bing, 123
He Chong, 174
He Dian, 230
He of Hengyang. See He Chengtian
He Yin, 230
hexagram(s), 74, 139, 146, 148
pi and tongren, 260, 320n501
sixty-four, 145
See also Book of Changes
Hiraṇyavātī (Ajitavatī) River, 284
Houji, 54, 55, 83, 121, 302n221
Hu, 69
Hu Tu, 121
Huaiyin, Marquis of. See Han Xin
Huandou, 215
Huangdi. See Yellow Emperor
Huan Junshan, 170
Hui, King/Prince, 92, 301n205, 303n240
Huilin, 101, 102, 104, 106, 108, 113, 114,
117, 122
See also Discourse on Buddhist Laymen and Clergy
Hui of Liuxia, 24, 73
Hui Shi, 103
Huitong, 273, 322n531
Huiyuan, xvi, xvii, 89–90, 106, 174, 190,
193, 196, 202
See also Discourse on the Clariﬁcation of Reward and Retribution; Discourse on the Śramaṇa’s Robe Worn
with a Bared Shoulder; Discourse on

Three Periods of Reward and Retribution; Discourse on Why Śramaṇas
Do Not Bow to the Sovereign
Huizi (Hui Shi), 103
hunting, 24, 156, 194, 278, 308n310
appropriate season/time, 75–76, 94,
113, 126, 128, 140, 141, 150, 154,
194, 306nn288, 289
ﬁve offenses, 113, 126, 306n289
threefold use of game, 143, 309n339
and sanqu zhi li (“the politeness of
providing a way of escape”), 193,
194, 303n245
See also animals

I

icchantikas, 70
illness, 173, 259, 303n237
of Confucius, 32
and Daoists/those of the Way of the
immortals, 32, 259
of Mouzi, 5
treated with cold or heat, 209,
315n415
immortals/immortality, 30, 33, 35, 45,
118, 121, 180, 182, 208, 222, 226,
228, 238, 268, 278, 279
abstention from eating grain, 5, 31
books/texts, 5, 30–31
eight immortals, 30
four immortals of Mount Gushi, 67
and illness, 32, 259
of the spirit, 53–54, 55, 56, 57, 79, 88,
106, 112, 115, 122, 165–166, 183
India, xvi, 81, 121
Buddha’s origins in, 7–8, 25, 39, 80–81
identiﬁed as:
central kingdom, 8, 252, 275, 284
foreign/barbarian land, 39, 80, 118,
158, 246
Shendu, 118
345

Index
India, identiﬁed as (continued):
Tianzhu, 68, 118
western land, 147, 282, 284
Zhugan, 37
Laozi’s travels in, 221, 284, 285
Inner Section of the Mysterious and
Sublime (Xuanmiao Neipan), 222
Invisible One. See Buddha

J

Ji. See Lu, Duke of, 294n94
Jianchu Temple, 1
Jiandi, 302n220
Jiang Yuan, 302n221
Jiangzuo, 69
Jiankang, 114
Jiantuole, 80, 106, 106, 114, 302n216
Jiao, 148
Jiao Shen (Zhongyang), 135
Jiaozhi, 5
Jiaozhou, 5, 289n4
Jia Sheng/Jia Yi, 110
Ji clan/family, 35, 215
Ji county, 118
Ji, Duke of, 57
See also Duke of Zhou
Jie, King, 34, 55, 56
cruelty/tyranny of, 39, 46, 55, 271
Jie Ni, 213
Jie state, 75
Jie Yu, 27
Ji Gang. See Zhongsan
Ji Kang, 54, 144
Jili, 20
Ji Lu, 65
Jin dynasty/period/state, xv, xvii, 14, 15,
29, 30, 38, 49, 69, 74, 75, 83, 92, 121,
174, 189, 207, 222, 257, 294n83,
302n231, 303n240
Eastern, xv, xvi, xvii, 80
Western, xvi, 80
346

Jingang borejing. See Diamond Sutra
Jing Ke, 102, 109
Jing, Lord, 172
Jing River, 208, 251
Jingzhou, 5
Jinji, 69
Jin, Marquis of, 295n106
Jin Ridi, 116, 153
Jinyangqiu, 69
See also Sun Sheng
Jiujiang, 70, 77
Jīvaka, 80, 106, 114
Ji, Viscount of, 15
Jizha, 34, 54, 55, 73, 141, 152
as an exemplary sage, 130
ranking of, 134, 139, 146, 147, 148
Juanzi, 45
Jue. See Buddha
Ju Liang, 208, 314n412

K

Kabuda-kātyāyana, 289n1
Kaiyang Gate, 25
Kālodāyin Udāyin, 289n1
See also bhikṣu(s), six evil
Kao Shu, 97
Khotan, 34
Kimura Eiichi, 312n388
King Aśoka Temple
Koguryo, 285
Kong Anguo, 66
Kong Zhigui, 230
Kong Zhongzhi, 230
Kuang, 29, 33, 34, 252, 294n83
Kuang region, 121, 307n303
Kumāra Guangjing. See Confucius

L

Lao Dan. See Laozi
Laozi, 22, 52, 64, 65, 68, 80, 101, 108,

Index
170, 192–193, 215, 222, 223, 227,
236, 237, 240, 241, 274, 284
and Buddha/Śakyamuni, 37, 68, 242,
244, 246, 272, 283, 284
and abstention from grain, 31, 279
and Confucius, 12, 64–65, 68, 229,
253, 257, 260, 274
and existence and nonexistence, 237,
240, 243
identiﬁed as Mahākāśyapa, 274, 284,
322n544
in India, 221, 284–285
life span of, 170
physical features of, 13
quoted, 6, 9, 10, 15, 16, 17, 18, 23–24,
25, 26, 29, 32, 35, 45, 215, 226, 237,
243, 248, 259, 275, 279, 280, 281
teaching/way of, 31, 52, 108, 178, 223,
227, 229, 231, 235, 237, 240, 243–244,
246, 249, 257, 272, 280, 287
and the undeﬁned and complete,
149–150
views of the body, 17, 32, 223, 281,
293n78
and the void/nothingness, 50, 244, 286
and wuwei, 16, 64, 215
See also Daodejing; Five Thousand
Words; Laozi Daodejing
Laozi Daodejing, xvi, 28, 31, 36, 78, 91,
147, 174, 222, 303n233
and interpretation of Buddhist scriptures, xvii
See also Daodejing; Five Thousand
Words
Laozi daquan pusajing, 321n518
Laozi xishengjing, 295n105
Later Han dynasty, 5, 39, 49, 69, 70, 77,
135
Legalists, 83
See also nine schools

Li, 150, 192, 240, 251, 257, 272
See also Laozi
Liang dynasty/state, xv, 1, 14, 19, 98,
293n67, 301n205
Lidai sanbaoji, xviii
See also Fei Changfang
Lieyizhuan, 303n238
See also Cao Pi
Liezi, 290n12, 296n114
life span/longevity, 30, 44, 45, 55, 74,
100, 103, 151, 171, 222, 226, 234, 249
and Daoist belief/practice, 32, 246,
249, 280, 283
Liji. See Book of Rites
Li, King, 255, 293n69
Ling, Emperor, 5
Lingling, 6
Ling Zhe, 22, 93
Liu Boshi, 172
Liudujijing, 300n194
Liuli, King, 76
Liu Shao, 312n389
Liu Yan, 6
Liu You, 45
Liuxia, 24, 73
Liu Xiang, 69, 117
Liuzi county, 69
Li Zhu, 63, 252
Lotus Sutra (Fahuajing), 72, 253, 298n157
Loutanjing, 39, 295n111
Luan Da, 283
Lu Cheng, 170
Lunyu. See Analects
Lüoan, 317n458
Luo Junzhang, 161, 162
Luo River, 19, 57, 118, 216
Luoyang, 25, 44
Lu state, 14, 19, 21, 24, 29, 34, 35, 51,
70, 77, 83, 212, 215, 272–273, 276,
278, 294n94
Duke of. See Ji

347

Index
Lu Zhonglian, 213
Lü Shang, 12, 22, 33, 143, 290n14,
292n45

M

Mafu, Lord. See Zhao Kuo
Mahākāśyapa, 274, 284
Mahayana, 66, 122
Ma Jun, 213
Mañjuśrī, 153, 198
Man state, 51
Maskarī-gośālīputra, 289n1
Māyā (Qingmiao), 7, 221–222
medicine(s), 12, 32, 64, 140, 151, 213, 249
and control of the vapor of the body,
109, 315n415
one of the four requisites, 189
refusal of, 43–44, 64, 76–77
meditation/meditative, 222, 254
practiced by the Buddha, 98–99
Mencius, 19, 33, 65, 95
appreciation of King Xuan of Qi,
75–76
driving off Yang Zhu and Mo Di, 5,
33, 289n5
ridicule of Chen Xiang’s studies with
Xu Xing, 18–19
on the rule of right, 24
on the trees of Mount Niu, 308n319
Meng Gongchuo, 15
Meng Ke. See Mencius
Mengsun, 110
merit(s)/meritorious acts/deeds, 21, 22,
47, 81, 92, 94, 114, 120, 129,
131–132, 133, 136, 137, 149, 151,
155, 168, 169, 178, 183, 188, 195,
201, 204, 209, 210, 214, 217, 218,
223, 226, 228, 229, 240, 263, 269,
274, 277
of Taibo, 97

348

of Vimalakīrti, 282
See also reward and retribution
Merupradīparāja:
lion seat of, 108, 119
and transformation of Vimalakīrti’s
room, 72, 298n158
Miaofa lianhuajing, 301n198, 319n490
Middle Kingdom. See China
Milky Way, 169, 311n365
Ming, Emperor, 49, 69
Xianjie mausoleum, 25
Mingling, 101, 305n270
Ming Zhengjun, 221
See also Discourse to Rectify [the
Argument on] the Two Teachings
Min Ziqian, 21
mirror, 276
and Buddha/Buddhism, 3, 252
metaphor of mirror and dust, 60–61
and the three transcendental knowledges, 261
Mo Di, 5, 33, 289n5
Mohism/Mohist(s), 15, 107, 230, 232,
233, 238
See also nine schools
Mount Ao, 29
Mount Chu, 293n69
Mount Dai, 4, 28, 66
Mount Gushi, 67
Mount Gu Ye, 67
Mount Heng, 31
Mount Hua, 30–31
Mount Ji, 216
Mount Jing, 255
Mount Juci, 67
Mount Kongtong, 66
Mount Kunlun, 30, 87, 121
Mount Li, 22
Mount Longmen, 141, 152
Mount Lu, 89
Mount Meng, 51, 83

Index
Mount Ming, 178, 311n373
Mount Niu, 130, 133
Mount Shang, 79, 216
Mount Shouyang, 15, 24, 36, 98, 212
Mount Song, 22, 28, 30
Mount Sumeru (Xumishan), 3, 49, 70,
77, 247, 300n194
Mount Tai, 22, 30, 34, 35, 52, 83, 112,
250, 278
Mount Weilei, 215
Mount Yu, 121
Mount Yunhe, 141, 152
Mouzi Bo, 5–36
See also Discourse on the Elucidation
of Delusions
Mu, King (Chu state), 82, 169, 261
See also Shangchen
Mu, Prince (Qi state), 303n240
Mucalinda, King, 220
music, 3, 14, 27, 29, 34, 45, 72, 127,
141, 143, 152, 176, 230, 271, 294n94
and Chinese ceremonies/rites, 108,
121, 259, 260, 317n465
and the deaf man and the braying of a
donkey, 273–274
eight kinds of musical sounds, 125,
306n285
ﬁve notes of traditional Chinse music,
23–24, 29, 292n55, 308n316
played for a cow, 29, 276
See also twelve classical Chinese
musical notes
musical composition(s), 34
Beili, 45
Cao, 29, 276
Dashao, 91
Daxia, 91
Dazhang, 27
songs, 27, 57, 89
“Cloud Gate,” 49
“Rushes” (Xingwei), 126, 308n311

“Yellow Flowers,” 49
Xianchi, 27
Xiaoshao, 27
musical instruments, 6, 27, 10, 125, 143,
271, 296n117, 306n285
Chinese zither (qin), 6, 29, 33, 42,
127, 141, 152, 296n117
drums, 18, 38, 42, 271, 296n117

N

Nanda, 289n1
See also bhikṣu(s), six evil
Nanjun, 196
Nature, 125, 143, 188, 199
law of, 128, 159, 177, 178, 179, 180,
181, 184, 186, 187, 191, 192, 193,
195, 196, 197, 198, 205, 228, 229,
232, 235, 244, 246, 272, 286
New Discourse on Body and Spirit,
170–174
See also Huan Junshan
Nie Zheng, 14
nine schools, 80, 107, 108
Ning Qi, 20
Ning Wuzi, 26
Nirgrantha-jñātiputra, 289n1
nirvana, 37, 65, 104, 111, 116, 121, 213,
279, 295n103
of Buddha/Śākyamuni, 8, 37, 249, 254
equated with Daoist transcendence,
226, 246, 278
and the spirit/Way, 61, 121, 180, 226,
278
as state of complete extinction/no
change/nonexistence, 116, 179, 223
as wuwei, 64, 290n8
Nominalists, 83
See also nine schools
non-beginning, 50–51, 169, 223
as profound, 62, 169

349

Index
non-Buddhism/non-Buddhist(s), xvi,
xvii, 51, 71, 95, 118, 153, 176, 247
six non-Buddhist masters, 289n1
Northern Wei dynasty, xvi
See also Wei dynasty
numinous beings, 73, 83, 88, 122,
148–149, 166, 170, 186, 228
Buddha/Śākyamuni as, 283–284
three, 113, 306n290
See also sentient beings; spirits
numinous powers, 57, 58, 59
and numinous mushrooms, 250, 254

O

One, the, 84, 98, 179, 222, 226, 233, 236,
238, 239, 254, 297n137, 302n222
preservation of, 18, 32
and the spirit/Way, 54, 178, 297n141
One of Transcendent Wisdom, 269
See also Buddha

P

Paekche, 285
Panwu, 66
Pengsheng, 92
Pengzu, 45, 222
Pi, 35, 294nn84, 95
Ping, Lord, 294n83
Prabhūtaratna, 72
precepts, 9, 20, 42, 46, 47, 71, 76, 81, 88,
111, 122, 188, 208, 258, 264
nonobservance/violations of, xvi, 31
ﬁve, 9, 36, 40, 46, 105, 112, 113, 215
two hundred and ﬁfty, 9
Poyelun, 321n518
Pu, 113, 121, 308n309
Puban of Hedong, 69
Purnavasu, 289n1
See also bhikṣu(s), six evil

350

Q

Qi. See Houji
Qiang, 19, 285
Qi Bo, 32
Qiji, 11
Qi Liang, wife of, 102, 109
Qin dynasty/state, 19, 30, 70, 73, 75, 77,
102, 118, 143, 158, 216, 217, 222,
303nn237, 240
First Emperor of, 106, 109, 115, 118
Qingjing faxingjing (Sutra of Pure
Dharma Acts), 321n518, 322n544
Qingliang Tower, 25
Qin Jing, 25
Qi state, 13, 19, 20, 30, 34, 69, 75, 92,
172, 272, 278, 294n94, 306n279
Marquis of, 103, 110, 305n274
Qiu, 50
Qiushui, 305n267
Qu Boyu, 132, 293n64, 308n324
Queen Mother of the West, 118
Que Gonze, 80, 106

R

Rāhula, 261, 271
Ran Boniu, 36, 41, 65, 205, 208, 314n410
illness of, 53, 82, 121, 169, 211
Ran Qiu, 62, 65, 211, 268, 299n167, in
Ratnaśikhi, 108, 119
rebirth, 88, 126
in Heaven, 105, 112, 154, 176
in the Western Paradise, 100
See also birth and death; transmigration
receptivity, 120, 181, 252
Renwuzhi, 312n389
See also Liu Shao
reward and retribution, 22, 58, 63, 71,
74, 78, 82, 92, 93, 105, 129, 131,
136–137, 142, 153, 154, 155, 157,
159, 176, 197, 198–202, 217

Index
doctrine/law of, 58, 141, 153, 176
and rebirth/transmigration, 76, 79, 81,
82, 108, 111–112, 117, 118, 176, 188,
201, 202
three periods of, xvii, 202–206
See also merit(s), and demerit(s)
Rites of Zhou (Zhouli), 141, 152
Rong Qiqi, 41, 296n114
Rong state, 285
Ruhuan sanmei jing, 313n403
Rui state, 238, 244, 245

S

Sage, 79, 155, 210, 221, 224, 226, 247,
250, 264, 286, 287, 288
See also Buddha
sage king(s), 3, 19, 75, 92, 108, 147, 183,
219, 311n368
Śakra-devendra, 220
Śākya clan, 76
Śākyamuni, 72, 101, 106, 113, 122, 153,
154, 156, 183, 194, 223, 234, 236,
239, 247, 261, 263, 283, 289n1,
298n157
passing/nirvana of, 80, 249
and the Duke of Zhou, 153, 158, 192
and Laozi, 242, 244, 251, 253, 257,
272
teaching of, 110, 119, 147, 158, 170,
177, 193, 236, 237, 241, 243
See also Buddha
Samarkand, 264
Samantabhadra, 284
Sanfen, 52
Sañjayī-vairatīputra, 289n1
Sanmiao, 215
Scripture of the Yellow Court (Huangtingjing), 253
Scripture on Laozi who Ediﬁed the Barbarians (Laozi huahujing), 284
Sengmin, 282

See also Discourse on the Western
Tribe and China
Sengyou, xv–xvi, xviii, 4
on criticisms and questions between
Zhou and Zhang, 245
See also Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism;
Collection of Records Derived from
the Tripiṭaka
sentient beings, 85, 87, 88, 96, 111, 126,
127–128, 130–131, 134, 149, 165,
166, 201, 218, 276
and Buddha/Buddhism, 8, 19, 43, 63,
72, 73, 91, 111, 120, 137, 147, 157,
188, 189, 217, 224, 249, 260, 285,
286, 287
killing/harming of, 74, 156
and spirit(s), 52, 58, 62, 69, 72, 84
sense(s), 63, 83, 112, 174, 182, 236,
297n149
organs, 23, 165
See also six feelings
Sequel Scripture of No Spirit (Wuling
xiajing), 41–42, 296n115
Seven Classics, 10, 12, 13, 21
See also Analects; Book of Changes;
Book of History; Book of Music;
Book of Odes; Book of Rites; Five
Classics
seven treasures, 102, 109, 247, 298n157
sexuality, 56, 113, 287
Shan, 230, 231
Shanci, 230, 231, 318n466
See also Zhou Yong
Shandong provice, 69
Shangchen, 82, 169, 261, 320n503
See also Mu, King, Prince
Shang dynasty, 24, 83, 117, 291n28,
309n337, 318n478
See also Yin dynasty
Shangjun/Shang Yang, 53, 216, 217

351

Index
Shangqing (Supreme Purity) school, 253
Shangshu. See Book of History
Shanhaijing, 68, 300n186, 307n304
Beishanjing, 289n3
Nanshanjing, 307n304
See also Book of Mountains and Seas
Shan state, 230
Shanxi province, 121–122
Shaozi, 230–231
Sha River, 116
Shaozheng Mao, 93
Shendu. See India
Shenjian, 216
See also Xun Yue
Shen Nong, 32, 43, 151
writing of, 52, 135, 140
See also Three Augusts
Shen Sheng, 46, 121
Shensi province. See Guanzhong
Shi Chong, 46
Shiji, 67
Shijing, 307n297, 308nn311, 314, 315;
310n353, 318n478
See also Book of Odes
Shi Le, 69
Shi Que, 97
Shi Yi, 118
Shuangjin family, 103, 305n274
Shujing, 316nn438,439; 320n509,
322n535
See also Book of History
Shun, Emperor, 3, 12, 13, 16, 18, 19, 20,
22, 22, 27, 42, 53, 67, 72, 215, 216,
225
birth of, 39, 50–51, 170
and Gu (father), 19, 51, 72, 170, 188
lifespan of, 32, 35, 67
music composed by, 27, 91
and Shangjun (son), 53
unusual eyes of, 13, 53

352

tomb in Cangwu, 35, 279
amd Yu, 298n153
See also Five Thearchs; Yao and Shun;
Yu Shun
Shuqi. See Boyi and Shuqi
Shusun Qiaoru, 21
Si, 121, 131
See also Zigong
Sima Qian, 66, 67, 91, 156
See also Shiji; Sun Qiao; Zichang
Sima Zhongda. See Xuan, Emperor
Si River, 65, 118
six arts, 21, 35
Six Classics, 52, 106, 117, 215
See also Book of Changes; Book of
History; Book of Music; Book of
Odes; Book of Rites; Five Classics;
Spring and Autumn Annals
six extreme evils/sufferings, 88, 211,
315n422
six feelings, 71, 78
See also sense(s), organs
six masters, 3, 289n1
six pāramitās, 63, 73, 250, 265
six puriﬁcation days, 9
six realms of existence, 204
six relations, 178, 253
six sense organs, 23
six supernatural powers, 99
Song dynasty/state, 14, 27, 30, 38, 83,
98, 101
Song Jun, 70, 77
Song Yu, 27
Soushenji, 307n300
spirit(s), xv, 16–18, 31, 41, 42, 50–62,
65–67, 69, 71–74, 78, 80, 83–88, 99,
101, 105, 108, 111, 114, 117, 119, 121,
122, 128, 131, 136, 139, 140, 141, 149,
157, 152, 162, 164–173, 180, 184–188,
195, 196, 198–200, 203, 205–207, 214,

Index
215, 217, 228, 231, 235, 236, 241, 242,
249, 259, 261, 297n141, 302n226,
307n291, 312n381, 313n404
evil, 42, 131, 136, 275
exquisite/extraordinary, 55, 119, 120,
122, 126, 128, 131, 134, 136, 139,
142, 149, 152, 154, 156
of Heaven, 141, 152
immortal/imperishable, 53–54, 55, 56,
73, 78, 79, 83, 84, 87, 88, 106, 112,
115, 122, 165, 166, 183
lofty, 53, 73, 153, 208, 315n414
essence/foundation/origin/source, 66,
76, 84, 87, 89, 161, 164, 180, 228
perishing, xvii, 17, 49, 79, 84, 106,
112, 126, 164
principle of, 61, 65, 72, 166
subtle, 61, 85, 102, 108, 119, 164, 165
and transmigration, xv, 120, 187, 204
vapor, 55, 172
vigorous, 52, 53, 54, 68, 73, 74, 82,
84, 88, 89, 156
wandering, 98, 131, 136
See also Way of the Spirit
spiritual:
darkness, 142, 155, 199, 221, 249
function(s), 70, 72, 76, 232, 236
intelligence, 52, 60, 62, 67, 78, 83, 95,
101, 108, 125, 126, 134, 164, 166,
249, 282
spiritual being(s), 8, 17, 18, 41, 84, 108,
140–141, 152, 282
Spring and Autumn Annals (Chunqiu),
11, 51, 69
See also Five Classics
Spring and Autumn with Commentary.
See Chunqiu Zuoshizhuan
śramaṇas, xvi, 24, 26, 34, 44, 45, 71,
154, 181, 189, 191, 195, 196, 206,
207, 213–219, 277, 287
behavior/conduct/deportment of, 9, 15,

16, 21, 23, 25, 188, 208, 209, 211,
212, 213, 214
deference toward sovereigns, 174, 180
and ﬁlial piety, 14, 96
and ﬁve kinds of perversions, 207,
209–211, 216
and shaving hair and beards, 13, 14,
16, 78
and wearing robes, 190, 194
See also Buddhist(s), clergy/monk(s);
four kinds of Buddhist disciples
Subhadra, 220
Sudāna, Prince, 19–20
Śuddhodana, King, 7
Sui, Marquis of, 15, 19, 291n22
Suiren, 166
Sui state, 62
Sun Changsha, 162
Sun Chuo [Xinggong], 80, 91, 114, 116–
117
See also Discourse on the Way and the
Wise; Discourse to Explain the
[Buddhist] Way
Sun En, 281–282
Sun, Lord, 137
See also Xunzi
Sun Qiao, 130, 134, 141, 147, 152, 156
See also Sima Qian; Zichang
Sun Sheng, 69, 162, 163
Supreme Thearch, 172
Su Qin, 24
sutra(s), 9, 25, 37, 71, 79, 179, 182, 254,
295n105, 298n157, 300n195,
302n214, 317n452
Sutra of Forty-two Chapters (Sichierzhang), 25
sword(s), 9, 197
Moye, 109, 306n281
parable of carving a mark on a boat
after dropping a sword in the water,
225, 270, 277, 317n458, 319n484

353

Index

T

Taibo, 14, 97, 275, 286
Taigong Wang Lü Shang, 12, 22, 33,
143, 290n14, 292n45
Taiping yulan, 310n342
Taishō canon/Taishō shinshū daizōkyō,
xv, xviii, 295n111, 300n195, 302n214
Taixue National University, 29
Taizi ruiying benqi jing, xviii, 297n138,
312n379, 317nn451, 454; 318n474,
322n545
Taizi Xudanajing (Jinapatra-arthasiddhisūtra), 291n39
Tang, Emperor, 21, 51, 142, 155, 126,
308n313
See also Yao, Emperor
Tang, King (Yin dynasty), 20, 34, 44, 46,
56, 93, 95, 190
See also Three Augusts
Tao Qian, 45–46
Tao Zhugong, 213
Tathāgata, 3, 66, 68, 76, 88, 182, 192, 253,
284, 285
See also Buddha
Ten Celestial Stems, 13, 290n15
Teng, Lord, 158
Teng state, 15
Teng Xiu 144, 310n342
ten wholesome acts, 40, 104, 295n112
Three Ancient Books, 66
Three Augusts, 56, 235
See also Tang, King; Wu, King; Yu,
King
three dynasties, 68, 92, 93, 190
See also Xin; Yin; Zhou
three kinds of acts (of body, speech, and
mind), 189, 203
three numinous beings, 113, 306n290
three periods of existence, xv, xvii, 40,
149, 168, 222, 223

354

three powers, 125, 127, 129, 130, 138,
139, 142, 145–148, 155, 157, 246,
251, 309n337
three realms of existence, 43, 59, 82, 84,
99, 179, 221, 249
three revered ones, 218, 316n448
See also Buddha, Dharma, Sangha;
Three Treasures
three sovereigns, 126, 128
See also Dawang, Wang Ji; Wen Wang
three teachings, 65–66, 231, 259
See also Buddhism; Confucianism;
Daoism
three transcendental knowledges, 99,
161, 247, 261
Three Treasures, xv, 4, 316n448
See also Buddha, Dharma, and
Sangha; three revered ones
Tian Fen, 74–75
Tian Kaizhi, 320n494
Tianzhu, 68, 118
See also India
Tiying, 89, 302n232
transmigration, 53, 57, 85, 86, 149, 162,
167, 168, 169, 178, 179, 180, 186,
199, 201, 247
See also birth and death; rebirth
Tong prefecture, 170
triple truths, 305nn271, 272
truth of existence (youdi), 102–103
truth of nonexistence (wudi), 103
Turfan, 116
twelve kinds of scriptures, 8, 100
twelve notes of classical Chinese music,
289n7, 290n10, 319n479
beilü, 45, 127, 130, 308n316
gong, 10, 24, 127, 130, 220, 246,
290n10, 308n316
huangzhong, 127, 248, 289n7,
308n316, 318n479
jue, 24, 27, 290n10, 308n316

Index

U

qingjue, 29, 276
shang, 10, 24, 27, 220, 246, 290n10,
308n316
six yang lü notes, 127, 289n7,
308nn316, 317
six yin lü notes, 127, 289n7,
308nn316, 317
yu, 24, 290n10, 308n316
zhonglü, 289n7
zhi, 24, 290n10, 308n316
See also music/musical compositions

Upananda, 289n1
See also bhikṣu(s), six evil

V

Vajracchedikāprajñāpāramitā-sūtra. See
Diamond Sutra
vapor(s), 31, 44, 55, 96, 113, 134, 147,
148, 166, 171, 172, 184–185, 187,
191, 197, 204, 228, 307n292
admonishing/controlling, 102, 109,
315n415
coarse, 184, 186
common, 96, 149
concentrating, 233, 238, 271
exquisite, 184, 186
of harmony, 135, 140, 204
pestilential/vicious, 39, 171
primordial, 227, 317n464
pure, 44, 112, 116, 125
yin and yang, xvii, 149, 173, 184, 185,
186, 287
Vietnam. See Jiaozhi
Vimalakīrti, 72, 77, 272, 282, 298n158
Vimalakīrtinirdeśa-sūtra, 298n158,
299n159, 300nn194, 195
See also Foshuo Weimojiejing
Vulture Peak (Gṛdhrakuṭa), 64, 284

W

waiting by a stump, metaphor of, 225,
250, 277, 319n484
Wang Bi, 240
Wang Ji, 126
Wang Ling, 75
Wang Mang, 106
Wang Qiao, 30
Wang Xiang, 120, 307n300
Wangziqiao, 45, 52, 208
Wang Zun, 25
Warring States period, 79, 306n279
Way, the, xv, 3, 4, 8, 9–10, 12, 14, 15,
17, 18, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26–27, 28, 29,
32, 37, 42, 52, 56, 61, 65, 66, 67, 68,
71–72, 78, 84, 85, 87, 89, 91, 98, 104,
105, 109, 114, 118, 126, 128, 131,
135, 143, 151, 154, 156, 159, 167,
172, 174, 175, 178, 179, 185, 186,
198, 204, 206, 208, 209, 211, 213,
214, 215, 219, 224, 225, 226, 228,
229, 235, 237, 240, 242, 243, 246,
248, 249, 252, 253, 254, 258, 259,
263, 267, 268, 275, 276, 277, 278,
283, 297n148, 317n455, 320n505
fundamental/profound/true, 82, 241,
247
highest, 18, 25, 29, 91
subtle, 49, 269, 270, 280
ultimate, 67, 180, 181, 182, 183, 210,
229, 2130, 268, 281
See also Great Way; Way, Buddhist
Way, Buddhist/of the Buddha, Tathāgata,
6, 9–10, 12, 17, 32, 34, 46, 47, 51, 63,
64, 65, 66, 68, 72, 73, 76, 80, 81, 84,
89, 96, 116, 121, 122, 129, 178, 183,
188, 192, 193, 197–198, 202, 211,
215, 218, 220, 222, 223, 241, 250,
267, 270, 277, 282, 284, 287

355

Index
Way of Heaven, 8, 10, 17, 26, 51, 74, 75,
81, 87, 125, 131, 230, 233, 275–276,
282
See also Daoism
Way of the Celestial Master, xvii
Way of the Divine Transcendents/Immortals, 31, 32, 34, 265, 283
See also Daoism
Way of the Five Pecks of Grain, xvii, 281
See also Daoism
Way of the Spirit, 77, 78,83, 85, 169,
181, 186, 223, 230, 231
See also Daoism
Wei, Duke, 320n494
Wei dynasty/period/state, xv, 15, 19, 24,
27, 74, 75, 83, 97, 132, 144, 215, 222,
246, 309n324, 316n442
See also Northern Wei dynasty
Wei Ke, 92, 303n237
Wei, King, 306n279
Wei Linggong, 307n303
Weimojie suoshuojing, 298n158, 321n516
Weimojing xuanshu, 321n518
Wei River, 208, 251
Weisheng Gao, 33, 294n86
Wen, Emperor:
of the Han dynasty, 89
of the Song dynasty, 101
of the Wei dynasty, 144
Wen, King, 13, 24, 35, 44, 54–55, 146,
238, 244, 290n14, 293n69, 318n473
Boyi and Shuqi compared with, 24
musical compositions of, 34
Wen, Marquis, 302n231
Wenming. See Yu, King
Wen Wang, 126
Wenxuan, 293n67
Wenzi, 186
Western Jin dynasty, xvi, 80
Western Paradise, 100

356

wheel-turning king, 67, 182–183, 214,
251
Wonderful Scripture of the Truth of the
Numinous Jewel (Lingbao miaozhenjing), 253
World-honored One, 191
See also Buddha
Wu Cheng, 12
See also Zhou, Duke of
Wu Ding, Emperor, 57
Wu, Emperor, xvi, 18, 57, 68, 225
Wu, King, 15, 24, 32, 34, 35, 44, 56, 95,
190, 211, 293n69, 307n301
See also Three Augusts
Wuliang xiajing, 296n115
Wu state, 34, 35, 54, 55, 130, 141, 152,
286, 294n95
wuwei (“non-action”):
and Buddhism/Buddhist teachings, 8,
9, 15, 16, 20–21, 27, 28–29, 31, 32,
40, 254, 275, 290n8
and Laozi/Five Thousand Words, 16,
215, 228, 253
and diminishing/reducing day by day,
32, 57, 105, 112, 313n399
and nirvana, 37, 64, 290n8
Wu-Yue region, 14
Wuzhai, 67
Wuzhong, 114
Wuzhuang, 314n412
Wuzi Xu, 35, 294n95

X

Xia dynasty/state, 15, 34, 68, 92, 190,
309n337
Xiang, 72
See also Guan Xian
Xiang Ji, 70, 77, 122
cruelty/tyranny of, 70, 73–74,
300n190

Index
Xiang, King, 27
Xiang, Lord, 193
Xiangmai, 295n105
Xiang, Prince, 92
Xiang Tuo, 47
Xiang Wu, 116
Xiang Xiu, 161
Xiaojing, 255, 290n16, 291nn32, 40;
294n93, 296n113, 304nn251, 252,
253, 255; 311n372
See also Canon of Filial Piety
Xiaoming, Emperor, 25
Xi Ba, 75
Xie, 83, 302n220
Xie Zhengzhi, 245, 251, 260, 265
Xi Fuji, 22
Xi, Lord, 193
Xi Shi, 321n517
Xuan, Emperor, 74, 75, 132
and Bing Ji, 74, 301n202
Xuan, Lord, 158
Xuan, King, 75
Xuan Meng, 22, 93
See also Zhao Dun
Xuanyuan, 51, 66, 121
See also Yellow Emperor
Xue state, 15
Xunyue, 216
See also Shenjian
Xunzi, 136, 141, 153
See also Sun, Lord
Xu state, 193
Xu Xing, 18, 19
Xu You, 15, 16, 22, 24, 67, 208
Xuzhou, 45

Y

Yandi, 296n124
Yangdu, 1
Yang, Emperor, 225

Yang Huo, 30
Yang, Marquis, 70, 77
Yang Wangsun, 65
Yang Zhu, 5, 33, 289n5
Yangzi River, 286
Yan Hui/Yan Yuan. 41, 59, 65, 130, 134,
139, 146, 147, 148, 205, 208, 228,
284
and Dongye Bi, 34, 278
untimely death, 36, 44, 47, 82, 121,
169, 211, 279, 315n422
Yan Junping, 52, 65, 213
Yan of Yongjia/Yan Yanzhi, 127–129,
138
Yan state, 228, 318n478
Yan Yannian, 74, 75, 105, 111
Yan Ying, 172, 305n274
Yan Yuan. See Yanzi
Yanzi, 44, 59, 60, 103
See also Yan Hui/Yan Yuan
Yanzi of Qi state. See Yan Ying
Yaochi, 118
Yao, Emperor, 3, 12, 13, 16, 18, 19, 20,
42, 44, 49, 51, 66, 67, 72, 84, 95, 97,
143, 154, 155, 181, 182, 183, 198,
208, 211, 216, 225, 291n24
and the bush of luck-tea, 57
life span of, 32, 35, 249
son Danzhu, 21, 170, 188
virtuous nature of, 55, 56, 84, 91
See also Five Thearchs; Tang,
Emperor
Yao Lüe, 69
Yao region, 62
Yecheng Temple, 273
Yellow Books (Huangshu), 280, 322n541
Yellow Emperor, 16, 43, 51, 57, 58, 66,
67, 186, 208, 291n24, 299n174,
314n412, 318n470
and acupuncture, 32
battle against Yandi, 296n124

357

Index
Yellow Emperor (continued):
and eating meat, 23
music composed by:
“Cloud Gate,” 49
Xianchi, 27
Sanfen, 52
teaching of, 231, 240
See also Five Thearchs; Three
Augusts; Xuanyuan
Yellow Face. See Buddha
Yellow River, 19, 21, 30, 57
Yi, 79
Yi Dun, 33
Yijing. See Book of Changes
yin and yang, 8, 13, 44, 52, 125, 139,
147, 149, 166, 184, 194, 251, 289n7,
290n12
musical notes, 127, 308n317
vapor(s), 149, 173, 184, 185, 186
See also Daoism
Yin dynasty, 15, 20, 34, 35, 44, 45, 47,
57, 68, 77, 92, 97, 100, 126, 190, 216,
225, 283, 291n28, 309n337, 320n507,
321n509
See also Shang dynasty
Ying (city), 27, 55, 105, 112, 312n373
Ying (king of Chu), 114
Ying Bu, 154, 310n354
Ying family, 217
Ying Jifu/Ying Zheng, 257
Ying River, 216
Yin, Prince, 34, 278
Yin Shou, 12
Yin Wenzi, 37, 39
Yin Xi, 65, 68
Yi River, 118
Yisang, 93
Yixi era, 207
Yi Yin, 20, 130, 134, 139, 143, 146, 147,
148
Yong gate, 25

358

Yongjia, 129, 138
Youling, 66
You Yu, 19, 116, 153
Yu (Jiang of Chu state), 123
See also Xiang Ji
Yuan, 207
Yuan, Lord, 27
Yuan Xian, 16
Yuanxing era, 174, 189, 313n392
Yu Bing, General, 174
Yu Daosui, 80, 106, 117
Yu Dingguo, 301n202, 306n277
Yue Guang, 80
Yue state/region, 14, 160, 228, 230, 233,
252, 257, 286
Yuezheng Zi Chun, 95
Yu Falan, 80, 106, 114, 117
Yu family, 74, 131, 136, 306n277
Yu Gong, 105, 111, 306n277
See also Yu, Lord
Yugong, 117
Yu, King, 13, 19, 39, 46, 93, 97, 190
See also Three Augusts
Yuling, 213
Yu, Lord, 74, 301n202
See also Yu Gong
Yu Qie, 28
Yu Qing, 22
Yu Rang, 14
Yu state, 73, 238, 244, 245, 295n106
Yu (Shun), Emperor, 51, 57, 58, 62, 121,
298n153
Daxia composed by, 91
mausoleum at Guiji, 35, 279
See also Shun, Emperor
Yu Wenbing, 117
Yuzhang prefecture, 6

Z

Zai Wo, 54, 65
Zai Yu, 121, 211

Index
Zang Wen Zhong, 33, 294n86
Zeng Shen, 21, 36, 279
Zengyi Ahanjing, 301n207
See also Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism
Zengzi, 13
Ze Rong, 6, 45–46, 114
Zhang Heng, 213
Zhang Liang Zifang, 54
Zhang Ling, 227
Zhang Rong, 230–231, 234, 245
See also Family Law
Zhang Wen Zhong, 294n86
Zhang Yi, 24
Zhao Dun, 22, 93
See also Meng; Xuan Meng
Zhao dynasty/family/state, 15, 38, 70,
73, 76, 77
Zhao, King, 102, 109
Zhao Kuo, 76, 78
See also Mafu, Lord
Zhao Meng, 38
Zhaoming, Prince, 293n67
Zheng Daozi, 164
See also Discourse on the Immortality
of the Spirit
Zheng Kangcheng, 65
Zhengshi era, 248
Zheng state, 27, 97, 130, 141, 152, 193,
280
Zhengyang, 135
See also Jiao Shen
Zhi, 34, 46, 148, 271
Zhicheng Temple, 101
Zhi Daolin, 80, 106, 116, 117
Zhi Dun, xvi, 104
Zhifu, 67
Zhi Jian, 316n445
Zhong Changtong, 135
Zhong’er, 22

Zhong Gong, 211
Zhonghua, 39, 53, 188
See also Emperor Shun
Zhongjing mulu, xviii
Zhonglun, 80
Zhongsan, 135, 140
See also Ji Gang
Zhong You, 87, 121, 131, 205, 211, 268
See also Zilu
Zhou, Duke of, 12, 13, 16, 18, 19, 21, 32,
35, 43, 57, 58, 192, 223
and Confucius, 3, 77, 80, 88, 91, 94,
101, 106, 108, 112, 113, 114, 117,
118, 121, 142, 147, 155, 158, 164,
246, 285, 301n210
teachings/writings of, 49, 51, 93, 94,
95, 112, 114, 120, 153, 155,
169–170, 193, 215
and brothers Guanshu Xian and
Caishu Du, 19, 21, 93, 316n439
and Emperor/King Wen, 44, 54, 55
and Emperor/King Wu, 18, 32,
307n301
equated with Buddha/Śākyamuni/
Tathāgata, 95, 153, 284, 285
reburial of, 35, 279
and Taigong Wang Lü Shang, 12,
33–34
Zhou dynasty/state, 13, 15, 20, 23, 30,
34, 57, 68, 92, 97, 100, 113, 117, 118,
136, 151, 155, 158, 190, 211, 215,
216, 225, 280, 284, 286, 303n234,
309n337, 319n494
Zhou, King, 34, 35, 56, 57
Beili composed by, 45
cruelty/tyranny of 39, 47, 320n507,
321n509
Zhouli. See Rites of Zhou
Zhou Yafu, 154, 310n354
Zhouyi. See Book of Changes

359

Index
Zhou Yong, 230, 239, 268, 318n466
criticism/responses to Zhang Rong’s
Family Law, 230, 239–245
See also Shanci
Zhouxu, 97
Zhou Zhongzhi, 46
Zhuang, King/Lord, 22, 82, 97, 148, 261
Zhuangzhou. See Zhuangzi
Zhuangzi, 44, 50, 52, 62, 65, 66, 80, 101,
108, 118, 137, 141, 148, 152, 157,
178, 186, 215, 223, 227, 246, 284
Zhuangzi, xvi, 110, 118, 181, 182, 185,
217, 222, 251, 294n89, 303n233,
310n355
chapter on the “Great and Most Honored
Master,” 186
chapter on “Nourishing the Lord of
Life,” 187
and geyi, xvii, 65
Zhuan Sun, 225, 317n457
See also Zichang
Zhuanxu (Emperor Gaoyang), 66, 211
See also Five Thearchs
Zhu Falan, 69
Zhu Fasheng, 106
Zhu Faxing, 80, 106
Zhu Fayan, xvii
Zhu Guangzhi, 265–273
Zhu River, 65, 118
Zhu Shixing (or Zixing, third century
Chinese Buddhist leader), xvi
Zhu Zhaozhi, 257–258
Zichang, 130, 134, 139, 141, 146, 147,
148, 152, 156

360

and Confucius, 12, 225
and the Shiji, 67
See also Sima Qian; Sun Chao; Zhuan
Sun
Zigong, 12, 54, 65, 87, 121, 131, 211
beard lost by, 121
Buddhist teaching received internally
by, 65
and Prince Yin and Prince Ding, 34,
278
See also Si; Zisi
Zilu, 16, 87, 113, 114, 211, 268, 308n309
and Confucius, 18, 32, 87
death of, 36, 121
See also Zhong You
Zishang, 211
See also Zixia
Zisi, 65, 211
See also Zigong
Zixia, 23, 65, 118, 211, 315n423
See also Bu Shang; Zishang
Zixing. See Zhu Shixing
Ziye. See Kuang
Ziyou, 12
Zong Bing, 49, 297n149, 306n286,
315n415
response to He Chengtian/He of
Hengyang, 100–106, 115–122
See also Discourse to Clarify
Buddhism
Zou Yan, 72, 102, 109
Zuo Qiuming, 42, 121, 308n308,
309n331
See also Chunqiu Zuoshizhuan

BDK English Tripiṭaka
(First Series)

Title

Abbreviations
Ch.: Chinese
Skt.: Sanskrit
Jp.: Japanese
Eng.: Published title

Ch. Chang ahan jing (長阿含經)
Skt. Dīrghāgama

Taishō No.

1

Ch. Zhong ahan jing (中阿含經)
Skt. Madhyamāgama
Eng. The Madhyama Āgama (Middle-length Discourses)
(Volume I, 2013)

Ch. Dasheng bensheng xindi guan jing (大乘本生心地觀經)

26

159

Ch. Fo suoxing zan (佛所行讃)
Skt. Buddhacarita
Eng. Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts (2009)

192

Ch. Faju piyu jing (法句譬喩經)
Eng. The Scriptural Text: Verses of the Doctrine, with Parables (1999)

211

Ch. Zabao zang jing (雜寶藏經)
Eng. The Storehouse of Sundry Valuables (1994)

203

Ch. Xiaopin banruo boluomi jing (小品般若波羅蜜經)
Skt. Aṣṭasāhasrikā-prajñāpāramitā-sūtra

227

Ch. Daluo jingang bukong zhenshi sanmoye jing
(大樂金剛不空眞實三麼耶經)
Skt. Adhyardhaśatikā-prajñāpāramitā-sūtra

243

Ch. Jingang banruo boluomi jing (金剛般若波羅蜜經)
Skt. Vajracchedikā-prajñāpāramitā-sūtra

361

235

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Renwang banruo boluomi jing (仁王般若波羅蜜經)
Skt. *Kāruṇikārājā-prajñāpāramitā-sūtra

Taishō No.
245

Ch. Banruo boluomiduo xin jing (般若波羅蜜多心經)
Skt. Prajñāpāramitāhṛdaya-sūtra

251

Ch. Wuliangyi jing (無量義經)
Eng. The Inﬁnite Meanings Sutra (in Tiantai Lotus Texts, 2013)

276

Ch. Dafangguang fo huayan jing (大方廣佛華嚴經)
Skt. Avataṃsaka-sūtra

279

Ch. Wuliangshou jing (無量壽經)
Skt. Sukhāvatīvyūha
Eng. The Larger Sutra on Amitāyus (in The Three Pure Land Sutras,
Revised Second Edition, 2003)

360

Ch. Miaofa lianhua jing (妙法蓮華經)
Skt. Saddharmapuṇḍarīka-sūtra
Eng. The Lotus Sutra (Revised Second Edition, 2007)

262

Ch. Guan Puxian pusa xingfa jing (觀普賢菩薩行法經)
Eng. The Sutra Expounded by the Buddha on Practice of the Way
through Contemplation of the Bodhisattva All-embracing
Goodness (in Tiantai Lotus Texts, 2013)

277

Ch. Shengman shizihou yisheng defang bianfang guang jing
(勝鬘師子吼一乘大方便方廣經)
Skt. Śrīmālādevīsiṃhanāda-sūtra
Eng. The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of the Lion’s Roar (2004)

353

Ch. Guan wuliangshou fo jing (觀無量壽佛經)
Skt. *Amitāyurdhyāna-sūtra
Eng. The Sutra on Contemplation of Amitāyus
(in The Three Pure Land Sutras, Revised Second Edition, 2003)

365

Ch. Da banniepan jing (大般涅槃經)
Skt. Mahāparinirvāṇa-sūtra
Eng. The Nirvana Sutra (Volume I, 2013)

374

Ch. Amituo jing (阿彌陀經)
Skt. Sukhāvatīvyūha
Eng. The Smaller Sutra on Amitāyus (in The Three Pure Land Sutras,
Revised Second Edition, 2003)

362

366

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Taishō No.

Ch. Fochuibo niepan lüeshuo jiaojie jing (佛垂般涅槃略説教誡經)
Eng. The Bequeathed Teaching Sutra (in Apocryphal Scriptures, 2005)

389

Ch. Banzhou sanmei jing (般舟三昧經)
Skt. Pratyutpanna-buddhasammukhāvasthita-samādhi-sūtra
Eng. The Pratyutpanna Samādhi Sutra (1998)

418

Ch. Dizang pusa benyuan jing (地藏菩薩本願經)
Skt. *Kṣitigarbhapraṇidhāna-sūtra

412

Ch. Yaoshi liuli guang rulai benyuan gongde jing
(藥師琉璃光如來本願功徳經)
Skt. Bhaiṣajyaguru-vaiḍūrya-prabhāsa-pūrvapraṇidhāna-viśeṣavistara

450

Ch. Wenshushili wen jing (文殊師利問經)
Skt. *Mañjuśrīparipṛcchā

468

Ch. Mile xiasheng chengfo jing (彌勒下生成佛經)
Skt. *Maitreyavyākaraṇa

454

Ch. Weimojie suoshuo jing (維摩詰所説經)
Skt. Vimalakīrtinirdeśa-sūtra
Eng. The Vimalakīrti Sutra (2004)

475

Ch. Zuochan sanmei jing (坐禪三昧經)
Eng. The Sutra on the Concentration of Sitting Meditation (2009)

614

Ch. Yuedeng sanmei jing (月燈三昧經)
Skt. Samādhirāja-candrapradīpa-sūtra

639

Ch. Yueshangnü jing (月上女經)
Skt. Candrottarādārikā-paripṛcchā

Ch. Damoduoluo chan jing (達磨多羅禪經)

480

618

Ch. Shoulengyan sanmei jing (首楞嚴三昧經)
Skt. Śūraṅgamasamādhi-sūtra
Eng. The Śūraṅgama Samādhi Sutra (1998)

642

Ch. Dasheng rulengqie jing (入楞伽經)
Skt. Laṅkāvatāra-sūtra

672

Ch. Jinguang ming zuishengwang jing (金光明最勝王經)
Skt. Suvarṇaprabhāsa-sūtra

665

363

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Taishō No.

Ch. Jie shenmi jing (解深密經)
Skt. Saṃdhinirmocana-sūtra
Eng. The Scripture on the Explication of Underlying Meaning (2000)

676

Ch. Sishierzhang jing (四十二章經)
Eng. The Sutra of Forty-two Sections (in Apocryphal Scriptures, 2005)

784

Ch. Yulanpen jing (盂蘭盆經)
Skt. *Ullambana-sūtra
Eng. The Ullambana Sutra (in Apocryphal Scriptures, 2005)

685

Ch. Dafangguang yuanjue xiuduoluo liaoyi jing
(大方廣圓覺修多羅了義經)
842
Eng. The Sutra of Perfect Enlightenment (in Apocryphal Scriptures, 2005)

Ch. Da Biluzhena chengfo shenbian jiachi jing
848
(大毘盧遮那成佛神變加持經)
Skt. Mahāvairocanābhisambodhi-vikurvitādhiṣṭhāna-vaipulyasūtrendrarājanāma-dharmaparyāya
Eng. The Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi Sutra (2005)

Ch. Jinggangding yiqie rulai zhenshi she dasheng xianzheng dajiao
wang jing (金剛頂一切如來眞實攝大乘現證大教王經)
865
Skt. Sarvatathāgata-tattvasaṃgraha-mahāyānā-bhisamaya-mahākalparāja
Eng. The Adamantine Pinnacle Sutra (in Two Esoteric Sutras, 2001)

Ch. Suxidi jieluo jing (蘇悉地羯囉經)
Skt. Susiddhikara-mahātantra-sādhanopāyika-paṭala
Eng. The Susiddhikara Sutra (in Two Esoteric Sutras, 2001)

893

Ch. Modengqie jing (摩登伽經)
Skt. *Mātaṅgī-sūtra

1300

Ch. Sifen lü (四分律)
Skt. *Dharmaguptaka-vinaya

1428

Ch. Fanwang jing (梵網經)
Skt. *Brahmajāla-sūtra

1484

Ch. Mohe sengqi lü (摩訶僧祇律)
Skt. *Mahāsāṃghika-vinaya

Ch. Shanjianlü piposha (善見律毘婆沙)
Pāli Samantapāsādikā

364

1425

1462

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Youposaijie jing (優婆塞戒經)
Skt. Upāsakaśīla-sūtra
Eng. The Sutra on Upāsaka Precepts (1994)

Taishō No.

1488

1519
Ch. Miaofa lianhua jing youbotishe (妙法蓮華經憂波提舍)
Skt. Saddharmapuṇḍarīka-upadeśa
Eng. The Commentary on the Lotus Sutra (in Tiantai Lotus Texts, 2013)
Ch. Shizha biposha lun (十住毘婆沙論)
Skt. *Daśabhūmika-vibhāṣā

1521

Ch. Apidamojushe lun (阿毘達磨倶舍論)
Skt. Abhidharmakośa-bhāṣya

1558

Ch. Yüqie shidilun (瑜伽師地論)
Skt. Yogācārabhūmi-śāstra

1579

Ch. Fodijing lun (佛地經論)
Skt. *Buddhabhūmisūtra-śāstra
Eng. The Interpretation of the Buddha Land (2002)

1530

Ch. Zhonglun (中論)
Skt. Madhyamaka-śāstra

1564

Ch. Cheng weishi lun (成唯識論)
Eng. Demonstration of Consciousness Only
(in Three Texts on Consciousness Only, 1999)

1585

Ch. Weishi sanshi lun song (唯識三十論頌)
Skt. Triṃśikā
Eng. The Thirty Verses on Consciousness Only
(in Three Texts on Consciousness Only, 1999)

1586

Ch. Weishi ershi lun (唯識二十論)
Skt. Viṃśatikā
Eng. The Treatise in Twenty Verses on Consciousness Only
(in Three Texts on Consciousness Only, 1999)

1590

Ch. Bian zhongbian lun (辯中邊論)
Skt. Madhyāntavibhāga

1600

Ch. She dasheng lun (攝大乘論)
1593
Skt. Mahāyānasaṃgraha
Eng. The Summary of the Great Vehicle (Revised Second Edition, 2003)

365

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Dasheng zhuangyanjing lun (大乘莊嚴經論)
Skt. Mahāyānasūtrālaṃkāra

Taishō No.
1604

Ch. Dasheng chengye lun (大乘成業論)
Skt. Karmasiddhiprakaraṇa

1609

Ch. Yinming ruzheng li lun (因明入正理論)
Skt. Nyāyapraveśa

1630

Ch. Jingangzhen lun (金剛針論)
Skt. Vajrasūcī

1642

Ch. Putixing jing (菩提行經)
Skt. Bodhicaryāvatāra

1662

Ch. Dasheng qixin lun (大乘起信論)
Skt. *Mahāyānaśraddhotpāda-śāstra
Eng. The Awakening of Faith (2005)

1666

Ch. Jiujing yisheng baoxing lun (究竟一乘寳性論)
Skt. Ratnagotravibhāga-mahāyānottaratantra-śāstra

1611

Ch. Dasheng ji pusa xue lun (大乘集菩薩學論)
Skt. Śikṣāsamuccaya

1636

Ch. Zhang suozhi lun (彰所知論)
Eng. The Treatise on the Elucidation of the Knowable (2004)

1645

Ch. Jingangding yuqie zhongfa anouduoluo sanmiao sanputi xin lun
(金剛頂瑜伽中發阿耨多羅三藐三菩提心論)

1665

Ch. Shimoheyan lun (釋摩訶衍論)

1668

Ch. Banruo boluomiduo xin jing yuzan (般若波羅蜜多心經幽賛)
Eng. A Comprehensive Commentary on the Heart Sutra
(Prajñāpāramitā-hṛdaya-sūtra) (2001)

1710

Ch. Naxian biqiu jing (那先比丘經)
Pāli Milindapañhā

1670

Ch. Miaofalianhua jing xuanyi (妙法蓮華經玄義)

1716

Ch. Sanlun xuanyi (三論玄義)

1852

Ch. Guan wuliangshou fo jing shu (觀無量壽佛經疏)
Ch. Dasheng xuan lun (大乘玄論)

366

1753

1853

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Zhao lun (肇論)

Taishō No.

Ch. Huayan yisheng jiaoyi fenqi zhang (華嚴一乘教義分齊章)

Ch. Yuanren lun (原人論)

Ch. Mohe zhiguan (摩訶止觀)

1858
1866
1886
1911

Ch. Xiuxi zhiguan zuochan fayao (修習止觀坐禪法要)

1915

Ch. Guoqing bai lu (國清百録)

1934

Ch. Foguo Yuanwu chanshi biyan lu (佛果圜悟禪師碧巖録)
Eng. The Blue Cliff Record (1998)

2003

Ch. Liuzu dashi fabao tan jing (六祖大師法寶壇經)
Eng. The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch (2000)

2008

Ch. Tiantai sijiao yi (天台四教儀)
Eng. A Guide to the Tiantai Fourfold Teachings
(in Tiantai Lotus Texts, 2013)

Ch. Zhenzhou Linji Huizhao chanshi wulu (鎭州臨濟慧照禪師語録)
Eng. The Recorded Sayings of Linji (in Three Chan Classics, 1999)

1931

1985

Ch. Wumen guan (無門關)
Eng. Wumen’s Gate (in Three Chan Classics, 1999)

2005

Ch. Xinxin ming (信心銘)
Eng. The Faith-Mind Maxim (in Three Chan Classics, 1999)

2010

Ch. Huangboshan Duanji chanshi chuanxin fayao
(黄檗山斷際禪師傳心法要)
Eng. Essentials of the Transmission of Mind (in Zen Texts, 2005)

2012A

Ch. Yongjia Zhengdao ge (永嘉證道歌)

2014

Ch. Yibuzonglun lun (異部宗輪論)
Skt. Samayabhedoparacanacakra
Eng. The Cycle of the Formation of the Schismatic Doctrines (2004)

2031

Ch. Chixiu Baizhang qinggui (勅修百丈清規)
Eng. The Baizhang Zen Monastic Regulations (2007)

Ch. Ayuwang jing (阿育王經)
Skt. Aśokāvadāna
Eng. The Biographical Scripture of King Aśoka (1993)

2025

2043

367

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Maming pusa zhuan (馬鳴菩薩傳)
Eng. The Life of Aśvaghoṣa Bodhisattva
(in Lives of Great Monks and Nuns, 2002)

Taishō No.

Ch. Longshu pusa zhuan (龍樹菩薩傳)
Eng. The Life of Nāgārjuna Bodhisattva
(in Lives of Great Monks and Nuns, 2002)

2046
2047

Ch. Posoupandou fashi zhuan (婆藪槃豆法師傳)
Eng. Biography of Dharma Master Vasubandhu
(in Lives of Great Monks and Nuns, 2002)

2049

Ch. Gaoseng zhuan (高僧傳)

2059

Ch. Gaoseng Faxian zhuan (高僧法顯傳)
Eng. The Journey of the Eminent Monk Faxian
(in Lives of Great Monks and Nuns, 2002)

2085

Ch. Datang Daciensi Zanzang fashi zhuan (大唐大慈恩寺三藏法師傳) 2053
Eng. A Biography of the Tripiṭaka Master of the Great Ci’en
Monastery of the Great Tang Dynasty (1995)
Ch. Biqiuni zhuan (比丘尼傳)
Eng. Biographies of Buddhist Nuns
(in Lives of Great Monks and Nuns, 2002)

Ch. Datang xiyu ji (大唐西域記)
Eng. The Great Tang Dynasty Record of the Western Regions (1996)
Ch. Youfangjichao: Tangdaheshangdongzheng zhuan
(遊方記抄: 唐大和上東征傳)

Ch. Hongming ji (弘明集)
Eng. The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation
of Buddhism, Volume I (2015)

2063

2087
2089-(7)
2102

Ch. Fayuan zhulin (法苑珠林)

2122

Ch. Fanyu zaming (梵語雑名)

2135

Ch. Nanhai jigui neifa zhuan (南海寄歸内法傳)
Eng. Buddhist Monastic Traditions of Southern Asia (2000)
Jp. Shōmangyō gisho (勝鬘經義疏)
Eng. Prince Shōtoku’s Commentary on the Śrīmālā Sutra (2011)

368

2125
2185

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Jp. Yuimakyō gisho (維摩經義疏)
Eng. The Expository Commentary on the Vimalakīrti Sutra (2012)

Taishō No.
2186

Jp.

Hokke gisho (法華義疏)

2187

Jp.

Daijō hossō kenjin shō (大乘法相研神章)

2309

Jp. Risshū kōyō (律宗綱要)
Eng. The Essentials of the Vinaya Tradition (1995)

2348

Jp.

Jp.

Hannya shingyō hiken (般若心經秘鍵)

Kanjin kakumu shō (觀心覺夢鈔)

Jp. Tendai hokke shūgi shū (天台法華宗義集)
Eng. The Collected Teachings of the Tendai Lotus School (1995)

Jp.

Jp.

Kenkairon (顯戒論)

Sange gakushō shiki (山家學生式)

Jp. Hizōhōyaku (秘藏寶鑰)
Eng. The Precious Key to the Secret Treasury (in Shingon Texts, 2004)

Jp. Benkenmitsu nikyō ron (辨顯密二教論)
Eng. On the Differences between the Exoteric and Esoteric
Teachings (in Shingon Texts, 2004)

2203

2312

2366
2376
2377

2426

2427

Jp. Sokushin jōbutsu gi (即身成佛義)
Eng. The Meaning of Becoming a Buddha in This Very Body
(in Shingon Texts, 2004)

2428

Jp. Unjigi (吽字義)
Eng. The Meanings of the Word Hūṃ (in Shingon Texts, 2004)

2430

Jp. Mitsugonin hotsuro sange mon (密嚴院發露懺悔文)
Eng. The Mitsugonin Confession (in Shingon Texts, 2004)

2527

Jp. Shōji jissōgi (聲字實相義)
2429
Eng. The Meanings of Sound, Sign, and Reality (in Shingon Texts, 2004)

Jp. Gorin kuji myōhimitsu shaku (五輪九字明秘密釋)
Eng. The Illuminating Secret Commentary on the Five Cakras
and the Nine Syllables (in Shingon Texts, 2004)
Jp. Kōzen gokoku ron (興禪護國論)
Eng. A Treatise on Letting Zen Flourish to Protect the State
(in Zen Texts, 2005)

2514

2543

369

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Jp. Fukan zazengi (普勧坐禪儀)
Eng. A Universal Recommendation for True Zazen
(in Zen Texts, 2005)

Taishō No.
2580

Jp. Shōbōgenzō (正法眼藏)
Eng. Shōbōgenzō: The True Dharma-eye Treasury (Volume I, 2007)
Shōbōgenzō: The True Dharma-eye Treasury (Volume II, 2008)
Shōbōgenzō: The True Dharma-eye Treasury (Volume III, 2008)
Shōbōgenzō: The True Dharma-eye Treasury (Volume IV, 2008)

2582

Jp. Senchaku hongan nenbutsu shū (選擇本願念佛集)
Eng. Senchaku Hongan Nembutsu Shū: A Collection of Passages
on the Nembutsu Chosen in the Original Vow (1997)

2608

Jp. Zazen yōjin ki (坐禪用心記)
Eng. Advice on the Practice of Zazen (in Zen Texts, 2005)

2586

Jp. Kenjōdo shinjitsu kyōgyō shōmon rui (顯淨土眞實教行証文類)
Eng. Kyōgyōshinshō: On Teaching, Practice, Faith, and
Enlightenment (2003)

2646

Jp. Rennyo shōnin ofumi (蓮如上人御文)
Eng. Rennyo Shōnin Ofumi: The Letters of Rennyo (1996)

2668

Jp. Tannishō (歎異抄)
Eng. Tannishō: Passages Deploring Deviations of Faith (1996)

2661

Jp.

2682

Ōjōyōshū (往生要集)

Jp. Risshō ankoku ron (立正安國論)
Eng. Risshōankokuron or The Treatise on the Establishment
of the Orthodox Teaching and the Peace of the Nation
(in Two Nichiren Texts, 2003)
Jp. Kaimokushō (開目抄)
Eng. Kaimokushō or Liberation from Blindness (2000)

Jp. Kanjin honzon shō (觀心本尊抄)
Eng. Kanjinhonzonshō or The Most Venerable One Revealed
by Introspecting Our Minds for the First Time at the
Beginning of the Fifth of the Five Five Hundred-year Ages
(in Two Nichiren Texts, 2003)

370

2688

2689
2692

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Fumu enzhong jing (父母恩重經)
Eng. The Sutra on the Profundity of Filial Love
(in Apocryphal Scriptures, 2005)

Jp. Hasshūkōyō (八宗綱要)
Eng. The Essentials of the Eight Traditions (1994)

Taishō No.
2887

extracanonical

Jp.

Sangō shīki (三教指帰)

extracanonical

Jp.

Jūshichijō kenpō (十七條憲法)

extracanonical

Jp. Mappō tōmyō ki (末法燈明記)
Eng. The Candle of the Latter Dharma (1994)

extracanonical

371

