BUDDHIST MONASTIC TRADITIONS
OF SOUTHERN ASIA

dBET Alpha PDF
Version © 2017
All Rights Reserved

BDK English Tripitaka 93-1

BUDDHIST MONASTIC TRADITIONS
OF SOUTHERN A SIA
A RECORD OF THE INNER LAW
SENT HOME FROM THE SOUTH SEAS
by

Sramana Yijing

T ranslated from the Chinese
(Taishô V olum e 54, N um ber 2125)
by

Li Rongxi

Numata Center
for Buddhist Translation and Research
2000

© 2000 by Bukkyo Dendo Kyokai and
Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored
in a retrieval system, or transcribed in any form or by any means
—electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise—
without the prior written permission of the publisher.

First Printing, 2000
ISBN: 1-886439-09-5
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 98-67122

Published by
Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research
2620 Warring Street
Berkeley, California 94704

Printed in the United States of America

A Message on the Publication of the
English Tripit aka
The Buddhist canon is said to contain eighty-four thousand different
teachings. I believe that this is because the Buddha’s basic approach
was to prescribe a different treatment for every spiritual ailment,
much as a doctor prescribes a different medicine for every medical
ailment. Thus his teachings were always appropriate for the par­
ticular suffering individual and for the time at which the teaching
was given, and over the ages not one of his prescriptions has failed to
relieve the suffering to which it was addressed.
Ever since the Buddha’s Great Demise over twenty-five hundred
years ago, his message of wisdom and compassion has spread through­
out the world. Yet no one has ever attempted to translate the entire
Buddhist canon into English throughout the history of Japan. It is
my greatest wish to see this done and to make the translations avail­
able to the many English-speaking people who have never had the
opportunity to learn about the Buddha’s teachings.
Of course, it would be impossible to translate all of the Buddha’s
eighty-four thousand teachings in a few years. I have, therefore, had
one hundred thirty-nine of the scriptural texts in the prodigious
Taisho edition of the Chinese Buddhist canon selected for inclusion
in the First Series of this translation project.
It is in the nature of this undertaking that the results are bound
to be criticized. Nonetheless, I am convinced that unless someone
takes it upon himself or herself to initiate this project, it will never
be done. At the same time, I hope that an improved, revised edition
will appear in the future.
It is most gratifying that, thanks to the efforts of more than a
hundred Buddhist scholars from the East and the West, this monu­
mental project has finally gotten off the ground. May the rays of the
Wisdom of the Compassionate One reach each and every person in
the world.

August 7,1991

N umata Yehan
Founder of the English
Tripitaka Project

Editorial Foreword
In January 1982, Dr. N umata Yehan, the founder of the Bukkyo
Dendo Kyokai (Society for the Promotion of Buddhism), decided to
begin the monumental task of translating the complete Taisho edi­
tion of the Chinese Tripitaka (Buddhist Canon) into the English lan­
guage. Under his leadership, a special preparatory committee was
organized in April 1982. By July of the same year, the Translation
Committee of the English Tripitaka was officially convened.
The initial Committee consisted of the following members: (late)
H anayama Shoyu (Chairperson); Bando Shojun; Ishigami Zenno;
K amata Shigeo; K anaoka Shuyu; M ayeda Sengaku; N ara Yasuaki;
Sayeki Shinko; (late) S hioiri Ryotatsu; T amaru Noriyoshi; (late)
T amura Kwansei; U ryuzu Ryushin; and Y uyama Akira. Assistant
members of the Committee were as follows: K anazawa Atsushi;
W atanabe Shogo; Rolf Giebel of New Zealand; and Rudy Smet of
Belgium.
After holding planning meetings on a monthly basis, the Com­
mittee selected one hundred thirty-nine texts for the First Series of
translations, an estimated one hundred printed volumes in all. The
texts selected are not necessarily limited to those originally written
in India but also include works written or composed in China and
Japan. While the publication of the First Series proceeds, the texts
for the Second Series will be selected from among the remaining
works; this process will continue until all the texts, in Japanese as
well as in Chinese, have been published.
Frankly speaking, it will take perhaps one hundred years or more
to accomplish the English translation of the complete Chinese and
Japanese texts, for they consist of thousands of works. Nevertheless,
as Dr. N umata wished, it is the sincere hope of the Committee that
this project will continue unto completion, even after all its present
members have passed away.
It must be mentioned here that the final object of this project is
not academic fulfillment but the transmission of the teaching of the

vii

Editorial Foreword

Buddha to the whole world in order to create harmony and peace
among humankind. To that end, the translators have been asked to
minimize the use of explanatory notes of the kind that are indispens­
able in academic texts, so that the attention of general readers will
not be unduly distracted from the primary text. Also, a glossary of
selected terms is appended to aid in understanding the text.
To my great regret, however, Dr. N umata passed away on May
5, 1994, at the age of ninety-seven, entrusting his son, Mr. N umata
Toshihide, with the continuation and completion of the Translation
Project. The Committee also lost its able and devoted Chairperson,
Professor Hanayama Shoyu, on June 16, 1995, at the age of sixtythree. After these severe blows, the Committee elected me, VicePresident of Musashino Women’s College, to be the Chair in Octo­
ber 1995. The Committee has renewed its determination to carry
out the noble intention of Dr. N umata, under the leadership of Mr.
N umata Toshihide.
The present members of the Committee are M ayeda Sengaku
(Chairperson), Bando Shojun, Ishigami Zenno, Ichishima Shoshin,
K amata Shigeo, K anaoka Shuyu, N ara Yasuaki, Sayeki Shinko,
T amaru Noriyoshi, U ryuzu Ryushin, and Y uyama Akira. Assistant
members are W atanabe Shogo and U eda Noboro.
The Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research was
established in November 1984, in Berkeley, California, U.S.A., to as­
sist in the publication of the BDK English Tripitaka First Series. In
December 1991, the Publication Committee was organized at the
Numata Center, with Professor Philip Yampolsky as the Chairperson.
To our sorrow, Professor Yampolsky passed away in July 1996, but
thankfully Dr. Kenneth Inada is continuing the work as Chairper­
son. This text is the eighteenth volume to be published and distributed
by the Numata Center. All of the remaining texts will be published
under the supervision of this Committee, in close cooperation with
the Translation Committee in Tokyo.

June 28, 1999

viii

M ayeda Sengaku
Chairperson
Translation Committee of
the BDK English Tripitaka

Publisher’s Foreword

The Publication Committee works in close cooperation with the
Editorial Committee of the BDK English Tripitaka in Tokyo, Japan.
Since December 1991, it has operated from the Numata Center for
Buddhist Translation and Research in Berkeley, California. Its
principal mission is to oversee and facilitate the publication in
English o f selected texts from the one hundred-volume Taisho
Edition of the Chinese Tripitaka, along with a few major influential
Japanese Buddhist texts not in the Tripitaka. The list of selected
texts is conveniently appended at the end of each volume. In the
text itself, the Taisho Edition page and column designations are
provided in the margins.
The Committee is committed to the task of publishing clear, read­
able English texts. It honors the deep faith, spirit, and concern of the
late Reverend Doctor N umata Yehan to disseminate Buddhist teach­
ings throughout the world.
In July 1996, the Committee unfortunately lost its valued Chair­
person, Dr. Philip Yampolsky, who was a stalwart leader, trusted
friend, and esteemed colleague. We follow in his shadow. In Febru­
ary 1997,1 was appointed to guide the Committee in his place.
The Committee is charged with the normal duties of a publish­
ing firm—general editing, formatting, copyediting, proofreading, in­
dexing, and checking linguistic fidelity. The Committee members are
Diane Ames, Eisho Nasu, Koh Nishiike, and the president and direc­
tor of the Numata Center, Reverend Kiyoshi S. Yamashita.
Kenneth K. Inada
Chairperson
Publication Committee

June 28, 1999

IX

Contents

A Message on the Publication of the English Tripitaka
N umata Yehan

Editorial Foreword

M ayeda Sengaku

Publisher’s Foreword

Kenneth K. Inada

Translator’s Introduction

Li Rongxi

v
vii
ix
1

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas
Fascicle One
Foreword
1. No Degradation Is Caused by a Breach of the Summer
Retreat
2. Behavior towards the Honored Ones
3. Sitting on Small Chairs at Mealtimes
4. The Distinction between Pure and Impure Food
5. Cleansing after Taking Meals
6. Two Bottles for Keeping Water
7. Morning Inspection of Water to Clear Away Insects
8. Chewing Tooth Wood in the Morning
9. Acceptance of an Invitation to a Feast

21
21
22
24
26
27
29
32
34

Fascicle Two
10. The Requirements for Raiment and Food
11. How to Wear the Robes
12. The Robes and the Funeral Rites of a Bhiksuni
13. The Purification of a Site
14. The Summer Retreat of the Five Groups
15. The Ceremony of Confession

53
70
75
80
82
83

xi

7

16. The Use of Spoons and Chopsticks
17. Salutation at Proper Times
18. Answering the Call of Nature
Supplemental Remarks

86
87
88
91

Fascicle Three
19. Regulations for Ordination
20. The Times for Taking a Bath
21. The Cloth for Sitting On
22. Rules Concerning Sleeping and Resting
23. Walking Up and Down for Good Health
24. The Junior Worshiping the Senior
25. Behavior between Teacher and Pupil
26. Conduct towards Visitors and Friends
27. The Treatment of Disease
28. Rules for Taking Medicine
29. Avoidance of Evil Drugs
30. On Turning to the Right and the Observation of Time

93
102
104
105
107
108
109
116
118
121
127
129

Fascicle Four
31. Bathing the Buddha’s Image
32. The Ceremony of Chanting
33. Absurd Ways of Worshiping the Buddha’s Image
34. The Ways of Learning in India
35. On Keeping Long Hair
36. Disposal of the Property of a Deceased Monk
37. Use of the Property of the Sangha
38. The Impropriety of Self-Immolation
39. The Bystanders Become Guilty
40. Things Not Done by Virtuous Monks of Old

135
138
144
145
155
157
161
163
166
167

Glossary

183

Bibliography

187

Index

189

A List of the Volumes of the BDK English Tripitaka

(First Series)

Translator’s Introduction

A Record o f the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas (Nan-haiji-gui-nei-fa-zhuan), Taisho No. 2125, in four fascicles, was composed
by Yijing while he was sojourning in Sribhoja (Sumatra) on his
return journey from India.
Yijing (635-713), surnamed Zhang before becoming a monk,
was a native of Qi-zhou (present Li-cheng County in Shandong
Province). He was admitted to the monkhood at the age of four­
teen. While he was still a youth of eighteen, he cherished the desire
to travel to India to study Buddhism. His wish was not fulfilled
until he was thirty-seven years old, in the second year of Xianheng (671), during the reign of Emperor Gao-zhong of the Tang
dynasty. When he was living in retirement during the summer
season at Yang-zhou in that year, he became acquainted with Feng
Xiao-quan, the Governor-designate of Guang-zhou (in the present
Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region), who was ready to proceed
to take up his post in the south. After the conclusion of the sum­
mer retreat, Yijing traveled with the new governor as far as
Guang-zhou, where, with the generous support of the mandarin,
he was able to sail in a Persian ship to the South Seas and reach
Sribhoja after a voyage of less than twenty days. Having stayed
in Sribhoja for six months to study the Sanskrit language, Yijing
resumed his journey via Malaya, Kaccha, and the Islands of the
Naked (Nicobar Islands), and arrived at Tamralipti (the Calcutta
area) in East India in the second month of the fourth year of
Xian-heng (673). He stayed there for another year to continue his
study of Sanskrit before starting his pilgrimage to Nalanda and
other holy sites in Central India.

1

Translator’s Introduction

After having visited such sacred places as Vulture Peak near
Rajagrha, Mahabodhi Monastery, the old residence of Vimalakirti
at V aisall, K u sin agara, and Deer Park, he clim bed over
Kukkutapada Mountain and returned to Nalanda Monastery,
where he settled down and lived for ten years to study and trans­
late Buddhist texts under the guidance of Ratnasimha, a learned
teacher of the time who resided at the monastery.
Bringing with him Sanskrit texts in more than five hundred
thousand stanzas, which when translated into Chinese would
amount to a thousand fascicles, he sailed from Tamralipti on his
return journey and arrived at Sribhoja for the second time in the
third year of Chui-gong (687). This time he stayed there till he
returned to China in the first year of Zheng-sheng (695).
It was during his second sojourn in Sribhoja that Yijing wrote
the Record in four fascicles sometime before 691, in which year he
dispatched a Chinese monk named Dajin, whom he had met in
Sribhoja, to take the manuscript of the Record back to China to­
gether with his newly translated sutras and sdstras in ten fascicles,
and the Biographies o f Eminent Monks Who Went to the Western
Regions in Search o f the Dharma (Xi-yu-qiu-fa-gao-seng-zhuan)
in two fascicles, as well as a letter to the court requesting that the
emperor build a Buddhist temple in India.
His motive in writing the Record was to provide his fellow monks
at home with information about the monastic rules and manner of
living of the monks in India and the islands of the South Seas. In
the course of his narration and by way of comparison, Yijing did not
forget to criticize the monks in China for those of their behaviors
which were not in agreement with the disciplinary rules, particu­
larly the rules of the Sarvastivada School. His intention was to make
China a land in which Buddhism was practiced exactly as in India.
In his own words he said: “My real wish is to make the Shao-shi
Mountain equal to Vulture Peak, and to put the Divine Land on a
par with the City of the Royal House (Rajagrha).”
What he most objected to was the tradition of branding the
scalp of a monk or nun at the time of ordination. It is said that this

2

i

Translator’s Introduction

practice was initiated by Emperor Wu (r. 502-549) of the Liang
dynasty, based on a teaching of the Brahmajala-sutra (a text on
Mahayana disciplinary rules), which advocated injuring one’s body
by burning off a finger, cauterizing one’s arms or scalp, or even
committing suicide as an expression of gratitude to the Buddha.
Such behavior is obviously contrary to the Vinaya rules prevalent
in India. Yijing boldly deprecated these habits practiced in China
and besought the monks at home to give up such improper con­
ventions. But it seems that his admonition was not listened to, as
no measures were taken to eliminate this unfortunate custom from
the time that it was initiated during the first half of the sixth
century c.e . until 1983, when it was abolished as a mark of ordina­
tion in all monasteries throughout China.
Again, in another chapter (Chapter Thirty-three), Yijing cen­
sured some Chinese monks for exhibiting Buddha images in the
highway while performing Buddhist ceremonies in order to attract
more worshipers and collect more money. This commercialization
of the performance of Buddhist ceremonies was not only so popu­
lar at Yijing’s time as to draw his attention but is still practiced in
China without an end in view.
As a translator of Sanskrit Buddhist texts into Chinese, Yijing
laid emphasis on the study of the Sanskrit language. In Chapter
Thirty-four he described the principal textbooks for studying
Sanskrit and remarked: “But the translators of old times rarely
talked about the grammar of the Sanskrit language. . . . Now I
hope you will all study Sanskrit, so that we can spare the transla­
tors the trouble of repetition. . . . Even in Ku-lun and Suli, the
people can read Sanskrit scriptures. Why should the people of
the Divine Land, which is a land of a bundance, not probe into the
original language of the scriptures?”
It is true that Sanskrit has never been and is not a required
course for Chinese student monks. Due to their lack o f elemen­
tary knowledge o f Sanskrit, they often m isunderstood the
original meaning of Chinese translations; and this gives rise to
unnecessary disputes and controversies. In China there is a

3

1
Translator’s Introduction

proverb: “Forget the trap when the fish is caught.” (Deyu wang quart.)
Perhaps that was why the numerous Sanskrit texts brought back
from India by Xuanzang in 645, for which a big pagoda, the Wild
Goose Pagoda (Da-yan-ta), was constructed at Xi’an as a store­
house, were forgotten and not handed down to posterity.
As a source of information, Yijing’s Record contains ample ma­
terials concerning monastic life, from the choosing of a teacher,
under whose guidance one becomes a monk, up to the disposal of
the personal belongings left by a deceased monk. It depicts such
a complete picture of the life of a monk that it is indispensable
and invaluable for research into the conditions of Buddhist monasticism in medieval India.

4

A RECORD OF THE INNER LAW
SENT HOME FROM THE SOUTH SEAS
by

Sramana Yijing

Fascicle One

Foreword

In the beginning, when the Great Chiliocosm was first produced,
it revealed the inception of the establishment of the universe. When
a hundred kotis (one koti equals ten million) of things were com­
pleted, there was as yet no proper order for men and inanimate
objects. Since the world was hollow and empty, there was neither
sun nor moon moving in it. It was really a calm and quiet state
without grief or happiness, and there was no distinction between
the principles of yin (negativity) and yang (positivity). Then the
celestial beings of the Heaven of Purity descended, with their bodily
light following them. As they took earthly delicacies, they became
greedy and acquired attachment. They ate climbing plants grow­
ing in the forest and fragrant grains of rice alternately. When
their bodily light gradually faded away, the sun and moon began
to appear. Conjugal relations and the affairs of agriculture arose,
and the relationship between ruler and the ruled as well as be­
tween father and son was established. Then the people looked up
to the blue firmament above and saw that the sky was sublimely
high with a colorful floating light. When they looked down to the
yellow earth, they beheld that wind agitated water and solidified
it into terra firma. It is said that heaven and earth were then
clearly divided. Living in between were human beings who came
into being spontaneously by the interaction of pure and impure
vital forces. The molding and casting function of negative and posi­
tive elements was likened to a big furnace, and the production of
all kinds of things was compared to the production of pottery from
clay. All these were erroneous sayings due to lack of learning.

7

204c4

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

Then the mountains stood high like stars scattered about in
the sky, while sentient beings spread and multiplied. They
differentiated the Way into ninety-six schools and classified truth
into twenty-five categories. The Samkhya School holds that all
things came into being from oneness, while the Vaisesika School
asserts that the five forms of existence arose from the six catego­
ries. Some go naked and have their hair plucked out, regarding
this as the essential way of getting out of transmigration. Others
smear their bodies with ashes and dress their hair into a conical
topknot, clinging to this practice as a means of going up to heaven.
Still others think that life is spontaneous, or that consciousness
dissolves with the death of the body. Some others consider the
world so obscure and profound that no one can perceive its es­
sence, and believe that it is so subtle and incomprehensible that
no one knows whence it came out. Others say that human beings
will always be reborn as human beings, or say that after death
they become ghosts or spirits. Some others talk about not know­
ing whether a butterfly becomes one’s self or one’s self turns into
a butterfly. Some people were collectively bewildered to see a
wasp which turned, when they came again, into a caterpillar.
The chaos before the universe took shape was compared to an egg,
and the undeveloped state of ignorance was likened to the innocent
condition of an infant.
All these assertions were made due to not understanding
that birth is the result o f greed and present existence is the
result of past actions. Will those who hold such views not trans­
migrate in the sea of suffering, drifting to and fro and lost in the
stream of confusion?
It is our Great Teacher, the World-honored Sakyamuni, who
himself pointed out a flat path, expounded the wonderful prin­
ciples in person, spoke on the twelve nidanas (links in the chain of
causality), and acquired the eighteen unique qualities of a Buddha,
who is titled the Teacher of Celestial and Human Beings and the
Omniscient One. He guided the four classes of living beings out of
the house on fire and delivered all beings in the three realms from

8

Fascicle One

the city of darkness. He came out of the stream of passions and
landed on the shore of nirvana (absolute extinction).
When he first attained full enlightenment at the Dragon River,
all beings of the nine classes cherished the mind of renouncing
this world. Then he shifted and spread the light to Deer Park, so
that the living beings of the six ways fostered the mind to take
refuge in him. When he first rotated the Wheel of Dharma, five
persons received his edification. Next, he talked on the tradition
of the disciplinary rules, and a thousand people prostrated them­
selves before him. Thus his pure voice was heard in the city of
Rajagrha, and those who realized the fruit of saintship were count­
less. In his father’s city he requited him for his parental kindness,
and numerous people made up their mind to acquire enlighten­
ment. He commenced his teaching career with Ajnata-Kaundinya
as his first disciple to realize the truth, and his last pupil was
Subhadra in accordance with his original determination to con­
clude his teaching in the last period of his life. He held and main­
tained the Dharma for eighty years for the salvation of the beings
of the nine abodes. In his teachings no obscure point was left un­
taught, and nobody was not accepted, however slow-witted he
might be. For lay followers in general, he only spoke briefly on the
five prohibitive precepts, but when speaking exclusively to the
monks, he fully expounded the seven groups of the rules of disci­
pline. It was thought that even grave offenses of householders
might be absolved when the disciplinary rules were observed, and
that the minor faults of the living beings might be excused when
the Vinaya (moral precepts) became manifest. A monk once broke
a twig with a feeling of hatred, and on account of this action he
was reborn in a family of dragons. On another occasion a monk,
showing mercy to small insects in the water, refused to drink it
and thus was reborn in the abode of Indra after his death. The
consequences of good and evil actions are as clear as that.
Thus both the sutras (scriptures) and sastras (commentaries)
were taught, and mental concentration together with wisdom was
employed. Isn’t the Tripitaka (the three collections of sacred

9

205a

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

writings) the key to receiving living beings? In the presence of the
Great Teacher, one always heard him preaching the same doc­
trine, although he taught it according to variant circumstances to
save living beings. His theories vanquished other people’s argu­
ments. When he first indicated his demise at Vaisâlï, Ànanda,
whose mind was deluded by Mara the Evil One, failed to ask the
Great Teacher to live longer. At his last preaching near the
Hiranyavati River, Aniruddha revealed the truth to resolve the
doubts of the audience. It may be said that this was the end of the
Great Teacher’s edification of living beings, and that he had com­
pleted what he could do with full merit. His physical form was no
more to be seen at the two rivers, to the despair of both human
and heavenly beings. His shadow faded away under the twin sala
trees, and even the dragons and spirits became broken-hearted.
Beside the sala grove the tears of the people made the ground
muddy, and nearby the mourners’ blood made the place look like a
garden of flowering trees. With the nirvana of the Great Teacher,
the world became empty and unsubstantial.
Then there were assemblies held by Dharma-propagating
arhats (perfect saints), the first one being held with five hundred
participants, and the second one with seven hundred participa­
tors. The keepers of the Vinaya were mainly divided into eighteen
different schools, and the Tripitaka had variant versions accord­
ing to different views and traditions. The monks of various schools
wore their undergarments differently cut, either in straight lines
or irregularly, and in wearing their upper robes, the folds might
be made broad or narrow. When they had to lodge together, they
might spend the night either in separate rooms or separated by
partitions of ropes in the same room, both ways being blameless.
At the time of receiving food, the monks might accept it with their
hands, or mark a place on the ground to put the food on, both
ways being without fault and each being handed down by a
different tradition, which traditions must not be mixed together.
(Yijing’s running note: The Sarvâstivâda School cut the under­
garments in straight lines, while the other three schools cut them

10

Fascicle One

in irregular shapes. This school prescribed that monks should spend
the night in separate rooms, while the Sammitiya School allowed
their monks to separate their beds with rope partitions. The
Sarvastivada School permitted monks to receive food into their
hands, but the Mahasamghika School required them to mark a
place on the ground to accept it.) The various schools and sects
have different origins, and there are only four principal schools
that have been handed down from the past in the Western Land.
(Yijing’s running note: (1) The Aryamahasamghika-nikaya, or
Holy School of the Great Assembly of Monks, is subdivided into
seven sects, and each of the three collections of the Tripitaka of
this school consists of a hundred thousand stanzas, which would
constitute a thousand fascicles if translated into Chinese. (2) The
Aryasthavira-nikaya, or School of the Holy Elders, is subdivided
into three sects, and the length o f its Tripitaka is the same as
that of the preceding school. (3) The Aryamulasarvastivadanikaya, or Holy Fundamental School of Reality, is subdivided into
four sects, and its Tripitaka is the same as that of the preceding
school. (4) The Aryasammitiya-nikaya, or Holy School of Correct
Measures, is subdivided into four sects, and its Tripitaka consists
of three hundred thousand stanzas. But the subdivisions of the
schools have varied according to different traditions. I have men­
tioned here eighteen subdivisions that exist now. As regards divi­
sion into five schools, this is not heard of in the Western Land.)
The schisms and their rise and fall, as well as the names of the
subdivisions, are factually different, and as they are described else­
where I need not go into detail here.
In all of the five parts of India, as well as the various islands of
the South Seas, people speak of the four nikayas, but the number
of followers of the nikayas varies at different places. In Magadha
all four nikayas are in practice, but the Sarvastivada-nikaya is
the one most flourishing. In Lata and Sindhu—names of countries
in West India—three of the nikayas have few followers, but the
Sammitiya has a large number of adherents. In the north all monks
follow the Sarvastivada-nikaya, though one may sometimes meet

11

205b

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

with followers of the Mahasamghika-nikaya. In the south all monks
follow the Sthavira-nikaya, while the other nikayas have few fol­
lowers. In the countries at the eastern frontier, all four nikayas
are practiced in various ways. (Yijing’s running note: All the places
going eastward from Nalanda for five hundred post stops are known
as the eastern frontier. At the extreme east there is the Great
Black Mountain, which is, I reckon, the southern boundary of Ti­
bet. It is said that it is southwest of Si-chuan, from which one may
reach this mountain after a journey of a little more than a month.
Further to the south from here and close to the sea coast, there
is the country of Sriksetra. Further to the southeast is the coun­
try of Lankasu. Further to the east is the country of Dvarapati.
Further to the extreme east is the country of Lin-yi. All these
countries greatly venerate the triple gem. There are many men
who observe the precepts, and the ascetic practice of alms-begging is the custom of the monks in these countries. In the Western
Land I have seen such monks, who are really different from men
of ordinary morality.)
In the Island of the Lion, all monks belong to the Sthaviranikaya, while the Mahasamghika-nikaya is repulsed. In the
South Seas there are more than ten countries where only the
Mulasarvastivada-nikaya is predominant, though one may occa­
sionally find some followers of the Sammitiya-nikaya. Recently a
few adherents of the other two nikayas have also been found here.
(Yijing’s running note: Counting from the west, there are Polu-si Island and then Malayu Island, which is now the country of
Sribhoja, and also Mo-he-xin Island, He-ling Island, Da-da Island,
Pen-pen Island, Po-li Island, Ku-lun Island, Bhojapura Island, Ashan Island, and Mo-jia-man Island. There are also small islands,
of which I cannot make a full list.) In all these countries the people
follow Buddhism, but mostly of the Hinayana School, except in
Malayu where there are a few Mahayana believers.
The circumference of some of these countries is about a hun­
dred li (one li equals one-half kilometer) or several hundred li, or
about a hundred post stations. Although it is difficult to measure

12

Fascicle One

the size of the great sea, those who are used to sailing in merchant
ships may know it by estimation. As the people of Ku-lun were the
first to come to Jiao-zhou and Guang-zhou, these places were gen­
erally called the country of Kun-lun. In this country of Kun-lun,
the people have curly hair and black bodies, while the inhabitants
in the other countries are not different from the people of the Di­
vine Land of China, but they are generally barefooted and wear
the kambala (a woolen loincloth). The details are fully described
in the Record o f the South Seas.
Traveling due south on foot from Huan-zhou for over half a
month, or for five or six high tides if going on board a ship, one
may reach Bi-jing, and proceeding further south one arrives at
Champa, that is, Lin-yi. In this country the majority of the monks
belong to the Sammitlya-nikaya, with only a few adherents of the
Sarvastivada-nikaya.
Traveling southwest for one month, one reaches the country
of Banan, formerly called Funan. In old times this country was
inhabited by naked people who mostly worshiped the devas. A f­
terwards Buddhism prevailed, but now a wicked king has com­
pletely eradicated it. No monks are found there, while various kinds
of heretics live there. This is the southern seaboard of Jambudvipa;
it is not an island in the sea.
In East China, however, the main principles of Buddhism
practiced are those o f the Dharmagupta School, while in Cen­
tral China the Mahasamghika-nikaya was also followed at vari­
ous places in old times. South of the Yangzi River and outside
the [local] mountain range, the Sarvastivada-nikaya flourished in
former times. We speak of the Vinaya [of the Sarvastivada-nikaya]
as the Vinaya o f Ten Readings and that [of the Dharmaguptanikaya] as the Vinaya o f Four Divisions, because these names are
mainly derived from the number of sections in the Vinaya texts of
these schools. Upon close observation on the distinctions between
the four schools and the differences in their Vinaya texts, we see
that the grave offenses and light faults are dealt with quite
differently by different schools. What is permitted by one school

13

205c

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

may be disallowed by another. The monks should observe the dis­
ciplinary rules of their respective schools, and should not substi­
tute the rules governing light faults of other schools for those
dealing with grave offenses of their own school. They should also
not detest the prohibitive rules of other schools, thinking that such
affairs are allowed by their own school. Otherwise the distinctions
between the schools will not be apparent, and the reasons for per­
mission and prohibition will be unclear. How can one and the same
person observe the disciplinary rules of all four schools? The par­
able of a piece of cotton skirt and a golden staff broken into frag­
ments indicates the realization of nirvana and that those who
practice the Dharma without discrimination should behave them­
selves according to the rules of their respective schools. (Yijing’s
running note: Once King Bimbisara dreamed that a piece of cot­
ton cloth was torn into eighteen fragments and a golden staff bro­
ken into eighteen sections. Fearfully, he asked the Buddha about
it. The Buddha said, “Over a hundred years after my nirvana,
there will be a king named Asoka ruling over Jambudvipa. The
bhiksus [mendicants] will then split into eighteen schools, but the
gate leading to emancipation will be one and the same for them
all. Your dream is a prediction. O king, don’t worry about it!”)
Among the four schools there is no definite classification as to
which ones should be put under Mahayana and which ones under
Hinayana. In the regions of North India and the South Seas, what
is prevalent is purely Hinayana, while in the Divine Land of China,
the monks keep the great teaching in their minds. At other places
both the Mahayana and the Hinayana are practiced in a mixed
way. Through an examination o f their practices, we see no
differences in their disciplinary rules and restrictions. Both of them
classify the Vinaya rules into five sections and practice the four
noble truths. Those who worship bodhisattvas and read Mahayana
scriptures are named Mahayanists, and those who do not do so
are called Hinayanists. What is known as Mahayana consists of
only two sub-schools, first, the Madhyamika and second, the
Yogacara. The Madhyamika School holds that things exist only

14

Fascicle One

conventionally; they are empty in reality, and their substance is
void like an illusion. The Yogacara School asserts that external
phenomena do not really exist. What exists exists internally, ev­
erything being manifestations of consciousness.
Both of these two schools follow the holy teachings of the
Buddha. How can we say which is right and which is wrong, since
both of them lead us similarly to nirvana? And how can we say
which is true and which is false, as the purpose of both schools is
to cut off our passions and save all living beings? Why should we
try to cause more complications and increase perplexity? If we
practice according to what they teach, we shall all reach the other
shore, and if we act contrary to them, we shall remain submerged
in the sea of rebirth. In the Western Land, both schools are pro­
fessed without having absurd contradictions in their theories, and
since we have no eye of wisdom, who can judge the right and wrong
of it? We should have confidence in what has long been practiced,
and cultivate ourselves accordingly. We must not take the trouble
to disconnect ourselves from them.
The different schools of the Vinaya observed in the Divine Land
are mutually related. Lecturers and writers have produced nu­
merous and diverse works on the Vinaya, rendering the five sec­
tions or seven groups of disciplinary rules, which had been easy to
understand, difficult to comprehend. Expedient ways concerning
the violation and observance of the rules had been obvious, but
became obscure. Thus one’s intention [to observe the Vinaya rules]
dissolves at the moment when the first basketful of earth is poured
down to build a mountain, and one’s mind retrogresses after at­
tending the initial lecture. Even the most talented men can achieve
their learning of the Vinaya only when their mustaches have
turned grey; how can men of medium or little talent gain any suc­
cess even when their hair has become white? As the Vinaya texts
are naturally verbose and have superfluous parts, it requires a life­
time to read all the commentaries. The established method of teach­
ers transmitting knowledge to pupils is to discourse on chapters
and sections, and explain them paragraph by paragraph and word

15

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

by word; in narrating the absolution of offenses, they are ana­
lyzed sentence by sentence. To estimate the effort required for
this method of study, it is as laborious as building a mountain; but
so far as its advantages are concerned, it is often as lustrous as a
sea pearl.

206a

The purpose of writers is to help readers understand easily
what is written by them. How could they intentionally use inexplicit language and then try to explain away their absurdity? It is
like when a flood inundates a plain and the water vanishes into
deep wells; a thirsty man dying for want of water can by no means
save his life. But such is not the case with examination of the
Vinaya texts. For the judgment of major or minor offenses, a few
lines would be sufficient, and for explanations of the conditions
of committing faults, one need not trouble oneself for even half a
day. Such is the general tendency of the Buddhist monks of India
and the South Seas.
As regards the Divine Land, what is prevalent is the teach­
ing of the ethical code of respecting and serving one’s sovereign
and parents, paying honor to and submitting to one’s elders, keep­
ing moral integrity and being modest and agreeable, and taking
only what it is righteous to take. Sons should be filial to their
parents and ministers loyal to the monarch. They should be pru­
dent in conduct and lead a frugal life. The Emperor bestows great
care upon his millions of subjects. As soon as the day breaks, he
considers the plight of the destitute and homeless ones with pity,
while none of his ministers is not respectfully executing his or­
ders day and night with such great care as one shows when walk­
ing on thin ice. He sometimes opens a great meeting, provided
with a hundred seats, to spread the teachings of the three Yanas
(Vehicles). He has built caityas (temples) all over the empire, so
that all men of insight turn their mind towards Buddhism, and he
has also constructed samgharamas (monasteries) throughout his do­
main, so that those who had gone astray turn back to the right
path. The farmers sing merrily in their fields, and the merchants
chant joyfully on board ship or in their carts. So the people of the

16

Fascicle One

countries where cocks or elephants are honored and respected come
to pay homage at the red terrace in front of the Throne Hall, and
the inhabitants of the regions of Golden Neighbors and Jade Ridge
propose to pledge allegiance at the green moss-grown steps. Carry
out things absolute; there is nothing more to be added to them.
(Yijing’s running note: The Cock-respecters is a name for the coun­
try of Korea used by the Indians, in whose language it is known
as Kukkutesvara, kukkuta meaning cock and Isvara, respectable.
It is said in India that cocks are respected as gods in Korea and
that the people wear cocks’ feathers by way of ornament. India is
known as a country where elephants are honored because the kings
of that country treat them with great honor. This is so in all five
parts of India.)
As regards the homeless monks, they lecture on the disciplin­
ary rules, with their disciples studying earnestly and respectfully
learning the ultimate gists from the teachers. Some of them retire
to live in a deep and secluded valley away from worldly entangle­
ments. They wash their mouths with the water flowing down from
the cliffs before they practice meditation, or sit in a jungle where
they find spiritual sustenance. They practice the Way during all
six periods of the day and night; by doing this they repay the kind­
ness extended to them by those of pure faith. They go into mental
concentration twice during the night; this is worthy of the respect
of gods and men. Since such actions are in perfect concordance
with the scriptures and the Vinaya rules, what fault can one find
with them?
But errors and mistakes have crept in during the course of
transmission, so that the disciplinary rules have become discrep­
ant. Long-standing irregular forms of conduct may become regu­
lar practices which are contrary to moral principles. I have carefully
written this work entitled A Record o f the Inner Law Sent Home
from the South Seas in forty chapters, divided into four fascicles,
according to the holy teachings and the essential rules and regu­
lations currently in effect. I am also sending back another book of
mine, The Memoirs o f Eminent Monks Who Visited the Western

17

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

206b

Regions in Search o f the Law during the Great Tang Dynasty, in
two fascicles, together with some other miscellaneous scriptures
and commentaries which I have copied. I wish that the venerable
monks at home will cherish the mind of propagating the Dharma
without harboring any prejudice and act with good deliberation in
accordance with what the Buddha has taught, and that they will
not ignore the Dharma because it is conveyed by a man of no
significance.
However, the theories and concepts of the scriptures and com­
mentaries handed down from ancient times to the present day are
well interconnected with the practice of dhyana (meditation). But
as I am far away from you, it is difficult for me to impart to you the
subtle technique of mental concentration to keep the mind in tran­
quility. I can, nevertheless, make a rough statement of the prac­
tices prescribed in the Vinaya texts and submit it to you in advance.
The rules and regulations that I have particularized below had
been checked by my teachers before I committed them to writing
in my Record. Even if I should die with the setting sun, I will still
do my best to my last moment, so that when the flame of this
candle goes out at dawn, a hundred lamps may continue to give
light. By reading this Record, you may visit the five parts of India
with a few steps without taking the trouble to move even one foot,
and before the lapse of even a short span of time, you will be able
to shed light upon the dark path for a thousand years to come. I
hope that you will check and study the Tripitaka carefully, so as
to arouse the sea of Dharma to expunge the four grievous offenses,
and that with the five sections of the Vinaya rules, which are as
clear as a mirror, you will sail the boat of wisdom to save those
who are submerged in the river of six desires. Although I have
received personal instructions from my teachers and what I have
learned does not arise from my own originality, I am afraid that I
may in the end be sneered at by men endowed with the eye of
wisdom. This is all I have to say.
All the topics discussed here are discussed according to the
Mulasarvastivada School; the traditions of other schools should

18

Fascicle One

not be intermingled with discussions of this work. The matters
mentioned here are generally the same as those related in the
Dasasvadhyaya-vinaya (the Vinaya o f Ten Readings) o f the
Sarvastivada School, which has three sub-sects, namely, (1) the
Dharmagupta, (2) the Mahisasaka, and (3) the Kasyapiya. These
sub-sects are not prevalent in the five parts of India, except in
Udyana, Kucha, and Kustana, where there are some adherents of
these sub-sects mixed with the followers of other schools. Yet the
Dasasvadhyaya-vinaya does not belong to the Mulasarvastivada
School.

19

206c

A Record of the Inner Law
Sent Home from the South Seas

1. No Degradation Is Caused by a Breach of
the Summer Retreat
Those bhiksus who have broken away from the summer retreat
are merely disqualified from receiving the ten benefits therefrom;
it is unjustifiable to degrade them from their original position of
seniority in the community of monks. How is it tolerable that a
monk who used to receive homage from others at former times
should now pay respect in reverse order to his juniors? Habitual
forms of conduct like this may become customary but are ground­
less practices. The acceptance of a special invitation to a monk to
go out during the summer retreat is as serious an offense as to
earn a living by theft. Therefore, we should make a careful exami­
nation of this matter and must not neglect it. The priority of a
monk’s position should be determined by the date of his ordina­
tion. Even if he should fail to observe the summer retreat prop­
erly, he must not be degraded in position, because no such
prescription is found in the holy teachings. Who was the person
that at some former time initiated this practice?

2. Behavior towards the Honored Ones
According to the teachings of the Buddha, it is decorous for a monk
to go barefoot in the presence of a holy statue or upon approach­
ing his honored teachers, except if he is ill; wearing shoes or other
footgear is not allowed under such circumstances. He must keep
his right shoulder bare and cover his left arm with his robe, with­
out wearing a kerchief or a turban. Such is the regular way, but

21

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

he may be allowed to do otherwise without committing any fault
when he is walking in other places. If he is in a cold country, he is
permitted to put on short boots or shoes suitable to the local cli­
mate. As the climate may be hot or cold in different places and
regions, many of the rules are adaptable according to the holy
teachings. It is reasonable that a monk is allowed to wear warm
clothes temporarily during the months of severe winter to keep
the body in good health. But during the spring and summer sea­
sons, a monk must act according to the regulations of the Vinaya.
One should not circumambulate a Buddha’s tope while wearing
shoes; this was clearly taught at the very beginning. Those who
wear laced boots must not enter temples; this has been declared
long ago. But there are people who willfully violate this rule. They
are rudely disregarding the golden words.

3. Sitting on Small Chairs at Mealtimes

207a

The monks of India in the west must wash their hands and feet
before taking meals, and they each sit on a small chair which is
about seven inches high and only a foot square. The seat, being
woven out of rattan cane and having round legs, is light to carry.
For junior or younger monks, small pieces of wood the size of a
chopping block may serve as seats. They place their feet on the
ground, and plates and jars are put in front of them. The ground
is smeared with cow’s dung by way of purification, with fresh leaves
spread over it. The chairs are arranged at intervals of one cubit,
so that the monks sitting on them do not touch each other.
I have never seen monks [in India] sitting cross-legged on big
couches to take meals. According to the holy regulations, the length
of a couch measures eight fingers of the Buddha. As the Buddha’s
fingers are three times longer than those of an ordinary man, the
length of a couch comes to twenty-four fingers of an ordinary man,
corresponding to one and a half times the Chinese hu ruler (a cer­
emonial tablet used by officials at court). In the monasteries of
China in the east, the height of a couch exceeds two feet, but such

22

Fascicle One

a couch was originally unfit for a monk to sit on, as it is an offense
for a monk to sit on a high couch. At present, many monks do sit
on high couches, and what can we do about it? Those who incur
blame should make a study of the prescribed measurement of
couches. But in the Ling-yan and Si-chan Monasteries, the couches
they use are one foot high. There was a reason for the virtuous
people of ancient times to make this rule. One should know that
sitting cross-legged side by side with knees put in a line is not the
right manner for monks to take meals.
I have heard that in the beginning, when Buddhism was in­
troduced into China, all monks sat squatting on their heels at
mealtimes. This was so up to the Jin dynasty (265-419), when
this manner of sitting to take meals came to be considered erro­
neous. Since then the monks have sat cross-legged to take
meals. Seven hundred years have passed since the holy teach­
ings spread to China in the east. Ten dynasties have gone by
through this period, and each dynasty had its own prominent
monks. Indian monks visited China one after another, and Chi­
nese monks lined up to receive instruction from them. Some
Chinese monks also went personally to India in the west and wit­
nessed what was right and what was wrong. When they returned
home, they told their fellow monks what they had seen abroad,
but who would listen to them?
It is said in a scripture, “After taking food, they washed their
feet. ” It is clear that the monks were not sitting cross-legged on
couches to take their meal; they washed their feet because food
remnants were dropped on the ground near their feet. From this
we may know that the monks sat with their feet on the ground
while eating. Disciples of the Buddha should follow the example of
the Buddha. Even if it is hard for them to keep the rules, they
must not deride them.
If a monk spreads a kerchief and sits on it with his legs crossed
squarely, it is difficult for him to keep himself clean, as it is impos­
sible to avoid getting stained in this posture by food remnants and
spills. Moreover, to collect what has been left over from a meal

23

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

does not at all conform with Indian custom. To collect the left­
overs would pollute the plates used by the monks; the servants
touch only clean and pure tableware. This is an inane tradition
which is ineffective for the preservation of purity. Please make
a good examination o f these points and see what are the merits
and demerits.

4. The Distinction between Pure and
Impure Food
It is customary for both monks and laypeople of India in the west
to differentiate between clean and unclean food. If only a mouth­
ful of food has been eaten, it all becomes defiled, and even the
receptacle is unfit for reuse and must be put aside to be discarded
together with other used containers after the meal is over. All
leftover food is given to those who are suited to eat it. To collect
and preserve it for further use is never allowed. All people of high
or low rank keep this custom, which is a convention observed not
only by men but also by deities.
Therefore, it is said in several commentaries: “It is considered
disdainful not to chew a willow twig [to cleanse the teeth], not to
wash one’s self after defecation, and not to distinguish between
pure and impure food. ” How can we use defiled utensils to convey
food once again, collect and preserve leftovers in the kitchen, put
surplus cooked rice back in the pot, return the remaining soup to
the thermal vessel, eat the next morning what broth and veg­
etables are left overnight, and keep cakes and fruits to be eaten
the day after tomorrow? Those who observe the Vinaya rules know
well about this distinction, but those who are undisciplined make
no distinction between them and regard them as identical.
On the occasion of receiving offerings of food, or at other times
when an ordinary meal is taken, a monk is considered defiled as
soon as he has put food into his mouth, and he must not touch
others, nor take another dish of clean food, unless he has rinsed

24

Fascicle One

his mouth with pure water. If he touches another person before
washing his mouth, the person he has touched becomes defiled
too, and that person must wash himself. If he has touched a dog,
he must also wash himself.
When offering sacrificial food to deities, the person who per­
forms the rites should stand to one side. After the ceremony is
over, he should wash his hands and rinse his mouth, and also wash
the sacrificial utensils. Then he may touch the cooking pans and
pots. O therw ise his supplication and in ca n ta tion w ill be
inefficacious, and even if sacrificial food is offered, the deities will
not accept it. Therefore, we may say that whatever offerings are
prepared either for presenting to the triple gem, or for giving to
the spirits, or even for ordinary meals, must be pure and clean. If
a monk has not washed himself clean and rinsed his mouth, and
has not washed after relieving nature, he is unfit to prepare food.
As the common saying goes: “Only pure food may be offered as a
sacrifice to the deceased. Nails must be clipped cleanly right to the
flesh [when making such an offering]. Whether it is for those who
have abandoned this mundane world, or for such people as
Confucius and his disciple Yan Hui, food offered as a sacrifice must
be pure and clean, and leftovers are never used as offerings to the
deceased.” For the preparation of food as an offering, or as a regu­
lar meal for the monks, a superintendent is needed to oversee the
process. While waiting for the preparation, if a monk or a layman
fears that he might be delayed beyond the prescribed time for tak­
ing a meal, he may take a portion of food and eat it separately
before the meal is properly served. This is permitted by the teach­
ings of the Buddha and it is faultless.
I have recently seen that under the supervision of monks and
nuns, meals are often served after noontime. In this way they com­
mitted a fault instead of gaining bliss; one must not do so. The
fundamental difference between the five parts of India and other
countries is this distinction between purity and impurity. Once
some messengers of the Hu tribe in the north [of China] came to
India in the west, and they were laughed at by the local people,

25

207b

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

because they did not wash themselves after answering the call of
nature, kept leftovers in a pot, sat so closely together as to touch
each other at mealtimes, did not keep back from pigs and dogs,
and did not chew willow twigs to cleanse their teeth. Thus they
incurred ridicule and censure. Therefore, Dharma practitioners
should be extremely mindful of these matters and must not think
o f them as trivialities. But in China no distinction was ever made
between pure and impure food since the remote past. Although
the monks have heard about it, they never have put the rules into
practice, and until I speak to them in person, they will not get a
real understanding of it.

5. Cleansing after Taking Meals

207c

After having taken a meal, a monk must wash his hands, then
clean and chew a willow twig to cleanse, brush, and pick his teeth,
as well as scrape his tongue, so as to make them all clean. He may
do so either with a vessel to contain the used water, or at some
secluded place, or over the opening of a drain, or near the flight of
steps leading to a house. He may hold the water jar himself, or
ask someone to provide water for him. If saliva remains in his
mouth, he is considered not to have observed the fast. After that,
he should use bean dregs, or sometimes mud made of earth mixed
with water, to wipe his lips to clear away the smell of grease. A f­
ter that, he should pour the water from a clean jar into a conchshell cup, which is placed either on a piece of fresh leaf or in the
hand. Both the vessel and the hand must be cleaned with three
kinds of dregs, i.e., bean dregs, dry earth, and cow’s dung, in order
to wash away the grease. Or he may pour the water from a clean
jar into his mouth at some secluded place, but if he is at an open
place, he is forbidden to do so by the Vinaya rules. Just gargle two
or three times; the mouth will be washed clean. Before doing so a
monk is not allowed to swallow saliva, as it is not only a breach of
etiquette but also a faulty behavior. Before the mouth has been

26

Fascicle One

rinsed again with pure water, the saliva must be spat out. If he
did not do so after noontime, he would be considered to have vio­
lated the rule not to eat at irregular times. People seldom know
about this point, and even if they know this rule, it is not easy for
them to keep it. From this point of view, we may say that even the
use of bean dregs or ash water can hardly keep us entirely free
from fault, as food particles may still remain between the teeth
and grease still stick on the tongue.
The wise ones should see into and be mindful about these
points. It is not allowed for a monk to pass his time gossiping and
talking after the meal is properly over, nor is he permitted not to
keep a jar full of pure water and not to chew the tooth-cleaning
twig, having an unclean mouth for the whole morning and incur­
ring blame throughout the night. If one lives in this way till the
end of life, it would be a disaster indeed! To ask a disciple to hold
the jar and pour out the pure water for washing is also in confor­
mity with the rules.

6. Two Bottles for Keeping Water
Water is used differently for pure and impure purposes, and it is
kept separately in two bottles. Earthenware or porcelain bottles
are used for keeping water for pure purposes, and copper or iron
ones, for impure purposes. The pure water is kept for drinking
in the afternoon, while the impure water is needed for washing
after going to the latrine. The pure water bottle must be held
with the clean hand and be stored in a clean place, and the bottle
containing water for impure purposes should be grasped with
the unclean hand and be put away at some unclean place. Only
the water contained in a clean bottle, or in some new and clean
vessel, is fit for drinking in the afternoon, while the water con­
tained in other vessels is called “timely water,” which can be
drunk without fault at noontime or before noon, but it is faulty
to drink it in the afternoon.

27

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

In making a water bottle, there must be a lid to cover the
outlet, which is about two finger-widths high, and on the top is a
small hole, of a size that would allow a copper chopstick to be put
in. One may drink the water from this spout. At the side of the
bottle, there is another round hole as large as a coin with a mouth
projecting two finger-widths high. The bottle is replenished
through this hole. It may contain two or three liters of water.
Bottles of smaller size are not used. If one fears that insects and
dust may enter the bottle through these two apertures, one may
cover them up, or close them with stoppers made of bamboo, wood,
linen, or leaves.
The Indian monks make their water bottles after this fashion.
At the time of taking water, the inside of the bottle must be washed
clean and free of any dust or filth before taking in fresh water.
How can we take water without regarding whether it is pure or
not, simply keeping it in a small copper jug and pouring it out
with the lid covering the mouth, so that the water spills and
splashes? It is [then] unfit for use, because it is hard to know
whether the water kept in [the jug] is pure or not, as it may be
dirty and smelly inside, not suitable for keeping water at all. More­
over, the amount—one liter and two deciliters—of water contained
in it is not sufficient for doing anything.

208a

For making a bag for the bottle, a piece of cloth about two feet
long and one foot wide may be used. Fold the cloth to make the
two ends meet and sew the edges together. Strings about the length
of one span are attached to the upper corners for fastening the
opening o f the bag. The bag is hung on the monk’s shoulder with a
bottle inside it. When a monk is going round begging for food, the
bag for his alms bowl is also made in the same fashion. It should
cover the mouth of the bowl to keep dust from entering it. As the
bottom of the bag is made in a pointed shape, the bowl does not
turn about in it. But the bag for storing the bowl is different from
that for the bottle, as is described elsewhere. When a monk is trav­
eling, he carries his bottle, alms bowl, personal robes, and other
articles separately on his shoulders, and, fully covered with his

28

Fascicle One

kasaya (religious robe), he goes away with an umbrella in his hand.
These are the manners of Buddhist monks.
If he has a free hand, he may carry a bottle for unclean pur­
poses and a bag containing his leather shoes, and hold a staff with
tin rings obliquely under his arm, while proceeding or stopping on
the way composedly, just as is described in the Sutra on the Parable
o f the Crow and the Moon.
At the season of worshiping the caityas, monks flocked from
the four quarters to Rajagrha, the bodhi tree, Vulture Peak, Deer
Park, the place of the sala trees which once burst into bloom with
white blossoms resembling a flock of cranes, and the desolate
Kukkutapada Mountain. Every day I saw thousands of monks at­
tired in the above-mentioned style. As regards the learned monks
of great virtue of Nalanda Monastery, they rode in palanquins,
but never on horseback, and the monks of Maharaja Monastery
did the same. All their requisite articles were carried for them
by other persons or by grooms. Such is the rule of the monks of
India in the west.

7. Morning Inspection of Water to Clear
Away Insects
Water must be inspected every morning. As water comes from
different sources, from a bottle, a well, a pond, or a river, it is not
inspected according to one uniform standard. At dawn, bottle wa­
ter is first examined by pouring out a handful of it from a clean
white copper cup, a copper dish, a conch-shell cup, or a lacquer
vessel, onto a piece of brick. A wooden instrument may also be
made for the special purpose of examining water. With one’s mouth
covered by one’s hand, one should observe the water for a good
while. One may also observe the water in a basin or a pot. Even
insects as tiny as a hair-point must be treated mindfully. If any
insect has been found, the water should be returned to the bottle,
which should be washed again and again until no insect is left in it.

29

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

If there is a pond or a river, take the bottle there and pour the
water with the insects into it, and then refill the bottle with
filtered fresh water. If there is only a well, strain the water in the
usual way. In examining the water of a well, one should first draw
some water from the well, get a cupful of it from the pail with a
copper cup, and then examine it as stated above. If there is no
insect in it, the water can be used throughout the night, and if
there is any insect, strain the water as mentioned before. As re­
gards the inspection of water of a pond or a river, it is explained in
detail in the Vinaya.

208b

For the filtration of water, the Indians in the west use the best
white kapok cloth, but in China fine silk may be used. The silk
should be starched with rice gruel or slightly boiled in water. Take
a piece of boiled silk, four hu feet long. Hold the edges to pull it
sidewards, and then put the two ends together and sew them up
into the shape of a sieve. Laces are attached to the two corners,
and loops to both sides. A stick is put across the silk in the middle
to stretch it to one foot and six inches wide. The two ends of the
strainer are fastened to posts and a basin is placed under it. When
water is poured into it from a pot, the bottom of the pot must be
inside the strainer. Otherwise the insects might drop with the
water to the ground, or into the basin, where they would be bound
to be killed. When water has just been poured into the strainer,
hold it and see. If there is any insect, the strainer should be
changed. If it is clean as usual, it may be used again. When
sufficient water has been poured into it, the strainer may be turned
inside out. Two persons, each holding one end, turn out the strainer
into a life-preserving vessel, pour water over it three times, and
then rinse it from outside. Water is put into it once again to make
another examination. If no insect is found, the strainer may be
stored away at will.
When this [filtered] water has been kept overnight, it must be
reexamined. It is said in the Vinaya that the use of the water that
has been kept overnight without being reexamined in the morn­
ing incurs guilt, whether it does or does not have insects.

30

Fascicle One

There are many different ways of protecting life while drawing
water. The strainer mentioned above is adequate for use at a well.
At a river or a pond, one may fix a wooden bowl and use a double
bottle as a temporary makeshift for a strainer. During the sixth
and seventh months of the year, the insects are smaller and
different from what they are at other times, and they can pen­
etrate ten layers of raw silk. Those who rejoice in protecting life
should be mindful to spare them. An earthenware basin may be
made for the purpose, but the silk strainer is useful and simple to
make. In the monasteries of India in the west, the basin is mostly
made of copper. As this is also done in accordance with the rules
laid down by the Buddha, one must not disdain it.
The life-preserving vessel is a small water pot with an open
mouth as big as the pot itself. There are two noses at the sides
near the bottom, and strings are fastened to them. When it has
been put into the water, pull the strings to turn it upside down and
plunge it into the water over and over again before it is pulled out.
If a strainer is for common use in a monastery, it is unbefitting
on principle for a fully ordained monk to touch it, nor should he
take the “timely water” kept in his chamber. He may drink it only
when it is brought to him by a monk not fully ordained. When
drinking water at irregular times, one must use a pure strainer, a
pure bottle, and a pure cup, and then one may drink it. The pres­
ervation of life is a disciplinary rule pertaining to natural moral­
ity. Among the rules of prohibition, taking life is a major violation,
and it is at the head of the ten evil deeds. This should by no means
be ignored or slighted.
The strainer, being one of the six requisites of a monk, is an
indispensable article for him to possess. Without a strainer, one
should not travel even for three or five li. If a monk is aware that
strainers are not used in a monastery, it is unbefitting for him
to partake of a meal there. One would rather die of thirst [than
drink unfiltered water] on a long journey, and this is sufficient
to be a good example for us. How can we use our daily water with­
out inspecting it?

31

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

Although some monks do use strainers, they let the insects
die inside them. Even if they intend to save life, they seldom know
the rules for doing it. They overturn the strainers over the mouth
of a well, not knowing to use a life-preserver. Once the insects
reach the water in the well, they are killed without doubt. Some­
times the monks make a small, round strainer out of raw, rough,
and thin silk, capable of receiving only twelve deciliters of water.
They do not look for insects in the strainer, but simply hang it up
beside their alms bowl to let people see and know that it is there.
They have no mind to protect life, and they commit faults every­
day. They act in this manner, which is handed down from teacher
to disciple, thinking that they are transmitting the Dharma! What
a pity, and how regretful it is indeed! Everybody should keep his
own vessel for inspection of water, and life-preservers should be
provided at all places.

8. Chewing Tooth Wood in the Morning
208c

Every day in the morning, a monk must chew a piece of tooth
wood to brush his teeth and scrape his tongue, and this must be
done in the proper way. Only after one has washed one’s hands
and mouth may one make salutations. Otherwise both the saluter
and the saluted are at fault. In Sanskrit the tooth wood is known
as the dantakastha—danta meaning tooth, and kastha, a piece of
wood. It is twelve finger-widths in length. The shortest is not less
than eight finger-widths long, resembling the little finger in size.
Chew one end of the wood well for a long while and then brush the
teeth with it. If one has to go near a superior person [while chew­
ing a tooth wood], one should cover the mouth with the left hand.
After having used the wood for brushing the teeth, split and bend
it to scrape the tongue. One may also use copper or iron to make a
tongue-scraper. A thin flat piece of bamboo or wood, the size of the
surface of the little finger and sharpened at one end, may be used
as a toothpick to clean broken teeth. When the wood is bent to

32

Fascicle One

scrape the tongue, take care not to hurt it. After having been used,
the wood may be washed clean and discarded in some secluded
place. When discarding the tooth wood, or spitting out water or
saliva, one must snap one’s fingers three times, or cough more
than twice. Otherwise it would be a fault to discard them. Or one
may break up a large piece of wood or cut a slender branch into
short pieces to make tooth wood. Near a mountain or a village,
one should give priority to the use of the branches of quercus,
bine, and ampelopsis, while on the plains, one may collect in ad­
vance branches of mulberry, peach, locust tree, and willow at will,
and keep them in store, so that they will not run short. Fresh
twigs should be offered to others, while dry ones may be retained
for one’s own use. The younger monks may take the twigs and
chew them at will, but the elders have to strike one end of the
twig with a hammer to make it soft.
Twigs of a bitter, astringent, or pungent taste, the end of which
may become cotton-like after being chewed, are best for using as
tooth wood. The rough root of burweed is the most excellent for
this purpose. (Yijing’s running note: That is the root of xanthium.
Cut its root two inches under the ground.) It hardens the teeth
and makes the mouth good-smelling, and also helps the digestion
and cures heart disease. After using this root for half a month,
foul breath will disappear, and toothache or dental disease can be
healed after thirty days. One must chew the tooth wood well and
wipe one’s teeth clean. Let all the saliva and oozing blood come
out of the mouth, and then rinse it clean with a large quantity of
water. Such is the way of cleansing the mouth.
After that, if one can take in a spoonful of water through the
nose, that would be practicing Nagarjuna’s art of longevity. If one
is not accustomed to taking in water through one’s nose, to drink
water is also good. When this method is used for a long time, one
will get less sickness. Dental calculus accumulates at the root of
the teeth and is hardened through the passage of time; it should
be completely scraped off. When the mouth is gargled clean, the
teeth will not decay any more till the end of one’s life. Toothache

33

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

is almost unknown in India because the people there chew tooth
wood.

209a

We must not mistake the tooth wood for willow twigs. In the
whole country of India, the willow is scarcely seen. Although the
translators used this name, the wood for the Buddha’s tooth wood
was not actually from the willow tree. I have seen it with my own
eyes at Nalanda Monastery. I am not trying to convince others
about this matter, but my readers need not take the trouble to
doubt it. Even in the Sanskrit text of the Nirvana Sutra, there is
the saying: “At the time of chewing tooth wood. . . . ”
Some monks [in China] use five or six small willow twigs and
chew them all in their mouths, not knowing how to rinse out the
dregs. Some of them swallow the juice, thinking that it will cure
their ailments. They try to be clean, but contrarily they become
filthy, and though they hope to get rid of disease, they incur more
serious illness. They may be unaware of this fact, and they are out
of the limits of our discussion. According to the custom of the five
parts of India, tooth wood is regularly chewed, and even a child of
three is taught how to do it. Both the holy teachings of the Buddha
and the secular custom of the people advocate this beneficial habit.
I have explained the meritorious and demeritorious ways of chew­
ing tooth wood, and it is up to my reader to decide at his own
discretion whether he should practice or reject this custom.

9. Acceptance of an Invitation to a Feast
Concerning how monks go to attend a feast in India and the other
countries of the South Seas, I shall give a brief description of the
ceremony.
In India, the donor comes beforehand to the monks, and after
paying homage to them, he invites them to attend the feast. On
the festival day, he comes to inform them, “It is time [for the feast].”
Utensils and seats for the monks are prepared according to cir­
cumstances. They may either use their own vessels, carried by

34

Fascicle One

monastic servants for them, or use the clean articles provided
by the donor. The utensils are made solely of copper, which must be
rubbed clean with fine ashes. Each monk sits in a small chair, placed
at such a distance that one person does not touch another. The
structure of the chairs has already been described in Chapter Three.
Earthenware vessels that have not been used before may be
used only once without fault. Once they have been used, they are
thrown away into a pit or ditch, because defiled vessels should not
be collected for further use. That is why in the western country of
India, huge heaps of used vessels are piled up high at places be­
side the road where alms of food have been given, and none of
them is to be used again. But earthenware of good quality, such as
that produced at Xiangyang, may be collected after having been
used, as once they are discarded they may be washed clean by way
of purification. In the five parts of India, there were formerly no
porcelain and lacquer works. Porcelain vessels, which look as if
made of clay mixed with oil, are clean without doubt. Lacquer ar­
ticles are sometimes brought to India by merchants, but the people
of the South Seas never use them as eating vessels because such
articles are liable to become greasy. But if the vessels are new
ones, they may be used as well after the smell of grease is cleansed
away with pure ashes. Wooden vessels are not used for tableware.
However, new ones may be used once without it being considered
a fault, but it is an error to use them a second time. This matter is
related in the Vinaya.
In the donor’s house, the ground must be smeared with cow’s
dung at the place where the feast is prepared, and small chairs
are arranged separately one by one. A large quantity of water is
stored in clean jars in advance. When the monks arrive at the
house, they untie the fastenings of their robes. After examining
the water in the clean jars prepared for them, they wash their
feet with it, if no insect has been found in it. Then they take their
seats in the small chairs and rest for a while. Having observed the
time and finding that the sun is nearly at the zenith, the donor

35

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

209b

makes the announcement that the time has arrived [for partak­
ing of the feast]. Then each of the monks folds his upper robe and
ties the two corners up in front, while taking up the right corner
of the lower side and pressing it under the girdle at his left side.
The monks wash their hands clean with bean powder or earth,
either with the donor pouring water for them, or with the monks
themselves using water from the kundika (jars). This is done ac­
cording to which way is more convenient. Then they return to
their seats and receive the eating vessels, which they wash slightly
without letting the water overflow. Before taking the meal, they
never say prayers. Having washed his hands and feet, the donor
places food as a sacrificial offering to the holy monks at the begin­
ning of the row of seats, and then distributes food to the monks
one by one. At the end of the row, a plate of food is placed as an
offering to Mother Hariti.
Once in her former life, this mother made a vow for some rea­
son or other to devour all the babies in Rajagrha. Owing to her
wicked vow, she forfeited her life and was reborn as a yaksi (fe­
male demon). She gave birth to five hundred children and ate some
male or female babies of Rajagrha every day. The people told this
to the Buddha, who, therefore, concealed her little son, named
Beloved Son. In the course of seeking her lost son in many places,
the yaksi at last found her child where the Buddha was. The Worldhonored One said to her, “Are you sorry for the loss of your Beloved
Son? You grieved at the loss of only one out of your five hundred
children, yet how much more pained are those who had only one
or two children and have lost them?” Then the Buddha converted
the yaksi and made her observe the five precepts as an updsikd
(female devotee).
The yaksi asked the Buddha, “I have five hundred children.
What shall we eat hereafter?” The Buddha said in reply, “In the
monasteries where the bhiksus dwell, they will make daily offerings
of food as meals for you and yours to eat.” For this reason, in the
monasteries of India in the west, images or portraits of Hariti,
depicting her holding a baby in her arms, with three or five children

36

Fascicle One

round her knees, are found on the porch or in a corner in the
kitchen. Every day abundant offerings of food are placed before
this image. Being a subject of the four heavenly kings, this mother
has the power to enrich people. If those who are suffering from
illness or are childless offer sacrificial food to her, their wish will
always be fulfilled. A full account of her is given in the Vinaya;
I have just related the story in brief. In the Divine Land of China,
she was formerly known as the Mother of Demoniac Children.
Moreover, in the great monasteries of India, a wooden statue
of a deity, two or three feet high, is placed beside a pillar in the
kitchen or in front of the gate of the main storehouse. The deity is
seated in a small chair with a golden bag in his hand and one foot
hanging down to the ground. Black in color and often anointed
with oil, he is called Mahakala, or the Great Black Deity. Ancient
tradition says that he is a subordinate of Mahesvara. By nature
he adores the triple gem and extends protection to the five groups
of Buddhist clergy, so that they will not sustain any damage. Those
who say prayers to him have their wishes fulfilled. At mealtimes,
the cooks always offer incense and lamps to the deity and place
before him all kinds of food and drink.
Once I saw more than a hundred resident monks having their
meal at Bandhana Monastery, the site where the Buddha preached
the Mahaparinirvana-sutra. In the spring and autumn seasons
worshipers would arrive unexpectedly. One day five hundred
monks suddenly came at about midday, and as it was exactly noon­
time, it was inconvenient for the resident monks to prepare more
food for the uninvited guests. The managing monk said to the cooks,
“In such a hurry, what can we do?” Then an old woman, the mother
of a monastic servant, told him, “This is a normal affair, don t worry
about it.” She burned much incense, lit many lamps, and offered
abundant sacrificial food to the Black Deity, to whom she said, Al­
though the Great Sage has entered nirvana, divine beings like you
still exist. Now monks of the four quarters have come to worship this
holy site. Let not the offerings of food and drink be deficient for them.
You have the power to do this, and you know this is the time.

37

209c

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

Then all the monks were invited to take seats, and the regular
amount of food for the resident monks of the monastery was served
to them all one by one. Every one of the great assembly of monks
was fully satisfied, while the leftover food was just as much as
usual. All of them shouted, “ Sadhu, sadhu!” (“Excellent, excel­
lent! ”), and praised the power of the deity. I went there in person
to worship the holy site. Thus I saw the features of that deity,
before whom enormous heaps of food were placed as offerings.
When I asked the reason, the monks told me the above story. Im­
ages of this deity were not formerly found in the areas north of
the Huai River in China; however, they were installed in many
monasteries south of the Yangzi River. Suppliants who prayed to
the deity always got favorable responses, and his spiritual efficacy
was not illusory. The naga Mahamucilinda of Mahabodhi Monas­
tery also has such miraculous powers.
Food is served to the monks in the following way. First, one or
two pieces of ginger about the size of a thumb and one or half a
spoonful of salt placed on a leaf are distributed to each of the monks.
The person who serves the salt folds his hands palm to palm and
kneels before the chief monk while chanting, “ Sampragatam,”
meaning “well come.” The old transliteration sam-ba is errone­
ous. Then the chief monk says in reply, “Serve the food equally. ”
The utterance of the [Sanskrit] word is to indicate that the
meal has been well prepared and it is time to serve the food. It
should be understood as such according to the meaning of the word.
Once the Buddha and his group of disciples received poisoned food
from someone, and he taught them to say “ Sampragatam. ” When
they took the meal, all the poison turned to delicious food. From
this incident we may say that this word is also a mystic formula,
not merely meaning “well come.” This word may be pronounced
either in the eastern (Chinese) or in the western (Indian) way, as
one wishes, at the time of uttering it. In the districts of Bing and
Fen, the monks chant it shi zhi (the time has arrived), and they
have a good reason for it.
The person who serves the food must stand respectfully, with
his two feet close together, and bow before the recipient of the

38

Fascicle One

food. He holds a vessel with cakes and fruits in his hands. The edibles
should be dropped into the hand of the diner from one span above it,
while other kinds of food are put into the diner’s vessel from one or
two inches above it. Otherwise acceptance is not in conformity with
the rules concerning a monk taking things from others. A monk
may begin to eat as soon as his share of food is distributed to him; he
need not wait till food is served to all the partakers of the meal. To
wait for food to be served to all monks is not a correct interpretation
of good demeanor. Nor is it in agreement with the holy teaching to
act as one wishes after a meal is over.
Next, cooked round-grained nonglutinous rice, together with
thick bean soup, is served with hot ghee. The monks mix the rice
and soup with their fingers, and add various condiments to the
mixed food, which they eat with their right hands. When one is
just half satiated with the food, cakes and fruits are served, and
after that yogurt is served with granulated sugar. When the monks
are thirsty, they drink cold water, whether it is winter or sum­
mer. This is a brief account of how the monks take their daily
meal or attend a reception.
For making an offering of food to the monks, it is customary
to show hospitality by preparing a large amount of edibles, so
much that plates and bowls brim over with leftover cakes and
rice, while as much ghee and yogurt may be consumed as one
wishes. In the Buddha’s time, King Prasenajit once personally
offered food to the Buddha and his assembly of disciples. So much
food, drink, ghee, and yogurt were prepared to serve them that
the victuals overflowed on the ground. This event is mentioned
in the Vinaya.
When I first arrived in the country of Tamralipti in East India,
I intended to prepare a plain and moderate meal as an offering
to entertain the monks. Someone advised me not to do so, saying,
“You can, of course, prepare just enough food for a feast; but ac­
cording to ancient tradition, one must make it a rich and sump­
tuous affair. If the food is just enough to fill the stomach, I am afraid
people will laugh at you. I have heard that you come from a great
country where everything is abundant. If you cannot afford the

39

210a

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

expense, you had better not prepare the feast.” Thus I acted
according to their custom, which is not unreasonable, because the
mind of giving generous alms will get a rich reward. But a poor
man may present whatever gifts he can afford to the monks after
a meal is over.
When the meal is over, the monks wash their mouths with a
little water, which is swallowed instead of being spat out. Some
water is put into a basin, in which a monk may wash his right
hand briefly, and after that he may stand up from his seat. When
he is about to stand up, he should take a handful of food in his
right hand, whether it is food offered to the Buddha or distributed
to the monks, to be taken out and given as alms to all living be­
ings in accordance with the holy teaching. But it is not taught in
the Vinaya to give away food before the meal. A plateful of food is
also taken out as an offering to the dead and other deities and
spirits, as well as to those who are worthy of eating it. This custom
has its origin at Vulture Peak, as is related in detail in a scripture.
One may bring the food to the chief monk and kneel before him.
The chief monk then sprinkles a few drops of water on the food
and utters the following prayer:
May what blessedness we have cultivated
Benefit universally those in the realm of ghosts.
After eating the food, they may escape from their plight
And be reborn after death in a blissful site.
The happiness a bodhisattva enjoys
Is as limitless as empty space.
By alms-giving one may get such fruits,
Which will augment without cease.
Then the food is taken out and placed in a quiet spot or under a
tree, or thrown into a river or a pond, as alms given to the de­
ceased. In the regions between the Yangzi and the Huai Rivers in
China, the people prepare a separate plateful of food besides the
meal offered to the monks. This is the custom described above.
After the meal is over, the donor gives tooth wood and pure
water to the monks. How to wash one’s hands and mouth has been

40

Fascicle One

related in Chapter Five. At the time of taking leave of the donor,
the monks say to him, “We rejoice at whatever meritorious deeds
you have done!” And then they disperse.
There is no other religious ceremony [performed in connection
with the feast], except that each of the monks recites a stanza by
himself. As for the leftovers after a meal, the monks are at liberty
to order a boy to carry it away, or to give it to poor and low people
or any others who need the food to eat. Or if it happens to be a
year of famine, or if they fear that the donor might be of a stingy
nature, they should ask for his permission before taking away the
leftover food. But the donor of the feast should by no means collect
the remains of the meal for himself. Such is the way that monks
receive offerings of food in India.
Or the donor may invite monks to his house as described be­
fore. He should set up an image of the Buddha at his house before­
hand. When noontime is approaching, the monks go to the holy
image and crouch down with their hands joined palm to palm to
venerate the Buddha’s memory. After paying homage to the
Buddha’s image, they eat in the manner related before. Or they
may ask someone from among themselves to go and kneel erect
before the holy image with his hands joined palm to palm and
praise the Buddha in a loud voice. (Yijing’s running note: This
erect kneeling means both knees touch the ground while the thighs
support the body erect. In old times it was known as kneeling in
the way of the Hu people. But it is wrong to say so, because the
erect kneeling is popular in all five parts of India, so how can it be
said to be the kneeling of the Hu people alone?) The monk who is
asked to praise the Buddha only sings of the Buddha’s virtues;
nothing else is said.
Then the donor lights lamps, scatters flowers with singleminded devotion, rubs the monks’ feet with perfumed paste, and
burns incense in profusion. All this is not usually done by different
persons. Meanwhile, according to circumstances, drums and
stringed instruments may be played to accompany songs as an
offering of music. Then the meal is served to each of the monks

41

210 b

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

one by one as has been described before. When the meal is over,
water is provided from a bottle in front of the monks. After that
the chief monk utters a short danagatha (a verse to express grati­
tude) to the donor. Such is another way that monks receive offerings
of food in India.
Although the manner of eating in the western country of In­
dia is different in many ways from that of China, I will make a
brief account of the Indian way of eating according to the rules
o f the Vinaya.
In the V inaya the Sanskrit terms pahcabhojanlya and
pancakhadaniya are mentioned. The word bhojaniya means regu­
lar food, and khadaniya, what is chewed and eaten. Aspanca means
five,pancabhojanlya should be translated into Chinese as five kinds
of edibles, which were formerly known as the five kinds of regular
food according to the semantic meaning of the word. They are (1)
cooked rice, (2) mixed meal made of barley and beans, (3) parched
rice flour, (4) meat, and (5) cakes. The word pancakhadaniya should
be translated as the five kinds of masticated food, namely, (1) roots,
(2) stalks, (3) leaves, (4) flowers, and (5) fruits. If one has no choice
but to eat the first group of food, one would certainly not like to eat
anything of the second group, but if one has first eaten food of the
second category, one might still wish to eat some more of the first
category. We know that milk, yogurt, etc., are not included in the
two groups of food, because no such names are separately mentioned
in the Vinaya, and it is clear that they do not belong to the class of
regular food. Any food made of wheat flour, if so solid that a spoon
put into it stands erect without slanting any way, is included under
cakes and cooked rice. Dry rice flour mixed with water is also in­
cluded under one of the five kinds of [regular] food, if it is so thick
that finger traces remain visible on its surface.
The boundaries of the five parts of India are extensive and
remote, and, roughly speaking, the length of the radius stretch­
ing to the four quarters of the land is more than four hundred post
stations. Although I did not see all things with my own eyes at places
other than the frontier regions, I could make careful inquiries

42

Fascicle One

to find out about them. All edibles, whether for eating or chewing,
are exquisitely prepared in different ways. In the north, wheat
flour is plentiful, while in the west, baked rice flour is abundant.
In the country of Magadha, wheat flour is scarce, but rice is abun­
dant. The southern frontier and the eastern borderland grow the
same crops as Magadha. Ghee and yogurt are found everywhere,
and such things as cakes and fruits are uncountable. The
laypeople seldom eat fish or meat. Most of the countries produce
much nonglutinous rice but little millet and no glutinous millet at
all. There are sweet melons and sugarcane, and taros are abun­
dant. Okra is scarce, but rape turnips are grown in sufficient quan­
tities. The latter has black and white seeds, which have recently
been translated into Chinese as “mustard seeds. ” The oil extracted
from these seeds is edible in all countries. When we eat its leaves
as a vegetable, we find the taste is just the same as that of a Chi­
nese turnip; the difference is that its root is hard and tough. The
seed is so large that it is bigger than a [Chinese] mustard seed.
The change may have been caused by the change of soil, just as
the orange tree may bear citrons when transplanted from one place
to another. At Nalanda I discussed this perplexing matter with
the Dhyana master Wuxing, but we could not clarify the matter
in our debate. Again, the people of all five parts of India do not eat
different minced condiments made of ginger, garlic, or leek, nor do
they eat lettuce and the like. Therefore, they do not suffer from
bellyaches. Their stomachs and intestines are soft and comfort­
able, and free from the trouble of becoming hard and inelastic.
In the ten islands of the South Seas, the offerings of food on
festival days are still more substantially and liberally prepared.
On the first day, a piece of betel nut, some fragrant oil extracted
from aconite, and a small quantity of crushed rice are placed on a
leaf as a vessel, which then is set on a big plate and covered with
a piece of white kapok cloth. Water contained in a golden bottle is
dripped on the ground before the plate as a signal to invite the
monks, who are asked to anoint themselves and take a bath before
noontime on the day after the following day. After noontime on

43

210c

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

the following day, amid the music of drum-beating and the offering
of fragrant flowers, a holy image is carried either in a canopied
carriage or in an imperial palanquin with streamers and banners
fluttering in the sun. Monks and lay followers of the Dharma hurry
like scudding clouds to the house of the donor, where a tent with
curtains has been pitched for the occasion. The golden or bronze
image is brilliantly decorated in a beautiful manner and anointed
with aromatic paste. It is placed in a basin, and the people bathe it
in scented water with devotion. After having been wiped clean
with a piece of perfumed cotton cloth, it is taken to the main hall
of the house. As incense is burned and lamps lit in profusion, the
people begin to sing eulogistic hymns. Then the chief monk recites
the danagatha for the sake of the donor to explain the merits of
alms-giving. After that the monks are invited to come out of the
hall to wash their hands and mouths, and then they are enter­
tained with sugar water and sufficient betel nuts. After this, the
assembly of monks breaks up and departs.
When noontime is approaching on the third day, the donor
goes to the monastery and announces respectfully that the time
[for the invitation] has come. The monks, after taking baths, are
led to the donor’s house. The holy image is set up again and bathed
briefly, but there are twice the flowers, incense, and music of beat­
ing drums as the previous morning. All offerings are placed before
the image, and five or ten maidens, or sometimes boys according
to circumstances, stand solemnly on each side of the image, hold­
ing in their hands thuribles or golden bathing jugs or incense or
lamps or fresh flowers or white chauris. The people come with toi­
let sets placed on dressing tables and mirrors contained in cases
and the like to offer to the image of the Buddha. When I asked
them the meaning of their action, they replied that it was in the
cause of acquiring blessedness, and said that if they did not make
offerings now, how could they expect to gain any rewards in the
future? Logically speaking, theirs is a good action.
Next, a monk is invited to sing hymns while kneeling before
the image of the Buddha. Then two more monks are separately

44

Fascicle One

invited, each taking a seat to one side of the image, to recite a
brief scripture of one or half a page. Sometimes they sanctify an
image of the Buddha by marking out the pupils of the image, so as
to acquire superior happiness. Then they return to whichever side
as they please, and fold up their kasayas by fastening the two
front corners together. After washing their hands, they are ready
to take the meal. (Yijing’s running note: Kasaya is a Sanskrit word,
meaning the color of gandha [pounded sandalwood], and as it has
no etymological connection with the Chinese language, why should
one take the trouble to transliterate it with two Chinese charac­
ters to denote the monks’ robes? According to the textual terms of
the Vinaya, all three robes worn by a monk are known as civara [a
monk’s dress].) The manner of preparing for the meal, such as
daubing the ground with cow’s dung, examining water, washing
the monks’ feet, taking and serving the food, are generally the
same as in India, except that they also eat the three kinds of pure
meat. They generally sew leaves into plates as large as half a mat
to keep one or two dou (one dou equals ten liters) o f cooked
nonglutinous rice on each plate, or else smaller receptacles are
made to contain one or two sheng (one sheng equals one liter) of
rice, which is brought to the monks and handed to them. Then
various other kinds of food, twenty or thirty items, are served to
the monks. This is in the case of a meal prepared by a poor and
humble household. If it is done by a royal family or rich people,
bronze plates and bowls and leaf vessels as large as a mat are used
to contain more than a hundred varieties of food and drink. Even
the kings give up their noble position of dignity and call them­
selves servants so as to serve food to the monks with perfect re­
spect and veneration.
The monks must accept without rejection whatever amount of
food is offered to them. If they took just enough food to satisfy
their hunger, the donor would feel displeased. He feels pleased
only when he sees that too much food is being served. Four or five
sheng of cooked rice and two or three plates of pancakes and fruits
are offered to each monk, and the donor’s relatives and neighbors

45

21 1 a

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

may help prepare the meal by contributing rice or cakes. There is
more than one dish of soup and vegetables for each partaker of
the meal, and the leftover food for each monk is sufficient to feed
three or four persons. In the case of a sumptuous meal, even ten
persons cannot consume the remaining food left by one monk. All
the remains of a meal are put at the disposal of the monks, who
may order their servants to carry the food away with them.
But the ceremony of feasting the monks in the Divine Land of
China is different from that of India in the west. In China, what­
ever food is left over is gathered by the donor, and the monks are
not expected to take it away at will. Therefore, the monks should
act according to the circumstances, be content with what they have,
and not bring disgrace on themselves, so that they will not be
unworthy of the good mind of the donor in alms-giving. But if the
donor has made up his mind not to gather the remaining food and
has invited the monks to take it away, they may then do what is
suitable for the occasion.

21 1 b

After the monks have finished their meal and have washed
their hands and mouths, the remaining food is cleared away and
the ground swept clean. Flowers are scattered and lamps lit, while
incense is burned to make the air aromatic, and what is to be pre­
sented to the monks is arranged before them. Then perfume paste,
about the size of a seed of the Chinese parasol tree, is distributed
to the monks, who rub their hands with it to make them fragrant
and clean. Next, betel nuts and nutmegs mixed with cloves and
camphor are offered to them. When chewed, this renders the mouth
fragrant and also helps digestion and cures heart disease. These
aromatic and medicinal things must be washed with pure water
and wrapped in fresh leaves before they are handed to the monks.
The donor then goes to the chief monk, or approaches a com­
petent teacher, and pours water from the spout of a bottle into a
basin, so that the water flows out incessantly like a slender copper
stick. The teacher, with flowers in his hand, receives the trickling
water while he recites the danagatha. He must first recite the
verses spoken by the Buddha and then those composed by other

46

Fascicle One

persons. He may recite as many or as few verses as he wishes,
according to the time he has at his disposal. He must mention the
name of the donor, praying for wealth and happiness for him and
wishing to transfer the happy reward of good deeds done in the
present to the deceased predecessors, to the emperors and princes,
as well as to the nagas (serpent demons) and spirits. He also wishes
for rich harvests in the country, for the people and other creatures
to live in peace, and for the noble teaching of Sakyamuni Buddha
to be everlasting. The gatha, which I have translated in some other
place, is the blessing uttered by the World-honored One when he
was living in the world. After the meal is over, the Daksinagatha
(verse of alms-giving) must be recited. Such is the ceremony of
giving alms. A daksinlya is one who is worthy to be honored with
alms. Therefore, the Holy One laid down the rule that after each
meal the monks should recite one or two danagathas to recom­
pense the donor for his bounteousness. (Yijing’s running note: The
word “donor” is a translation of the Sanskrit term danapati. Dana
means alms and pati, a lord. The Chinese term tan-yue, indicating
that by practicing alms-giving one may get across the stream of
poverty, is not a correct translation of the Sanskrit word, in spite
of the good interpretation. It is also incorrect to transliterate
daksina as da-chen.) If we do not do so, we are not only acting
contrary to the holy teachings, but we shall also be unworthy of
the food we have consumed. Begging for the remains of a meal is
sometimes practiced.
Then gifts are distributed, or a “wishing tree” is made and
presented to the monks, or a golden lotus flower is manufactured
as an offering to the image of the Buddha. There are fresh flowers
in knee-high heaps and enough white kapok cloth to fill a couch.
After midday a sermon is occasionally delivered on a short scrip­
ture, and the monks sometimes disperse at nightfall. At the time
of departure, they exclaim “ Sadhu!” and also “ Anumoda.” Sadhu
means “Well done!” and anumoda is translated as “I rejoice at
what is being done!” When gifts are presented to others or to one­
self, one should utter the same expressions. Both the one who

47

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

presents the gifts and the one who praises the action with joy will
gain bliss in the same way. Such is the general custom of the monks
receiving offerings o f food in the ten islands of the South Seas.
People of the middle class extend an invitation with the pre­
sentation of betel nuts to the monks on the first day. On the sec­
ond day an image o f the Buddha is bathed when it is nearly
noontime, and the meal is finished at midday, while preaching is
held in the evening. The poorer people either offer some tooth wood
to invite the monks on the first day and simply prepare a meal on
the following day, or they approach the monks and express their
wish to invite them without further ceremony.
But the custom is different among the Hu tribes of the north,
in countries such as Tukhara and Suri. There the donor first pre­
sents a flower canopy as an offering to the caitya (temple), and
then the monks go round the holy object while asking a precentor
to say the prayers in their entirety before they take the meal.
How the flower canopy looks has been described in the Xi-fang-ji
(A Record o f the West).

2 iic

Although the ceremonies for offering food to the monks may
be simple or elaborate in different countries, and the dishes served
may be rich or scant, the monks’ regulations, such as those on the
preservation o f purity or the way of eating food with one’s fingers,
and the major monastic rules are much the same. Some of the
monks practice the dhuta (ascetic) disciplines, living by begging
for food and wearing only the three robes. If such a monk is in­
vited and offered gold and valuables, he simply discards them like
mucus or saliva and retires to live in a lonely forest. But in China
in the east, the custom is that when a donor wishes to entertain
some monks with a meal, he simply dispatches an invitation card
to them. Even on the morning of the following day, he does not go
in person to invite the monks. When compared with the teachings
of the Buddha, this practice seems short of cordiality. The lay dis­
ciples should be taught proper manners. When going to attend a
reception, a monk should bring his filter with him, and the water
for the use of the monks must be examined. After the meal, a monk

48

Fascicle One

should chew tooth wood to clean his mouth. If there is any rem­
nant food left in the mouth, the meal is considered unfinished,
and even should he pass the whole night hungry, he will not be
spared the guilt of taking food at irregular times [as he has food
particles in his mouth], I hope that we will make a study of the
manner of eating in India and reconsider the customs prevalent in
China. Then we may naturally know what is appropriate and what
is inappropriate. As I do not have the leisure to give a full account
of the matter, I leave it to the wise to ponder.
Once I wrote an essay, which reads as follows:
The Supreme World-honored One, the Father of Great Com­
passion, having pity on those who are plunged in the sea of
transmigration, tried hard to gain enlightenment for three
great kalpas (eons), and, with the hope to guide them, he
lived for seven dozens of years to spread his teachings. Con­
sidering that the foremost requirements for upholding the
Dharma were food and clothing, he feared that this might
give rise to worldly troubles, and therefore laid down strict
rules and prohibitions. These regulations, which reflect the
will of the Buddha, should be observed and practiced. But
on the contrary, there are some monks who indiscreetly
think themselves guiltless and do not know what sorts of
eating might cause defilement. They observe only the one
rule against sexual conduct, and say, “Since we are guilt­
less, why should we take the trouble to study the Vinaya
rules? Eating and drinking, dressing and undressing are
irrelevant. The Buddha’s will is pointing out the Way lead­
ing directly to the gate of voidness.” But how do they know
that the Vinaya rules were not laid down at the will of the
Buddha? It is out of mere assumption that they value one
rule and disregard another. Their disciples follow their ex­
amples and never read or have a look at the Vinaya rules.
When they have copied just two fascicles of books on the
gate of voidness, they say that this doctrine covers all the

49

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

theories of the Tripitaka. They do not consider that each
m outhful o f food swallowed illegally m ight cause the
suffering of drinking molten copper in hell. Do they also not
know that each step taken carelessly might incur the mis­
ery of being a traitor?
The original intention of the bodhisattva is to keep the
skin raft tight [so that we may cross the sea of rebirth]. We
must not overlook any minor offense; then we may render
this life the last one without further rebirth. It is right for
us to practice both the Mahayana and the Hinayana doc­
trines in keeping with the instructions of the Compassion­
ate World-honored One. What fault is there if we take
precautions against minor offenses and gain insight into the
great voidness, to accept all living beings and clarify their
minds? For fear that [my fellow monks at home] may per­
plex themselves and misguide others, I just submit this in­
complete information according to the Buddha’s teachings
in the hope that they may draw inferences from it and gain
complete knowledge. The Dharma o f voidness is true and
not false, but this is not a reason to disregard the Vinaya
texts. It befits us to recite the Vinaya rules and make a
confession to clear away our faults every fortnight. One
should always advise and exhort the disciples to worship
the Buddha three times a day. The Buddha-dharma is de­
clining in the world day by day, and I have noticed that
what I saw in my childhood was totally different from what
I see now in my old age. Since we have witnessed the present
situation, we must be more careful about our behavior. Eat­
ing and drinking are, however, a burden to us. They are
our constant necessity, but I hope those who respect the
Buddha will not disregard his holy teachings.
Let me repeat it:
Out of the eighty thousand holy teachings, only one or two
are most important. Outwardly one should conform to the

50

Fascicle One

worldly way, while inwardly one should concentrate on true
wisdom. But what is the worldly way? It is observing the
prohibitive rules and being guiltless. And what is true wis­
dom? It is the abandonment of both the faculty of sight and
the object seen. One should follow the superior truth with­
out any attachment, and do away with the entanglements
of life arising from the chain of causality. One must dili­
gently accumulate merit by practicing more good deeds, so
as to realize the wonderful meaning of perfect truth. How
can a monk falsely declare that he has attained the state of
bodhi (enlightenment), while he has never studied the
Tripitaka, knows neither the teachings nor the principles
of the Dharma, and has committed sinful deeds as numer­
ous as the grains of sand in the Ganges River? Bodhi means
enlightenment, in which all illusions and entanglements are
destroyed. There is neither birth nor death in the state
known as eternal reality. How can we carelessly say that
we are living in the Western Paradise, while we are actu­
ally staying in the sea of suffering? One who desires to real­
ize the truth of eternity should observe the disciplinary rules
with purity as a basis. One should guard against a tiny hole
that might be punctured in the air bag, and take precau­
tions against the major offenses, even though they might
assume such a small shape as a needle’s eye. Of all the great
grievances, the foremost are mainly caused by food and
clothing. If one follows the Buddha’s teachings, one will not
be far from gaining spiritual liberation, and if one disre­
gards the noble words, one will surely be submerged in the
sea of rebirth for a long time.
I have so far related the rightful practices and briefly described
some examples of our predecessors. All this is based on the holy
regulations; none comes out o f my own views and intentions. I
hope my readers will not feel displeased at my straightforward

51

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

statement, and that it may be useful for those who are far away
from me. If I do not make an exact statement and submit it to my
readers, who will discern what is refined and what is vulgar?
End of Fascicle One

52

Fascicle Two

10. The Requirements for Raiment and Food
It may be observed that the corporeal body depends upon food and
clothing for its maintenance, while the perfect wisdom of no re­
birth is manifested through the truth of voidness. If one makes
use of food and clothing in a way contrary to proper manners, one
will incur blame on oneself step by step; and if the concentrated
mind loses its proper course, one will get into perplexity thought
after thought. Therefore, those who wish to realize spiritual lib­
eration in the course of using food and clothing should use them in
accordance with the holy words of the Buddha, and those who try
to practice the truth with a concentrated mind should conform
with the teachings of former sages in order to concentrate their
minds. Looking down upon the life below, one sees that it is but a
dungeon for those who have gone astray. Gazing up to the shore
of nirvana, one beholds the open gate of enlightenment and tran­
quility. Only by doing so may one pull the boat of Dharma to the
shore in the sea of suffering and hold up the torch of wisdom dur­
ing the long period of darkness. As regards the regulations about
wearing robes and how to eat and drink, observance and violation
are expressly prescribed in the Vinaya texts; even a beginner in
the Dharma knows what is a grave offense and what is a light one.
This is, however, a matter, whether meritorious or demeritorious,
that concerns only individual persons, and we need not take the
trouble to argue about it here. There are some who behave against
the Vinaya rules and yet guide others in their conduct. There are
some others who hold that usage gives rise to practices, that,
whether they are right or wrong, are considered regular and

53

212b

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

faultless. Some others argue that the Buddha was born in the
west, where the monks follow the custom and manners of the west,
while as we are monks living in the east, we should follow the
rules and regulations of the east. “How can we, ” they would say,
“change the elegant dress o f the Divine Land o f China and accept
the peculiar customs of India?” It is for people holding such views
that I have made this rough statement, so that they can weigh the
matter by themselves.
As the regulations concerning clothing are the guiding prin­
ciples of homeless monks, it befits me to give a full description of
the style of their clothing. This should never be neglected or over­
looked. The laps of the three robes worn by monks in all five parts
of India are sewn together; only in China are they open without
being stitched up. I myself have made inquiries in the northern
countries of India where the Vinaya of the Dharmagupta School
is prevalent and found that the openings of the robes are sewn
together; nowhere are they left open. If a monk of India has ob­
tained a Chinese religious robe, he would probably sew up the open­
ings before he would wear it. The Vinaya texts of all the schools
mention that the laps of the robes should be sewn and fastened
together. There are strict rules about the six requisites of the
monks, and the thirteen necessities are fully explained in the
Vinaya texts. The following are the six requisites:
1. The samghati, which is translated as “double robe.”
2. The uttarasariga, which is translated as “upper robe.”
3. The antarvasa, which is translated as “inner garment.”
(These three garm ents are known as the civara. In the
northern countries they are generally called the kasaya from
their reddish color. However, this is not a technical term used
in the Vinaya texts.)
4. The patra, a begging bowl.
5. The nisidana, a cloth or mat for sitting or lying on.
6. The parisravana, a filter.
A candidate for ordination must possess these six requisites.

54

Fascicle Two

The following are the thirteen necessities:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

The samghatl.
The uttarasanga.
The antarvasa.
The nisidana.
An undergarment.
A substitute undergarment.
The samkaksika (a side-covering vest).

8. A substitute samkaksika.
9. A towel for wiping the body.
10. A towel for wiping the face.
11. A pinafore used when shaving one’s hair.
12. A piece of cloth for covering itchy places.
13. A garment worn when decocting medicine.
A verse says:
Three robes and a sitting cloth,
A couple of skirts and two side-covers,
Towels for wiping body and face, a pinafore for shaving,
A cloth to cover itches and a garb for decocting medicine.
These are the thirteen kinds of clothes which a monk is permitted
to possess. Since there are established rules concerning clothing,
one must use them in compliance with the Buddha’s teaching.
These thirteen articles should not be classed with other surplus
belongings of a monk, but should be separately listed, clearly
counted, and well preserved. When one receives any of these things,
one may keep them, but one should not take the trouble to possess
all that is given to one. As regards the surplus robes, a monk may
dispose of them in different ways according to circumstances, but
as for such things as woolen mattresses, blankets, mats, and the
like, he may accept and use them only with the understanding
that they are purposely committed to him by the givers.
Sometimes people speak of three robes and ten necessities,
but it was the idea o f some translators to divide the thirteen

55

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

necessities into two groups; it is not in accordance with the San­
skrit texts. They speak separately of the three robes and list the
ten articles apart from the robes. But they cannot give a full list of
the ten articles, and thus cause groundless conjecture and guess­
ing. If they interpret the word shi (meaning ten) as “miscellaneous, ”
this is not the original meaning.
The garment for decocting medicine which the Buddha per­
mitted the monks to keep should be made of a piece of silk about
twenty feet long, or a whole roll of it. As one may fall ill at any
time, it would be difficult to obtain such a garment in a hurry, and
so a monk is permitted to make one beforehand and keep it. As
this garment is needed in time of illness, it must not be used at
random times.
The purpose of the gate of spiritual cultivation and benefiting
living beings is universal salvation. Since men are of three grades
of intelligence, they cannot be limited to only one way. The four
dependences, the four actions, and the twelve ascetic practices are
ordained for men of superior intelligence. Keeping a room for
one’s own use and accepting gifts o f the thirteen necessities are
good for monks of both medium and inferior intelligence, so that
those who have fewer desires will be spared the embarrassment
of having surplus daily requisites, and those who wish to have
more will not fret at deficiency. Great is the compassionate father
who skillfully answers the needs of men of all grades of intelli­
gence and is a good teacher for human and heavenly beings, with
the title of Guide of Men.
The assertion that one hundred and one things may be
offered to meet a monk’s physical needs is not found in the Vinaya
texts o f the four schools. Although allusions to it are made in
some scriptures, it was mentioned only on special occasions. Even
a wealthy layman does not possess more than fifty household
articles. How can a monk, who is detached from worldly en­
tanglements, be allowed, on the contrary, to own more than a
hundred things? One may judge by reason to know whether it is
permissible or not.

56

Fascicle Two

As regards the use of fine and tough silk, it is permitted by the
holy Buddha. Why should one forcibly prohibit the use of it to
make things knottier? I judge that the intention to simplify things
rendered matters more complicated. In all five parts of India, monks
of the four schools wear [silk robes]. Why should we reject silk,
which is easy to procure, and try to obtain fine cotton, which is
difficult to seek? Isn’t it a hindrance that obstructs the Way to the
utmost? Such a rule belongs to the class of prohibitions that were
not laid down by the Buddha but were enforced by others. This
caused some meddlesome observers of the Vinaya rules to swell
their self-conceit and look down upon others.
Those venerable ones who seek nothing and have few desires,
being humble-minded inwardly and modest outwardly, would say
that theirs is the best way to cover oneself; what else would it be?
They mean that silk is produced by injuring life, which hurts the
mind of compassion extremely. Out of pity for living beings, it is
logical to not use silk. If that is so, then the clothes we wear and
the food we eat are in most cases produced by injury to life. If we
did not pay attention to mole crickets and earthworms, why should
we be specially mindful of chrysalises and silkworms? If one wishes
to protect all animate beings, then there will be no means of sus­
taining oneself, and why should one forsake life without a good
reason? From logical inference, we may conclude that such an idea
is impractical. Those monks who refrain from eating ghee and
curds, and from wearing leather shoes and silk or floss robes, are
people of the class mentioned above.
Regarding the question of killing, if a life is destroyed inten­
tionally, it is then considered a karmic deed [that will produce its
due effect], but if it is done unintentionally, the Buddha said, it is
not considered an evil deed. The three kinds of pure meat are
designated as to be eaten without incurring blame. If one does
not act in conformity with the spirit of this rule, one commits but
a slight offense. [To argue it by means of a syllogism, we may
raise the proposition that] eating pure meat is guiltless, for
the reason, which is accepted by both parties to the argument,

57

2i3a

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

that the act is done without the intention o f killing. If we add
an example to the syllogism, the statement will be clear and
manifest. Since the reason and example indicate that the act is
guiltless, the proposition becomes self-apparent. The syllogism
has made the statement perspicuous, and moreover, it is the golden
saying of the Buddha. Why should we then take the trouble to
give it more strained interpretations? They simply made people
as confused as the miswriting of “five hundred” for “five days”
through a slip of the author’s pen and the erroneous reading of
“three pigs” for “earth-pig,” which was transmitted by those who
believed the words to be true.
Such an action as begging for live cocoons and witnessing the
destruction o f the silkworms is something that even a lay scholar
would not do, let alone a monk, who aspires to gain liberation from
the world. To quote this as a proof, I consider it utterly inadmissible.
If a donor comes with a pure mind to present a silk robe to a monk,
the monk should utter the word “Anumoda” and accept it to clothe
his body so that he may cultivate virtue, without incurring any blame.
In the five parts of India, the religious garment may be stitched
or sewn at one’s discretion, disregarding whether the threads of
the cloth are lengthwise or crosswise. The time for making it does
not exceed three or five days. One bolt of silk can be cut into one
garment of seven stripes and another of five stripes. The inside
patches are three fingers wide, while the peripheral edges are one
inch broad. These edges have three rows of stitching, and the in­
side patches are all sewn together. As these garments are used for
performing daily duties or holding ceremonies, why should we make
them look fine and exquisite?
The intention of those who wear rag robes is to simplify things.
They may either gather cast-off rags from rubbish heaps or pick
up abandoned clothes at a cemetery. Whenever they have obtained
such rags, they sew them up into robes to protect themselves
against cold and hot weather.
Some people say that what is mentioned as sleeping articles in
the Vinaya texts is included in the category of the three robes.

58

Fascicle Two

When they see that the use of silk from wild cocoons is prohibited
[for making sleeping articles], they hold the view that the robes
also should not be made of silk. Thus they try hard to seek cotton
cloth, not knowing that in the original texts “sleeping article” ac­
tually means a mattress and that the word kauseya is the name
for silkworm. When the silk fiber is woven into silk cloth, it is also
known by the same name. As it is costly material, making it into a
mattress is not allowed.
There are two ways of making a mattress. One way is to sew a
piece of cloth to make a bag and fill it with wool. Another is to
weave silk thread into a mattress which is something like a car­
pet. It is two cubits wide, four cubits long, and may be thick or
thin according to the season. Begging for a mattress is forbidden,
but if it is given as alms, it may be accepted without incurring
blame. If it were completely banned, it would be a grave matter,
and a strict rule should have been laid down against its use. Such
mattresses are not the same as the three robes.
Again, what is mentioned in the Vinaya as right livelihood
mainly concerns the procurement of subsistence. The plowing and
weeding of fields should be done in the proper way, while sowing
and planting must not be done in a manner which violates the
guiding principles of the religion. If food is taken according to the
regulations, it will not give rise to any blame. Only then may one
say that by building up the body one can increase happiness.
According to the teaching of the Vinaya, in the cultivation of
paddy fields, the Sangha (community of monks) must share the
crops with the monastic servants and may also share them with
other families, all of whom may get one-sixth of the produce. The
Sangha provides farm cattle and land only, and is responsible for
nothing else. The division of crops may be appropriately adjusted
according to circumstances.
Most of the monasteries in the west follow the system men­
tioned above. There are some avaricious monks who do not share
the produce in proportion with others, but employ male and fe­
male slaves and personally manage the farming business. Bhiksus

59

2i3b

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

who abide by the disciplinary rules refuse to eat the food produced
by such monks because they think that such monks, by personally
running a farm, support themselves by improper livelihood. By
ordering about the hired men who work in the fields, they inevita­
bly arouse their resentment, and digging the earth to plant seeds
as well as plowing land are liable to injure ants and other insects.
One’s daily ration is no more than one sheng of grain; who can
make it stand for a hundred evil deeds? Hence an honest and up­
right monk is disgusted with the cumbersome task of farming. He
abandons it and goes far away with his pot and bowl to sit alone in
a quiet forest and takes pleasure in the company of birds and deer.
Being away from the hubbub of pursuing fame and gain, he culti­
vates the calm of nirvana.
If a monk manages a business to gain profit for the Sangha, it
is permitted by the Vinaya, but he is not allowed to cultivate land
and injure living things. Nothing is more harmful to insects and
more obstructive to good deeds than the cultivation of land. The
guilt and wrong livelihood related to the cultivation of ten qing
(one qing equals 6.6666 hectares) of land have not been enumer­
ated in any books, but people have repeatedly taken the trouble to
waste pen and ink in writing about the rules concerning the three
faultless and rightful robes. Alas! I can tell this matter only to
those who have faith; it is difficult for me to discuss it with those
who are skeptical because I fear those who transmit the Dharma
may still persistently adhere to their own views.
When I arrived at Tamralipti for the first time, I saw a square
field outside the monastery. Some laymen suddenly came there to
fetch vegetables, which they divided into three portions, giving
one portion to the Sangha and taking two away for themselves.
I did not understand what was going on, and inquired of the Ven­
erable Mahayanadlpa about their intention. He said in reply, “The
monks of this monastery are mostly observers of the disciplinary
rules. As they are not allowed by the Great Sage to cultivate land
themselves, they rent the land to others and take a share of the
crops for food. ” In this manner they could sustain their lives by

60

Fascicle Two

right livelihood without involving themselves with worldly con­
nections, as they were free from the fault of destroying living things
through plowing and irrigating the fields. I also saw a bhiksu
(mendicant), who was the director of monastic affairs, inspect
the water from a well every morning. If there was no insect in
the water, it was used. Once life was found in it, it had to be
filtered before being used. I also saw that whenever anything,
even as small as a piece of a vegetable, was given by outsiders,
the monks had to ask the permission of the Sangha before they
might use it. I also saw that no controller was appointed in the
monastery; when anything happened, a meeting was convened to
make a decision. If a monk acted according to his own will and
made decisions as he pleased, or treated others favorably or unfa­
vorably regardless of the opinion of the Sangha, he was called a
kulapati (layman) and expelled by the Sangha.
I also saw that when the nuns had to go to a monastery, they
had to make an announcement before they started to proceed there.
When the monks had to go to a nunnery, they had to make an
inquiry before going there. When monks wished to go out of the
monastery, they had to go out in twos, and when they had to go to
a layman’s house on business, they might, with the permission of
the Sangha, go in a company of four. I also saw that on the four
fast days of each month, the monks of the whole monastery as­
sembled in the evening to listen to a recitation of the disciplinary
rules, which they observed with deep deference.
I also witnessed the following incident: Once a junior monk
ordered his boy attendant to send two sheng of rice to the wife of a
servant because of the junior monk’s illicit relations with the
woman. This matter was reported to the Sangha, and the monk
was summoned to answer questions. In the course of interroga­
tion, the three admitted their misbehavior. Although the junior
monk did not commit the evil act, he was ashamed of himself,
withdrew his name from the list of monks, and went away from
the monastery forever. His teacher asked somebody to send his
clothing and other things to him. Such is the clerical law which all

61

213c

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

the monks observed. They need not take the trouble to go to a
secular court of justice for a settlement.
I also saw that once a woman came to the monastery, but she
did not enter the chambers. She just spoke with the monks in the
corridor for a short moment and went away. I also saw that in the
monastery there was a bhiksu by the name of Rahulamitra, who
was then about thirty years old. His conduct was unusually per­
fect and his fame was high and far reaching. Every day he read
the Ratnakuta-sutra, which consisted of seven hundred stanzas.
He was well versed in the Buddhist texts of the Tripitaka, and
was thoroughly conversant with those secular books, the four
Vedas. He was honored as an elder in the eastern part of the Land
of Saints. Since he was fully ordained, he had never spoken face to
face with a woman; even when his mother or elder sister came, he
would come out just to have a look at them. When I asked him
why he behaved like that, since it was not the holy teaching, he
said in reply, I am a man of much carnal passion by nature, and if
I did otherwise, I could not stop its source. Although [to speak
with women] is not prohibited by the Holy One, what is wrong if
my behavior is meant to prevent evil desires?”
I also saw that learned monks who were well versed in the
holy texts of any one of the three collections were lodged in the
best chambers and provided with servants to wait upon them. They
gave lectures regularly and were exempted from routine monastic
duties. When they went out, they mostly rode in palanquins, but
never on horseback. I also saw that when a guest monk came to
the monastery for the first time, the Sangha would provide him
with good food for five days, so that he could rest and recover from
fatigue. After that he lived like other ordinary monks. If he was a
good person, the Sangha might invite him to stay and allow him
to spend the summer retreat that year with a supply of bedding.
If he was not a learned man, he would be treated like the other
regular monks. Only those who were well learned were treated
with the arrangements mentioned above, with their names writ­
ten in the monastic register just like the original resident monks.

62

Fascicle Two

I also saw that when a man came with a good mind, he would be
asked his purpose, and if he came to become a monk, the Sangha
would shave his hair. His name would have nothing more to do
with the king’s census register, as the monks kept their own reg­
istration books. Afterwards, if he violated the Vinaya rules and
committed misdeeds, he would be expelled with the sound of a
ghanta (bell). Thus the monks would examine each other and see
to it that faults were nipped in the bud and not allowed to grow up
gradually in the course of time.
I should say with a sigh that when I was in the Divine Land of
China, I thought of myself as knowing the Vinaya well, and little
imagined that after coming here to India, I should have found my­
self ignorant of the subject. Had I not come to the west, how could
I have seen such correct rules and regulations? Some of these rules
are laid down by the monks of the monastery and some are spe­
cially made for the rectification of the mind, while the rest are found
in the Vinaya texts, which are important for the maintenance of
the Buddha’s teachings in this period of the decay of the Dharma.
All these are the rules of the Balaha Monastery at Tamralipti,
but at Nalanda Monastery the regulations are still stricter. Thus
over three thousand monks lived there, with a fief of more than
two hundred villages, which were offered to them as alms by the
kings and monarchs of successive dynasties. The uninterrupted
prosperity of the monastery is due to nothing else but the obser­
vance of the Vinaya rules by the monks.
I have never seen [in India] that a secular official would sit in
the middle of the audience hall of his yamen, while the monks
stand aside in a row, bullied, slighted, called and shouted to just
like ordinary laymen. The monks [in China] run about, seldom
feeling tired on the way, to see off a leaving official and welcome
the new one. If the imperial inspector does not visit the monas­
tery, they go to the government house to seek a livelihood, without
regarding whether it is in the cold or the hot season.
A man becomes a homeless monk because he wishes to free him­
self from worldly entanglements, so as to give up the hazardous

63

2i4a

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

way of the five fears and follow the safe thoroughfare of the eight­
fold right path. Why should one be again involved in mundane
affairs and be caught once more in the net of immorality? If so,
how can we fulfill our wish of achieving perfect calm? It may be
said that in that way we are acting entirely in contradiction to
spiritual emancipation and not in concordance with quietude. It is
only reasonable that we should practice the twelve dhuta (ascetic
ways of living) and own only the thirteen articles of necessity to
sustain our lives according to circumstances. We should wash away
old habits, repay the great bounty of our teachers and of the Sangha
and our parents, and requite the heavenly beings and nagas, as
well as the lords and emperors, for their deep compassion. In this
way we may well follow the laws of the Guide of Men and become
rightly fit for the path of spiritual cultivation and exhortation. In
the course of discussing the preservation of life, I have mentioned
actual practices. I hope my virtuous readers will not feel that my
discussion is dull and tedious.
The distinctions between the four schools are marked by the
way the monks wear their undergarments. The monks of the
Sarvastivada School double-fold their undergarments outwards
on both sides, while the monks of the Mahasamghika School stuff
the right piece of the undergarment into the left side and press
it in tightly, so that it will not get loose. The women of India in
the west wear their skirts in just the same way as the monks of
the M ahasamghika School. The way that the monks o f the
Sthavira and Sammitiya Schools wear their undergarments is
similar to that o f the Mahasamghika School, except that they
turn the edge outwards and press it to one side. The make of
girdle is also different. The nuns wear their robes in the same
m anner as the monks o f their respective schools, w ith no
difference at all.
But the Chinese monks’ samkaksikas (outer garments), which
are worn over only one shoulder, and their square skirts, trousers,
leg sheaths, loose gowns with huge sleeves, and short jackets are
all contrary to the original rules. Not only do their robes have

64

Fascicle Two

sleeves similar to those on laymen’s clothes and cover the whole
back closely, even their manner of wearing them is not in concor­
dance with the Vinaya rules. Both wearing and using such gar­
ments are blameworthy. Some Chinese monks attired in such dress
came to India in the west, and the local people laughed at them.
As they were ashamed of themselves, they tore their clothes to
pieces for miscellaneous use, because it is unwarranted for a monk
to wear any such garments. If I kept silence without saying any­
thing, people would not be able to know about it. Although I wished
to speak outright, I feared that my hearers would bear resent­
ment towards me. Hence, I tried to express my superficial views in
this composition of mine, but I hesitated to proceed or hold back. I
wish that the wise ones will make a careful study so as to know
about the original rules concerning clothing.
In India the garments worn by the laypeople, officials, and
noblemen of higher castes consist of only two pieces of fine white
cotton cloth, while the poor and low-caste people merely have one
piece of cotton cloth. The homeless monks possess only the three
robes and the six requisites, and only those who take delight in
owning more things use the thirteen necessities. In China the
monks are not allowed to wear garments with two sleeves and a
whole back, but the fact is that they follow Chinese customs and
talk falsely about things Indian.
Now I will give a brief description of the people and their cos­
tume in Jambudvipa and the various islands on the border of the
sea. From Mahabodhi eastward to Lin-yi, there are more than
twenty countries extending up to the southern boundary of Huanzhou. If we proceed to the southwest, we reach the sea. In the
north, Kasmira is the limit, while in the South Seas there are
more than ten countries, including the island of Simhala. In all
these countries the people wear two pieces of kambala. (a woolen
loincloth), which is neither cut nor sewn up, without a girdle. It is
simply a wide piece of cloth about two fathoms long, put around
the waist to cover the lower parts. Beyond India at the edge of the
great sea are the countries of the Persians and the Tajiks, where

65

2i4b

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

the people wear shirts and trousers, while in the country of the
naked, the people wear no dress at all, both men and women being
stark naked. Further away from Kasmira, the various Hu peoples,
such as the Tibetans and the Turks of Suli, dress in roughly the
same way. They do not wear kambalas, but use felt and fur, and
have little karoasa (cotton), which is used only occasionally. As it
is a cold region, shirts and trousers are regularly used.
Among these countries, except those of the Persians, the na­
ked people, the Tibetans, and the Turks, where no Buddhism was
known originally, all follow the Buddha’s teachings. Even in the
lands where shirts and trousers are used, the people do not bathe
themselves clean; hence the people of the five parts of India are
proud of their own cleanliness and sublimity. But so far as cul­
tural personality and refinement, etiquette in meeting friends, the
culinary art, magnanimity of kindness, and righteousness are con­
cerned, no country excels China in the east. The monks in China,
however, do not preserve the purity of food, and neither do they
wash after going to the latrine, nor chew willow twigs to cleanse
their teeth. In these matters they are different from the western
regions. Some monks hold that it is faultless to wear improper
garments and quote a passage from the Samksipta-sasana-vinayasutra which says, “What is considered impure in this place, may
be regarded as pure in other places, where it may be practiced
without fault. ” This passage is mistranslated and the correct mean­
ing is not so, as I have pointed out elsewhere.
For a bhiksu in China, garments other than the three robes
are not allowable by the sacred rules. Since it is faulty to put on
extra garments, it is reasonable not to use them. In a warm coun­
try like India one may use only one unlined garment through all
the seasons o f the year, but in a cold country with snowy hills,
how could one live in health if one wished to discard [warm
clothes]? It is the sincere word of the Buddha that we should
keep our body in ease and our work in progress, while the prac­
tice o f self-torture and immoderate exertion is the teaching of
heretics. Now what should we take or reject?

66

Fascicle Two

The Buddha permitted the use of the repa garment, which is
commonly worn in cold countries and is sufficient to keep the body
warm. How can it be said to be a hindrance to the practice of the
Way? The Sanskrit word repa may be interpreted as “abdomen
covering cloth.” I will give a brief description of how it is made.
Cut a piece of cloth so as to make it without a back, leaving one
shoulder bare. No sleeve is attached to one side. It is only one
piece of cloth, just big enough to put on. The shoulder sleeve, which
is not wide, is on the left side, and it is not fitting to make it wide
and large. It is tied up on the right side with strings so that no
wind will waft into the garment. It may be stuffed with a large
quantity of cotton wool to make it thick and warm. Sometimes
the right side of this sort of underwear is sewn right up to the
armpit, so that it has to be slipped on over the head. Such is the
proper way of making this garment which I have seen in the
west. Most of the monks coming from the Hu regions brought
along and wore this kind of garment, but I never saw such clothes
at Nalanda, because it is in a hot country where the people do
not use them. From this we may know that monks are allowed
to wear this kind of garment in cold countries. The old clothes,
which are bare at the back, originally followed the example of
this garment. But an extra piece of cloth added to the right side
makes the garment lose its former style. If one does not make a
garment according to the established rules, one is sure to commit
an offense against the Dharma.
As regards the repa garment, it is for wrapping the abdomen
to protect it in the severe cold season, while the thick mantle which
is worn over the whole body is warm enough to prevent frostbite.
When worshiping the Buddha’s image in a shrine hall, or in the
presence of a senior monk, one should always keep one shoulder
bare; to cover it incurs guilt. As it is for the sake of getting rid of
encumbrances that one becomes a homeless monk, and moreover,
as a charcoal fire is always kept burning in the living quarters
during the winter season, there is no need for a monk to put on
superfluous clothes. In case of illness, when it is necessary to wear

67

2 i4 c

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

more clothes, one may do so at one’s own discretion, but one should
not act against the rules.
In China, however, the severe cold may pierce the body, and if
one did not put on warm clothes, one would certainly die of ener­
vation. Since we are all alike involved in suffering, it is reasonable
to extend salvation to all people. The square skirt and the robe
that leaves one shoulder bare distinguish a monk from a layman,
but the repa garment is to be worn only temporarily during the
cold season of winter. From this we may know that it was not
originally designed for monks to wear, but that for the sake of
protecting our lives we are permitted to use it, as the wheels of a
cart need oiling. We should feel deep shame at being obliged to do
so, and the best thing is not to wear it. Other clothes, such as loose
gowns, leg sheaths, trousers, and shirts should by no means be
allowed for regular use. As soon as the severe cold season is over,
it is not fitting to wrap the whole body in such clothes. One should
change them for a robe that leaves one shoulder uncovered, as it
is actually not permissible for a monk to wear them. In this way
we may get the gist and be rid of the superfluities of the matter,
acting according to the true teachings of the Buddha. One may
act freely only for oneself; if one teaches in that way, I fear one
will mislead others.
If we could change the old course and strike out on a new path,
we might then continue the line [left by Bodhidharma] at Shaoshi Mountain and be as lofty as Vulture Peak. We might sit side
by side [with the sages] in the city of Rajagrha and transmit the
Dharma to the country of the Emperor so that we might protect it
together. Thus the Yellow River might mingle its pure water with
the Lake of Mucilinda. The slender-leaved willow would shine si­
multaneously with the bodhi tree, which would thrive until the
field of mulberry trees changes [into the sea]. The glory would last
until the kalpa-stone is completely wiped away. How marvelous it
would be! Let us strive to attain this goal!
But now the Sun of the Buddha has sunk and only his teach­
ing is left behind in this period of termination. If we practice his

68

Fascicle Two

teaching, it is just as if we are living in the presence of the Great
Teacher, but if we act against his teaching, various faults will be
perpetrated. The Buddha, therefore, said in a sutra, “If my pre­
cepts are followed, it shall be just as if I am living m this world.
Someone may say that since the virtuous people of old did not
say anything about such things, why should we, men of a later
time, change the convention? It is not correct to say so. For it is

2i5 a

the Dharma, and not any man, upon which we depend; this point
has been extensively expounded in the Buddha’s doctrine. Research
into the Vinaya texts will show that monks may take only sue
clothing and food as are not tainted by violations of the precepts.
It is not hard to know a thing, but to practice it is difficult. If a
man fails to practice what he has learned, why should the teacher
be blamed?
Let me repeat it:
For all living beings,
Food and clothing are most important.
They are the cangue and shackles
Keeping us in the field of rebirth.
By following the holy word and rules,
One may get freedom from the world.
To act in one’s own way
Involves trouble and faults.
Let the wise men know
Retribution is instant.
One should be unstained like jade in mire
Or a lotus growing out of muddy water.
When the eight airs have left the body,
The five fears give no more trouble.
Clothing is only for covering the body;
Food is merely for sustaining life.
Fix your mind on attaining emancipation,
Never wish to be reborn as a man or a god.
Practice austerities to the end of life;

69

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

Spend your years saving all living beings.
Give up the unreality of the nine happy abodes;
Aspire to the perfection and firmness of the ten stages.
Try to be qualified to receive alms fit for the five hundred
arhats
And competent to give benefit and welfare to the three
thousand worlds.

11. How to Wear the Robes
Now I will give a description, according to the Vinaya, about how
to wear the three robes and make loops and fasteners. Take a
religious robe that is five cubits long, and fold it into three lay­
ers. A patch of cloth about five finger-widths square is fixed at the
pleat on the shoulder about four or five finger-widths within the
border o f the robe. The four sides o f the patch are stitched on the
robe. A small hole is made with an awl in the center to fix the
loop, which is made o f silk braid or a piece of silk cloth and is
about the size of the loops of an ordinary shirt. It is two fingers
long, tied into a love knot. The remainder should be cut off. One
end o f the loop is then put into the hole and drawn out to the
other side o f the robe. It is pulled back crosswise to form two
loops. The inner part o f the fastener is at the pleated part of the
robe in front of the chest. The fasteners at the border of the robe
are fixed in the same way as those fixed on a shirt. Such is the
method of fixing fasteners on a robe. This is only a rough descrip­
tion which I am submitting to my readers for the time being. If
one wishes to know the actual method in detail, one has to learn
about it face to face from a teacher. Loops and fasteners are also
fixed at the lower part of the robe. As the monks are permitted by
the Buddha to wear their robes upside down at will, a loop and a
fastener are fixed separately at the two lower corners, about eight
finger-widths from the border of the robe. Monks are required, at
mealtime, to fasten the reversely folded corners together before
the chest. This is an essential point.

70

Fascicle Two

When one is in a monastery or in the presence of an assembly
of monks, one must not use the strings and fasteners, or cover both
shoulders with the robe. But when one is going out of the monas­
tery or entering a layman’s house, one must tie up the fasteners.
At other times one may just cover the shoulders. When one is in
seclusion or performing monastic duties, one may put on the robe
inside out at will. But in the honored presence of an image of the
Buddha, one must dress properly and tidily, putting the right cor­
ner of the robe loosely over the left shoulder so that it hangs behind
the back without falling on the arm. If one wishes to use the fasten­
ings, one should cover both shoulders with the robe and then turn
the fastenings inside to fall in back of the shoulder; one must not let
them get loose. When the corner is put over the shoulder, the robe
may go round the neck, and both one’s hands may come out beneath
the robe with the corner hanging in front. A lovely statue of
King Asoka, depicting him in a procession with an umbrella over
him, is dressed in this manner. This is the way to wear the upper
robe in an orderly manner according to the teaching of the Buddha.
The umbrella may be woven out of slender bamboo sticks, as
thin as a bamboo vessel of only one layer. The size may be two or
three feet in diameter at one’s option. The center is made doubly
thick to hold the handle, the length of which is in proportion to
the circumference of the cover. The cover of the umbrella may be
painted with a thin layer of lacquer. It may also be woven of reed.
If paper is pasted inside the cover, in the way that rattan hats and
the like are manufactured, it is made strong.
Although umbrellas have not been used in China before, it is
desirable to make them. In a sudden shower, it protects our robes
from getting wet, and in the heat of the blazing sun, it keeps us
cool under its shade. To use an umbrella is in concordance with
the Vinaya as well as beneficial to our bodies, and there is no harm
in holding one. Many of the necessary things we have discussed
here have not been used in China before.
One corner of the kasaya hangs in front like the trunk of an
elephant. All Indian monks who came to China wore the robe in

71

2i5b

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

this fashion, because fine silk is so smooth that a robe made of it is
liable to slip down the shoulder. Thus the correct way of dressing
was replaced by a wrong manner. Afterwards, when the Tripitaka
master of the Tang dynasty (Venerable Xuanzang) came back from
India, he introduced wearing the robe with one corner hanging
over the shoulder, but many of the elderly monks still disliked it.
A bias towards persistence in old practices exists everywhere.
With regard to the three robes, if short fastenings are fixed on
them instead of long ribbons, it is not considered a fault. Wearing
a whole piece of cloth sideways as a skirt without a waist piece
will save one the trouble of sewing and stitching. The water pot,
the alms bowl, and all other belongings should be hung on the
shoulders just below the armpits so that the strings will not inter­
twine. The strings should not be too long, just long enough to hang
the objects over the shoulders. If the strings crossed before the
chest, they would cause one to pant for breath. One must not do
so, as it is not the original way of carrying things. I shall talk
about the bag for carrying the alms bowl later.
The people of Suli and other places in the north often carry
things crossing one another. This is a regional modification and
was not a rule laid down by the Buddha. If one has an extra robe,
one may first put it lengthwise over one shoulder and then cover
both shoulders over the robe one is wearing and the alms bowl one
is carrying.
When going to a monastery or repairing to a layman’s house,
one must go into the premises to put down the umbrella, and then
untie the strings to hang up one’s [extra] robe and alms bowl. The
wall before a house is usually fixed with ivory hangers, so that
visitors will not be in want of a place to hang their things. Other
relevant matters will be related in Chapter Twenty-six on how to
meet an old acquaintance.
As a kasaya made of thin silk is very slippery, it cannot easily
stay on the shoulder, and when one is worshiping an image of the
Buddha, it often falls to the ground. So it is better to use some less
smooth stuff, such as rough silk or fine cotton cloth. As regards

72

Fascicle Two

the samkaksika, i.e., the side-covering garment, it should be more
than one cubit long in order to comply with the original rules.
Then wearing this kind of garment, the right shoulder is bare and
only the left one is covered. In the chamber one always wears this
garment and a skirt, but when going out to salute honored ones,
one has to put on other robes in addition.
As for how to wear the skirt, I will just give a brief account.
According to the rules for m aking a skirt adopted by the
Sarvastivada School, the skirt is a piece of fine silk or cotton cloth,
as the case may be, five cubits across by two cubits long. In India it
is made unlined, while in China it may be lined as one pleases,
and the length and width are as desired. After having put it around
[the lower part of] the body, you pull it up to cover the navel. Hold
the upper corner of the left flap of the skirt with your right hand,
and pull it from the inside to reach the right side of the waist. The
left flap of the upper robe is taken to cover the left side. (Yijing’s
running note: The right flap is the one near the right hand; the
left flap, the one near the left hand.) Raise both ends of the skirt
to make them even and twist them right in the middle into three
folds. Then press them with both hands into the waist with all
three folds turned back and twisted beneath. The two corners are
raised three fingers higher and inserted inwards about three fingers
down to the skirt itself. When the skirt is worn in this manner, it
will stick to the body and will not fall off even if it is not tied with
a belt. Then hook up the middle of the skirt with a waistband
about five cubits long, and raise it up below the navel. Bind the
skirt at the upper edge and stretch it to the back in double layers
which are folded one upon the other and drawn to the front at the
left and right sides. Hold both ends of the band, one in each hand,
and press them fast on both sides. Then bind the waist three times
with the two ends of the band. If it is too long, cut it short, and if it
is not long enough, add some more to it. The ends of the band
should not be stitched or adorned. This is the all-round way of
wearing the skirt, [known in Sanskrit as parimandala-nivasa,
translated into Chinese as the all-round way of wearing the skirt]

73

2i5c

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

which is the distinctive mark of the Sarvastivada School. The width
of the waistband is about that of a finger. As regards the bootlace,
the garter, and the like, they may be square or round. It is harm­
less to use them doubled up, but to use such a thing as hempen
string is not allowed by the Vinaya texts.
When one sits in a small chair, or on a block of wood, one should
hold up the lower corners of the skirt and press the edge of the
skirt under the thighs with a quick movement just to cover the
knees. It is harmless to leave the shins uncovered. The upper part
of the skirt should cover the navel, and the lower part should reach
the point four fingers above the ankles. Such is the manner of
wearing the skirt in a layman’s house, but in a monastery it is
allowable to cover just the upper part of the shins. These limits
were fixed by the Buddha, and no one should alter them at will.
Should one purposely act against the Buddha’s teachings to sat­
isfy one’s human fancies? If the skirt one wears is so long as to
trail on the ground, one would spoil the pure gift presented by a
devotee on the one hand, and on the other hand, would disregard
the maxims of the Great Teacher. My remonstrance is sincere, but
who will listen to me? I hope that out of ten thousand monks, one
or two may pay attention to my words.
In India the skirt is worn crosswise round the body. The
white cotton cloth o f India is two cubits wide, and as it is only
half the width required for making a skirt, it is difficult for a
poor man to obtain a bigger piece. He has to join and sew to­
gether the two edges of the cloth and cut open the inside to meet
his requirement. The rules for wearing garments are recorded in
the Vinaya texts; I have only given a brief description of the es­
sentials of the matter. No detailed explanation can be given un­
less we hold a face-to-face discussion.
Furthermore, all the garments of a homeless monk may be
dyed in the color of gandha (myrrh), or of the yellow dust of gluti­
nous rehmannia, vitex, philodendron, etc. These stuffs should be
mixed with water in which red earth or red stone grains have been
ground. One should make the color neither too deep nor too light,

74

Fascicle Two

just to the point of meeting the requirement without taking too
much trouble. Or one may just use the core of the sour jujube
tree, or simply red earth and red stone grains, or birch leaf pear
and earth-purple. As the color once dyed will last till the gar­
ment is worn out, why should one try to get any more kinds of
dyestuffs? The bark of the mulberry tree and blue and green col­
ors are prohibited, while true purple and brown colors are not
used in the west.
As regards shoes and sandals, there are special instructions.
Boots and thread-knitted shoes are completely banned as illegal.
Embroidery and ornaments are not allowed by the Buddha, as is
fully explained in the “Rules about Leather.”

12. The Robes and Funeral Rites of a
Bhiksuni
In China the bhiksunls (Buddhist nuns) dress like laywomen, and
their clothes are mostly contrary to the rules. According to the
Vinaya, a bhiksuni possesses five garments, namely, (1) the
sam ghdti, (2) the uttardsahga, (3) the antarvdsa, (4) the
samkaksikd, and (5) a skirt. The style of the first four garments
is not dissimilar to those worn by a monk, but a nun’s skirt is
different. It is known as kusulaka in Sanskrit, meaning a silo­
shaped skirt because it is sewn at both sides in the shape of a
small silo. It is four cubits long and two cubits wide. It may cover
up the navel and reach down to four fingers above the ankles. To
wear the skirt, one steps into it, pulls it up to cover the navel,
and then contracts the top of the skirt on both sides and ties it
up with a double band in the back. The way of tying the band is
more or less the same as that of monks.
Between the chest and the armpits [of a bhiksuni], no breast
cover should be tied. But if she is in her youth or in old age, when
her breasts rise high or become flaccid, she may wear one with­
out fault. W hy should one put her to shame, saying that she does

75

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

not know the rules and regulations? Free use of ornaments is blame­
worthy at the moment of putting them on or taking them off. At
the time of death, she will have evil effects falling upon her like
drizzling rain. If one has committed an offense only once out of
many times, one should still make a timely repentance.
When going out, or in the presence of monks, or on being invited
to accept a meal at a layman’s house, a nun should put her kasaya
round her neck to cover her body, and should not untie the strings
at the shoulders. She should not expose her chest, and her hands
should be thrust out from under her robe to take the food. A
samkaksika which covers only one shoulder, and shirts and trou­
sers, are prohibited by the Great Sage; they are unfit for a nun
to wear.

216 b

In the countries of the South Seas, the nuns have a special
garment. It is also called samkaksika, though not the same in style
as in India. It is two cubits long and two cubits wide. The edges of
it are sewn together, leaving about one foot not sewn in the cen­
ter, and the upper corners are cut one inch open. To wear this
garment, one holds it up, puts one’s head and shoulders through
the hole, and then pulls one’s right shoulder out of it. It has no
waistband; it covers one’s sides, breasts, and navel; and it reaches
below the knees. If one wishes to wear this garment, it is harmless
to do so. It has only two fastenings, and is good enough to conceal
shame. If one does not like to wear it, one may wear the samkaksika
worn by monks. In the chambers of a nunnery, it is adequate for a
nun to wear only a kusulaka and a samkaksika. (Yijing’s running
note. I examined the Sanskrit texts and did not come across the
name “shoulder-covering g a rm en t,” w hich is actually the
samkaksika. This is the original for the Chinese transliteration
qi-zhi. It is not called a “skirt” in Chinese; perhaps the translators
used different terms.) One should reject a garment which is against
the rules and wear one which is made in compliance with the
Buddha’s teaching.
Making a samkaksika requires a full width and a half of silk or
some cotton cloth four or five cubits in length. The way of wearing it

76

Fascicle Two

is to put it over the shoulders in reverse, just as one wears the
robe of five stripes. When going out to places other than one s
chamber, one should be well covered. Even in the latrine, it is
improper to leave the shoulders bare. In the spring and summer
seasons one may use this garment to cover the body, while in
the autu m n and winter seasons, one may optionally put on
warmer clothes.
By begging for food with an alms bowl, a nun may sufficiently
maintain herself. Although she is a woman, she has the lofty aspi­
rations of a man. Why should she always busy herself with the
shuttle and loom and do miscellaneous work to make herself many
garments, no less than five or ten? Some nuns never pay attention
to meditation or the recitation of scriptures, being always driven
by the vexations of an emotional temperament. They deck them­
selves with ornaments like laywomen, paying no regard to the
texts on precepts. It befits all disciples to oversee and check on
one another about their behavior.
In India none of the nuns act in such a way. All of them get
their sustenance by begging for food and live a poor and simple
life. But the nuns [in China] rarely have any beneficial support.
The nunneries in which they abide are mostly devoid of a commu­
nity supply of food, and if they did not try to earn a livelihood
according to circumstances, they would have no way to keep them­
selves alive. If they do so, they are liable to act contrary to the
teachings of the Vinaya and go against the Buddha s mind. Can
they make a compromise and get out of the dilemma? It is said
that when the body is at ease, the Way will flourish. But can we
hear more about it in detail?
In reply I would say that one’ s original object in becoming
homeless was to gain emancipation, so as to extirpate the nox­
ious roots of the three trees [of greed, hatred, and stupidity]
and to suppress the flood o f the four torrents [of desire, con­
tinual existence, erroneous views, and ignorance]. One should
follow the practice of austerity and keep off the wrong paths of
suffering and enjoyment. One should strive hard to keep one s

77

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

desires to a minimum, and pursue the true path of quietude. When
one observes the precepts day and night, the Way will get on in
the world. How can one think that it is reasonable to maintain the
body in ease? If one can abide by the Vinaya rules and differentiate
truth from falsehood, one will naturally be respected by drag­
ons, spirits, and heavenly and human beings. Why should one
worry about one’s livelihood and toil without purpose? The five
robes, a pot, and an alms bowl are enough for a nun to subsist
upon, and a small cell is sufficient for her to live in. When one
simplifies personal matters and spares one’s disciples the trouble
of attendance, one will be like a piece of jade lying undefiled in
mire, or a pure lotus flower growing out of muddy water. Although
such a nun may be a person of low rank, her wisdom is really equal
to that of a superior personality.

2 i 6c

Upon the death of their parents, [Chinese] monks and nuns
perform rites and ceremonies unscrupulously, or they mourn over
the dead as the bereaved children of a lay family would do, or
arrange small mourning tables in their rooms to make offerings to
the deceased, or wear a piece o f dark-colored cloth in contradiction
to regulations, or keep their hair long against the rules, or hold a
wailing stick, or sleep on a straw mat in a mourning hut. All these
practices are not taught by the Buddha, and they may well be
omitted without committing a fault. What one should do, on ac­
count of the deceased, is to clean and decorate a room in which
canopies and curtains may be temporarily fixed up for one to re­
cite the scriptures and meditate on the Buddha while offering in­
cense and flowers, so that the souls of the dead may be reborn in a
good place. This is the way for a filial offspring to requite the kind­
ness of the deceased. Why should one live in mourning for three
years to show off one’s virtue, and fast for seven days as a way of
repaying the kindness of one’s dead parents? These actions will
simply rebind the dead to earthly troubles to suffer more chains
and fetters and pass from one dark place to another without know­
ing the twelve links of the chain of causality in the three divisions.

78

Fascicle Two

If one proceeds from death to death, how can one realize the ten
stages of perfect achievement?
According to the teachings of the Buddha, when a bhiksu is
dead and his death has been ascertained, the corpse is carried to a
crematorium on the same day and cremated soon afterwards. In
the course of the cremation, his relatives and acquaintances gather
together and sit at one side on bundles of straw, or on a heap of
earth, or on bricks and stones. A competent monk is asked to re­
cite from the Anitya-sutra, a text on impermanence, as little as
half a page or one page, so that it will not be tedious and tiresome.
(Yijing’s running note: This text has been copied and sent home
separately.) Then all of them meditate on the impermanent na­
ture of all things, and after that they return to their abodes. In a
pond outside the monastery, they bathe themselves with their
clothes on. If there is no pond, they may wash near a well. They
wear old garments, so as not to spoil new ones. Then they change
into dry clothes and return to their chambers. The ground is
purified by the smearing of cow’s dung, and all other things re­
main as usual. Not a bit of their dress is changed [for the occa­
sion], Sometimes sariras (ashes) are collected, and a stupa (a
tumulus) is built. It is known as a kula (a mound) and is in the
shape of a small pagoda, but without the wheel sign on the top.
The pagoda for an ordinary person and that for a Holy One are
different, as is fully described in the Vinaya texts. How can we
agree to discard the holy teachings of Sakyamuni, the Father, and
pursue the secular burial rites taught by the Duke of Zhou, wail­
ing for several months and wearing mourning apparel for three
years? I heard that there was a Venerable Lingyu, who never per­
formed a funeral service, nor did he put on mourning dress. In
memory of the deceased, he cultivated meritorious deeds on their
behalf. Some of the monks in the capital and at Luo-yang also
followed his example. People may think that he was unfilial to
behave so, but they do not know that his action was more in con­
cordance with the gist of the Vinaya.

79

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

13. The Purification of a Site
There are five methods of purifying the ground of a site; namely,
(1) purification through mental action, (2) purification through
common consent, (3) a place resembling a cow lying down, (4) an
old deserted place, and (5) purification through the assent of the
assembly of monks.
Purification through mental action indicates that when the
foundation stone has been laid for the construction of a monas­
tery, the supervising bhiksu should think thus, “At this spot in
the monastery, or in the house, a pure kitchen should be built for
the community of monks. ”

2i7 a

Common consent means that when the foundation stone o f a
monastery has been laid in the presence of, say, three monks, one
of them should say to the other two, “Brethren, let us fix our at­
tention to mark out this place in the monastery, or in the house,
for the construction of a pure kitchen for the community of monks. ”
The second and the third monks should also repeat the same.
The place resembling a cow lying down means that the build­
ings of the monastery being erected are in the shape of a cow lying
on the ground, with the doors of the chambers opened at random
without a fixed plan. Even if no rites have been performed for its
purification, such a place is considered pure by itself.
An old deserted place denotes a place which has long been
abandoned and forsaken by the monks. If they come back, as soon
as they reach the site, it is regarded as pure. But they cannot
spend a night there unless a ceremony has been performed.
Purification through the assent o f the assembly o f monks
means that approval of the boundaries of a site for building a
monastery is given by the assembly of monks after due discussion
of a proposal submitted to them for consideration. The details are
related in the Mulasarvastivada-nikaya-ekasata-karman.
Once one of these five rites has been performed, the Buddha
said, “This will enable all bhiksus to have the double ability to
cook food within and store it outside of the boundaries, or to cook

80

Fascicle Two

food outside of and store it within the limits, both being w ith­
out fau lt.”
When I examined the rites of purification of the monks of the
four schools, witnessed the actual practice at the present time,
and made a careful study of the purport of the Vinaya, I found
that the method of purification was roughly the same as what
has been described above. If monks drink, eat, and lodge to­
gether at a place before it has been purified, they commit an
offense of cooking and lodging [at an improper place]. Once it
has been purified, they may drink, eat, and lodge together in
the limits without committing the offense of cooking and lodging
[at an improper place].
When we say a monastery, we imply that the whole monastic
residence is a pure kitchen. In every chamber raw and cooked
food may be stored. If a monk is not allowed to spend the night
inside a monastery, can we drive him out to stay outside over­
night? First, monks do not preserve berths for themselves, and
secondly, keeping provisions in the monastery is permissible. It is
the tradition of India to purify and demarcate the whole monas­
tery as a kitchen, but to use a part of it as a kitchen is also per­
mitted by the Vinaya. These views are not the same as those of
the Vinaya masters in China.
If a monk stays away from the monastery for a night, with­
out having purified and marked out a spot to keep his robes, he is
blameworthy. If the spot has already been purified and marked
out by the assembly of monks, he may leave his monastery to spend
the night there without committing a fault. The same is the case
with the pure kitchen. Since such is allowed by the Buddha, we
must not stick to our own worldly opinions. The demarcation of a
spot for safekeeping of one’s robes is fixed in different ways, de­
pending on whether it is under a tree or in some other place. It is
just a boundary of protection, and is not meant to guard against
women. If a [female] servant comes into the kitchen, shall we
deem it a village? When one carries one s robes at the time of
going to a village, it is not meant to guard oneself against women.

81

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

When the karmadana (director o f duties) goes round to supervise
monastic affairs and carries his robes with him, it is really too
burdensome for him.

14. The Summer Retreat of the Five Groups

2i7 b

The first summer retreat starts on the first day of the dark half of
the fifth moon, and the second summer retreat begins on the first
day of the dark half of the sixth moon. The summer retreat may
be commenced only on these two days; no other date between them
is fixed as the day to begin the retreat in the Vinaya texts. The
first summer retreat concludes in the middle of the eighth moon,
while the second terminates in the middle of the ninth moon. On
the day when the retreat is drawing to its end, both monks and
laymen perform a grand ceremony of alms-giving. The month af­
ter the middle of the eighth moon is called Karttika (OctoberNovember). When a Karttika congregation is held south of the
Yangzi River in China, this is just the time to conclude the first
summer retreat. The sixteenth day of the eighth moon is the day
to distribute the kathina (inflexible) robes, or the robes of merit,
as offerings to the monks. This is an ancient tradition.
It is said in a Vinaya text that during the summer retreat a
monk may take leave with a good reason to go out of the monas­
tery for one or more days as he is invited. If what he is doing can
be done in one night, he must ask for permission for one day’s
absence, up to seven days for going in response to different invita­
tions. If another occasion arises for him to go out, the Vinaya pre­
scribes that he should apply for permission again. Should the
absence exceed seven days, say eight days, or even up to forty
nights, he should apply for permission from the general assembly
of monks. Having received their unanimous permission, he may
go out for eight or more days, but he should not stay out for half of
the summer retreat. Thus leave is for forty nights at the most.
When a sick person or some troublesome matter requires him to
go out of the monastery to some other place, he may do so without

82

Fascicle Two

being regarded as breaking the summer retreat, though he has
not obtained permission beforehand.
When the five groups of the homeless disciples have settled down
for the summer retreat, if a member of the lower grade has occasion
for going out, he or she may ask another member to apply for per­
mission in his or her stead. Before the commencement of the sum­
mer retreat, rooms are preassigned to the monks, the better rooms
being allotted to the elder ones; thus all the rooms are distributed in
order of seniority to the last person. Such rules are still practiced in
Nalanda Monastery. The great assembly of monks assigns rooms
every year; this is what the World-honored One has taught us to do
with great benefit. Firstly, it may eliminate the concept of egoism,
and secondly, the monastic rooms are generally looked after by all
monks. All homeless monks should do so.
The monasteries south of the Yangzi River in China some­
times assign rooms to monks. This is a tradition handed down by
the ancients, and it is still practiced at the present. How can one
take a monastery as one’s own property, just because one is liv­
ing in it, without regarding whether such an action is permis­
sible or not, till the end of one’s life? It was because people of
former generations did not observe the right conventions that
men of subsequent ages lost sight of the Dharma. If the assign­
ment of rooms is properly done according to the teachings of the
Vinaya, it will give us great benefit.

15. The Ceremony of Confession
The last day of the summer retreat, which is also the end of the
year, should be named pravârana (the day one is free from re­
straint), when the monks are free to expose the misconduct of one
another on the three bases [of having witnessed, having heard
about, or having a suspicion of the misdeed], with the intention
of absolving others from guilt. The word was formerly translated
as zi-zi (self-release from restraint) according to its implication.

83

A Eecord of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

On the night o f the fourteenth day, a teacher well versed
in scriptures must be invited to mount a high seat to recite a
Buddhist scripture, while lay devotees and monks gather together
like clouds and mist, with lamps burning continually and incense
and flowers offered. On the following morning, all of them go out
round the village or town and worship the caityas devoutly. They
bring with them carriages with shelves and sedan chairs to carry
images of the Buddha, while drums and other instruments sound
under the sky, and banners and canopies, properly arranged, flut­
ter high to shade out the sun. This is called the samagri, trans­
lated as complete assemblage. All great festival days are celebrated
in the same way as this. It is known in China as the procession
going round the city.
When it is nearly noontime, they return to the monastery and
have their regular meal at midday. In the afternoon, they gather
together, each taking a handful of fresh cogon grass, and while
2i7c stamping their feet on it, they exercise their duty of free criticism.
First come the monks and then the nuns, and lastly the three
lower grades of the homeless disciples. If it is feared that owing
to the large number of people attending the assembly, a long
time might be required to complete the function, more members
of the assembly should be appointed to hear the confessions. When
one is accused of a fault, one should make a confession and ask for
absolution according to usage.
At this time either the lay disciples offer gifts to the monks,
or the monks exchange gifts among themselves. All alms received
are brought into the presence of the assembly, and a confessor
who possesses the five virtues [of being free from predilection,
from anger, and from fear, of not being easily deceived, and of
being able to discern shirkers o f confession] should ask the pre­
siding monk, “Can these alms be distributed to the members of
the community o f monks to be placed at their disposal?” The pre­
siding monk says in answer, “Yes!” Then all robes, razors, needles,
awls, and the like received from the donors are equally dis­
tributed to the monks. Such is the teaching of the Vinaya. The

84

Fascicle Two

reason why razors and needles are offered to the monks on this
day is that the donors wish them to acquire sharp intelligence and
keen wisdom.
After the mutual criticism and the distribution of alms, the
monks may disperse and each go his own way. This is the comple­
tion of the summer retreat, and there is no need for them to spend
another night there. A full description is given elsewhere, and I
shall not explain it here in detail.
The confession of guilt is to disclose one’s own misdeeds and
declare what offenses one has committed in the past, in order to
rectify the past and prevent future faults with perfect sincerity
and earnest self-reproach. The posadha (fasting) ceremony is con­
ducted once every half month, and one should reflect every morn­
ing and evening on what offenses one has committed. (Yijing s
running note: Posa means “nourishing,” and dha, purifying. Thus
posadha means nourishing good deeds and purifying the guilt of
violating the disciplinary rules. It was formerly transliterated as
pu-sha in a wrongly abridged form.)
Committing any offense of the first group is irremediable,
while violation of the rules of the second group requires a quo­
rum of twenty members of the community of monks (to listen to
the offender’s confession and absolve him of his guilt). If one has
committed a minor offense, one should make a confession to ab­
solve one’ s fault before a monk who is not one’s equal. Of the
Sanskrit word apatti-pratidesana, apatti means offense, and
pratidesana, confessing before others. It is in the hope of gaining
purity that one confesses oneself guilty. One should confess of
one’s faults item by item, and then expiation may be expected. A
general confession of faults is not allowed by the Vinaya. For
confession we formerly said chan-hui in Chinese, which is actu­
ally irrelevant to the confession of misdeeds. Why? Because ksamai
(transliterated as chan) is an Indian word meaning forbearance,
while hui is a Chinese word meaning “repentance,” and repen­
tance has nothing to do with forbearance. If we strictly follow
the Sanskrit text, we should say at the time of making confession,

85

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

“I confess my faults with a sincere m ind.” From this careful
analysis, we may see that to translate ksama as repentance has
scarcely any authority.
In India, when people, regardless o f age, touched each other
unintentionally or rubbed shoulders when passing each other,
the senior one looked at the other person with his hands hanging
down, while the junior one joined his hands palm to palm to pay
due respect to the senior one, or to stroke his body or some­
times hold his shoulder, uttering the word “Ksama,” meaning
“Please forgive me and do not be angry with m e!” In the Vinaya
the word ksama is used to express apology. Only when one con­
fesses one s own faults is it known as desand (instruction). It is
for fear of causing future misunderstanding that I have spoken
about the errors introduced in former times. A habit may be­
come a custom through long usage. However, we must follow the
original regulations.
218a

The Sanskrit wordpravarana is translated as optional. It also
means satisfying, indicating that one is free to disclose the faults
o f other monks at one’s option.

16. The Use of Spoons and Chopsticks
In the west, the people use only the right hand for eating food, but
a monk may be permitted to keep a spoon on account of illness. As
regards chopsticks, they are not heard of in the five parts of India,
nor are they mentioned in the Vinaya texts of the four schools of
Buddhist monks. They are used only in China in the east. It is, of
course, an old custom of the laypeople to use chopsticks, and monks
may or may not use them according to their preference. The use of
chopsticks is neither allowed nor disallowed, and this matter falls
within the scope of the general rules of morality. If nobody derides
or talks about the use of chopsticks, they may well be utilized in
China. If a monk holds chopsticks [in India], the laypeople may sneer
at him with contempt. But in India the people have never handled
chopsticks. Such is the principle o f the general rules of morality.

86

Fascicle Two

17. Salutation at Proper Times
The manner of paying homage should be in concordance with the
rules; otherwise a prostration would merely be tumbling on the
ground. Therefore, the Buddha said, “There are two kinds of im­
purity with which one should not receive salutation nor salute
others.” If one acts against this teaching, every bow one makes
involves the fault of ill behavior.
What are the two kinds of impurity?
First, the impurity caused by eating and drinking. If one has
eaten anything, even swallowed a tablet of medicine, one is unfit
to receive salutation or salute others, unless one has rinsed one’s
mouth and washed one’s hands. If one salutes others when one
has not rinsed one’s mouth and washed one s hands after having
drunk juice or water, or even tea, honey, or other liquids, such as
ghee, syrup, and the like, one commits a blunder as mentioned
above.
Second, the impurity caused by going to the latrine. If one
salutes others when one has not washed oneself clean and has not
washed one’s hands and rinsed one’s mouth, or when one has not
cleansed one’s body or robes after they are defiled by excrement or
soiled with mucus, saliva, etc., or when one has not chewed tooth
wood in the morning, one commits a blunder as mentioned above.
When the monks gather together to take a meal, one may just
join one’s hands palm to palm to show respect without paying a
full salutation. If one pays a full salutation to others on such occa­
sions, one is acting against the teaching. At a busy or narrow place,
or at an unclean spot, if one salutes others, one also commits a
similar blunder. All these points are described in the Vinaya texts.
As the rules are handed down from a long time ago, and the [Chi­
nese] monks are living in a cold country, it is rather difficult for
them to behave in accordance with the teaching, even though they
\vish to do so. None of them does not find consolation in having
fellow monks living under similar circumstances, and they would
not care about minor offenses.

87

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

18. Answering the Call of Nature

218b

I shall now give a brief account concerning evacuation. One should
wear a bathing skirt on the lower part of the body, and put on a
side-covering cloth for the upper part. One should then go to the
latrine with a toilet jar filled with water, and close the door be­
hind oneself to hide. Fourteen lumps of earth are prepared and
placed on a piece of brick or stone, or on a small piece of board,
outside the latrine. The size of the brick or board is one cubit long
and half a cubit wide. The lumps of earth are ground into powder
and kept in separate heaps arranged in two rows. An additional
lump is also placed there. One takes three balls of earth into the
latrine and puts them aside. One of them is used for wiping the
body and another one for washing it. The manner of washing the
body is to first wash it with the left hand with water and then
purify it with both water and earth. The remaining ball is used for
roughly washing the left hand. If chips [of bamboo] are used [for
cleaning purpose], they may be taken into the latrine, but they
should be thrown out of the latrine after having been used. If some
old paper must be used, it should be cast into the latrine after
having been used. After having washed oneself clean, one may
straighten one’s garments with the right hand, put the jar aside,
unfasten the door bolt with the right hand, and come out with the
jar carried in the right hand. Or one may hold the jar in one’s left
arm with the left hand bending inwards, and close the door with
the right hand before one leaves.
Then one comes to the place where the balls of earth are kept
and squats down at one side. If one needs something to sit on, one
may use anything one thinks fit at the time. The jar is placed on
the left thigh and pressed down by the left arm. The seven balls of
earth near oneself are used one by one to wash the left hand, and
then the other seven are used one by one to wash both hands. The
brick or board must be washed clean. The remaining ball is used
for washing the jar, and then the arms, the thighs, and the feet, to
make them all clean. After that one may go anywhere one wishes.

88

Fascicle Two

The water in the toilet jar is unfit for putting into the mouth
or to the lips. After going back to one’s chamber, one should rinse
the mouth with water from a clean jar. In case one has touched
the toilet jar after having finished the affair, one should again
wash one’s hands and rinse one’s mouth; then one may touch other
utensils. These are the rules, as roughly stated above, concerning
relaxing the bowels. In order not to trouble others, a monk always
washes himself, but it is not a fault to ask an attendant, if he has
one, to wash for him. After urination, one or two balls of earth
may be used for washing the hands and body. Purification is most
important, as it is the foundation of veneration.
Some people may consider it a small matter, but the Vinaya
severely berates [those who violate the rules]. If one has not washed
oneself clean, one is unfit to sit on a seat of the monastery, nor
should he worship the triple gem. By these rules Sariputra once
subdued the heretics. Thus the Buddha laid down the rules for
monks in general. Those who practice these rules will gain the
blessedness of observing the precepts of the Vinaya. If they do
not, they go against the Buddha’s teaching and will incur guilt.
For a long time in the past, such rules were not introduced to China
in the east.
Even if they had been introduced, they would have aroused
the detestation [of the Chinese monks], who would have said: In
the Mahayana theory of complete voidness, what is pure and what
is impure? Since the inside of the abdomen is full of filth, what is
the use of washing the outside?” They do not know that by slight­
ing and disparaging the teachings and disciplinary rules, they are
slandering and calumniating the holy mind. They incur guilt either
by receiving salutation or by paying salutation to others, and heav­
enly beings and spirits abhor their way of wearing robes and eat­
ing food. If a person does not wash himself clean, the people of all
the five parts of India will laugh at him and he will be sneered at
wherever he goes. Those who are engaged in propagating the
Buddha’s teachings should work for their dissemination. Since we
have renounced worldly life and have relinquished our homes to

89

218c

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

become homeless monks, we should abide by the words o f
Sakyamuni, the Father. Why should we cast angry stares at the
sayings of the Vinaya texts? If one does not believe in these points,
one had better try to follow the directives for washing oneself.
After doing so for five or six days, one will grasp the defect of not
washing oneself clean [after going to the latrine]. In the cold sea­
son, however, warm water must be prepared. In the three other
seasons, one may use whatever water one likes. But the use of a
water tube or a trough and a piece of silk for wiping is not based
on the Vinaya texts. There are some people who keep some water
in their mouth and leave the latrine, and this is also against the
rules of purification.
For a monastery there must be, first of all, a latrine built and
kept clean. If the monks are unable to make one, they may in­
struct some devotees to build one for the use of all monks, whether
holy or ordinary ones, coming from the ten quarters. It is impor­
tant not to spend much money for it. Such is the way of purification,
which is by no means a futile action.
A big trough capable of holding one or two shi (one shi equals
one hundred liters), filled with earth, should be prepared and put
beside the latrine, as the monks have no place to store earth in
their private chambers. If a monk does not actually possess a wa­
ter jar, he is allowed to use a porcelain or earthen pot to carry
water and put it aside in the latrine. He may use his right hand to
wash himself harmlessly.
In the regions of the Yangzi and Huai Rivers, many latrines
are made of big earthen urns half buried below the surface of the
ground. One should not wash oneself at such places. Separate
washing places should be prepared, preferably at spots with
streams of flowing water. In such monasteries as Bao-fu Monas­
tery at Fen-zhou, Ling-yan Monastery at Mount Dai, Yu-quan Mon­
astery in the capital city of Jing-zhou, and the White Pagoda
Monastery at Yang-zhou, the latrines are built quite in accordance
with the traditional rules, except for the lack of a supply of water
and earth. Had some people taught them the proper way of doing

90

Fascicle Two

it, the arrangement would have been the same as that at Rajagrha.
This is due to the indifference of the former sages; the pupils of
late times are not to be blamed for being ignorant.
The earth as well as the water stored in a jar that is kept in
the latrine should be safely placed and sufficiently supplied; there
should be no shortages. It is better to use a water pot with a spout
to replenish the jar. If one wishes to keep a bottle, the rules for
that have been related before. A copper bottle with a lid over the
wide mouth is unsuitable for washing. But if a hole is made in the
side of the bottle, the top is welded with tin, and a small aperture
is made in the protruding point on the top, it may also be used as
a makeshift, to meet the requirements of the time.

Supplemental Remarks
I have toiled with my pen and paper to express my deep and ear­
nest sentiments, with the hope that some people will accept my
remonstrances as water follows the course of a stream. The Great
Sage has passed into the state of calm between the twin sala trees,
and the arhats have become ashes in the five parts of India. The
Dharma they have left behind is still exerting influence up to this
morning. We should follow the example of those who have given
up their lives and draw our inspiration from the ones who have
abandoned the world. We should forsake the troubles that cause
turbidity in our minds, and should admire the brilliant world of
purity. Let both external defilements and internal delusions be
cleared away, and the upper ties together with the lower bond­
ages be completely destroyed. Our traces in life will be inactive
and our spirits will become clear and bright. In any one of the four
postures [of walking, standing, sitting, and lying], we shall cause
no involvement, and the three honored ones [the Buddha, the
Dharma, and the Sangha] will be near and dear to us. Since we
are not mocked by living people, why should we fear the anger of
the lord of death? With my thoughts concentrated on benefiting

91

219a

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

all sentient beings of the nine happy states, I shall complete the
good cause of realizing Buddhahood in three long ages. I sincerely
hope that one man out of ten thousand rectifies himself through
my words. Then I shall not regret the pains and hardships I have
suffered during the last twenty years and more.
End of Fascicle Two

92

Fascicle Three
19. Regulations for Ordination
The rules for becoming a monk in the western country of India
were all laid down by the Holy One, and are extensively related in
the Mulasarvastivada-nikaya-ekasata-karman. Here I shall just
sketch them in brief. Anyone who has the intention of becoming a
homeless monk may go of his own free will to a teacher whom he
likes and inform him of his wish. The teacher then makes in an
expedient way the necessary inquiries as to whether the appli­
cant [has committed] patricide or matricide, etc. After having found
that he has committed none of the serious crimes that would bar
him from entering the community of monks, the teacher agrees to
accept him. Having been accepted, the applicant is permitted to
relax and rest for ten days up to one month. Then the teacher
imparts to him the five precepts, whereupon he is named an
updsaka (a male lay devotee). Before that he is not counted among
the seven groups of Buddhist disciples; this is the basic step for
entering the teachings of the Buddha. The teacher then prepares
for him a stripeless robe, a samkaksika, and an undergarment, as
well as an alms bowl and a strainer, before he makes a statement
to the assembly of monks, informing them that a candidate wishes
to become a monk. With the consent of the assembly of monks, the
teacher, on behalf o f the candidate, asks a monk to be the
candidate’s dearya (instructor). At a secluded place a barber shaves
his hair and beard, and cold or warm water is prepared according
to the season for him to take a bath. After that the teacher helps
him to put on the undergarment and conveniently ascertains that
he is not a eunuch, etc. Then the teacher gives him the outer gar­
ment, which he receives by putting it over his head. Having put

93

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

219b

on the religious robe, the candidate is given the alms bowl. This is
known as the ceremony of home-leaving. Next, in the presence of
the teacher, the âcârya imparts the ten precepts to the candidate,
either by reciting them or reading from a text. After having re­
ceived the ten precepts, he is known as a srâmanera (novice).
(Yijing’s running note: This is translated as “seeker of quietude,”
meaning he who aims to seek the condition of perfect quietude of
nirvana. The old transliteration was sha-mi, which is too short
and the pronunciation is incorrect. It was translated as one who
has entered the life o f rest and shows loving kindness to all. The
meaning is accurate, but without authority.)
The regulations, the disciplinary rules, the asking for instruc­
tion, and the solicitation of permission from the Sangha are the
same in substance for all qualified candidates who proceed to re­
ceive ordination. According to the Vinaya texts, a srâmanera is not
considered guilty if he has committed any of the twelve particular
offenses, but for a siksamânâ (probationary female novice) there
are some modifications of the rules. What are the twelve offenses?
1. Failure to distinguish between (legal and illegal) robes.
2. Sleeping without wearing a garment.
3. Touching fire.
4. Eating to excess.
5. Injuring living things.
6. Discarding filth upon green grass.
7. Climbing up a tall tree without purpose.
8. Touching jewels.
9. Eating leftover food.
10. Digging in the ground.
11. Refusing to accept offerings of food.
12. Damaging growing sprouts.
For the two lower grades of members of the Sangha (male and
female novices), the commission of these twelve offenses does not
incur guilt, but for the siksamânâs the nonobservance of the last
five rules incurs guilt. All of these three lower-grade members
should observe the summer retreat. The six major rules and six

94

Fascicle Three

auxiliary ones (for siksamanas) are spoken of elsewhere. If they
can observe these rules, they may be considered in concordance
with the Dharma and counted among the five groups of Buddhist
disciples, being worthy to receive the material advantages offered
to them. How can a teacher not impart the ten precepts to one
who has left home to become a monk, out of fear that he might
break them, and thus he could not receive full ordination? In such
a case the novice would merely bear the false name of being a
sramanera and vainly assume the title of a monk. He seems to
have enjoyed a small advantage, but actually he suffers a great
loss. It is said in a scripture, “One who has not received the ten
precepts, though counted as a member of the Sangha, has a seat
only temporarily, and how can he hold it for long?
In the Divine Land of China one becomes a monk and leaves
his home by public registration. After shaving his hair with gov­
ernment permission, he goes to live with a teacher for some time.
The teacher does not take care to make any of the inquiries of the
disciple, nor does the disciple request the impartation of the ten
precepts. Before receiving full ordination, such a person commits
all sorts of guilty actions unscrupulously. On the day of receiving
full ordination, he is simply led to the altar without previous knowl­
edge of the rites laid down in the Vinaya. How can he behave prop­
erly at the time of the ceremony? This is not right for maintaining
the Way. He is neither fit to be a resident monk of a monastery,
nor is there any doubt about the debt he incurs by receiving the
alms given to him. He should act according to the teachings for
the salvation of himself and others.
One who becomes a monk by permission of the government
should ask a monk beforehand to be his teacher, who will first
make the inquiries and then, if he is found pure of the impedimental
crimes, teach him the five precepts. After seeing him having his
hair shaved, the teacher then dresses him in a stripeless robe and
imparts to him the ten precepts.
When the novice has become acquainted with the religious
rites, has reached the required age, and wishes to receive full

95

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

ordination, the teacher, having seen that the disciple is capable
o f keeping the disciplinary rules with resolution, may prepare
the six requisites for him and invite nine other monks [to be wit­
nesses], The ceremony may be legitimately performed on a small
terrace, in a large enclosure, or within a natural boundary. In­
side the limited area for the function, mats belonging to the
Sangha may be used or each monk may bring his own mat for a
seat. Some incense and flowers may be prepared in an inexpen­
sive way. The candidate is taught to pay respect three times to
each o f the monks, or sometimes to approach each of them and
touch his feet as a sign of homage. Both ways are proper man­
ners o f salutation taught by the Buddha.
After having paid homage to the monks, the candidate is in­
structed to beg for full ordination. When he has done so three times,
his teacher gives him the robes and an alms bowl in the presence
of the monks assembled for the occasion. The bowl should be car­
ried around and be shown to each of the monks. If it is proper in
mode, all of them should say, “A good bowl!” If they did not say
anything, they would incur the fault of infringing the Dharma.
After that the ceremony of ordination is conducted according to
the Dharma. The karmacarya (chief ceremony officiant) holds a
text and reads it aloud, or recites it from memory, both being al­
lowed by the Buddha. The one who has received the disciplinary
rules is known as an upasampanna. (Yijing’s running note: Upa
means “near to” and sampanna, “completeness,” indicating nir­
vana. Having received full ordination, one is near to nirvana. The
old translation is “fullness,” which gives a general idea of the term.)
As soon as the ceremony is completed, one should immediately
measure the shadow o f the sun and note down distinctly the name
of one of the five seasons.
The shadow of the sun is measured in the following manner.
Take a fine stick, about the size of a slender chopstick one cubit
long. Bend it at a point four finger-widths from one end and make
it into the shape of a carpenter’s square, but mind that the shorter
part of the stick is not broken away from the longer section. Let

96

Fascicle Three

the shorter part stand erect under the sun, and place the longer
section on the ground, overlaying the shadow cast by the shorter
part of the stick. Then measure the shadow with four fingers. A
length of fully four finger-widths is called one purusa. Thus we
have so many purusas of time, or sometimes one purusa and one
finger-width or half a finger-width, or simply one finger-width
of time, etc. In this way time is measured and calculated by add­
ing or reducing the number of finger-widths. (Yijing s running
note: The word purusa is translated as “man.” The length of four
finger-widths of shadow is called one purusa, because when the
shadow of the vertical stick, which is four finger-widths long, casts
a shadow of the same length on the ground, the shadow of a man
standing under the sun will measure the same as his height. When
the shadow of the vertical stick is eight finger-widths long, the
man’s shadow on the ground is double his height. Such is the case
with a man of medium height; it is not necessarily so with all
persons. Other measurements of time are also made by the same
method.) But it must be made clear whether it is before or after
the [midday] meal. When the weather is cloudy or at night, the
measurement should be made in an appropriate way as one
thinks fit.
According to the method adopted in China, we put a ruler ver­
tically under the sun at midday to measure the shadow of the sun,
or to mark the twelve two-hour periods of a day and night. The
five seasons are counted in various ways in different regions, and
the number of months in the year is sometimes odd and some­
times even. Thus it is difficult to know them with certainty, unless
they are explained with reference to a specific matter.
The first season is winter, which consists of four months, from
the sixteenth day of the ninth moon to the fifteenth day of the
first moon. The second season is spring, which also consists of four
months, from the sixteenth day of the first moon to the fifteenth
day of the fifth moon. The third one is the rainy season, which
lasts only one month, from the sixteenth day of the fifth moon to
the fifteenth day of the sixth moon. The fourth one is the final

97

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

season, which lasts only one day and night on the sixteenth day
of the sixth moon. The fifth one is the long season, which lasts
from the seventeenth day o f the sixth moon to the fifteenth day
of the ninth moon. This system laid down by the Buddha for di­
viding the seasons is found only in the Vinaya texts, and there is
evidently a deep significance in it. According to the usages of
different localities, the year is divided into three, four, or six sea­
sons, as is mentioned elsewhere.

220a

In India or on the islands of the South Seas, when one monk
meets another one for the first time, he asks the other one, “Ven­
erable One, how many times have you done the summer retreat?”
The other one answers, “So and so many times.” If they have
done the same number of summer retreats after ordination, the
inquirer asks the other one in which season he was ordained. If
they were ordained in the same season, the inquirer again asks
the number of days left in that season when he was ordained. If
the number of days left in that season is also the same, the one asks
the other whether he was ordained before or after the meal on that
day. In case both of them were ordained in the forenoon, then they
inquire about the length of the shadow under the sun at the mo­
ment of ordination. If there is any difference in the length of the
shadow, the seniority of the two is determined. If there is no
difference, the two of them are of equal standing. In that case, the
order of seats is arranged according to the principle of priority of
arrival, and the duty-distributor may allow either of them to take
precedence over the other in performing religious duties.
Those who go to India must be acquainted with these points.
It is unlike in China, where the monks just inquire about the date
of ordination. But in Nalanda Monastery the monks often receive
full ordination when the [first] morning of the long season has
just dawned. They mean to claim seniority over most of the monks
ordained in the same summer. It corresponds with the dawn of
the seventeenth day of the sixth moon in China. They do not want
the ordination to fall on the date of commencement of the second
summer retreat. (Yijing’s running note: This is according to the

98

Fascicle Three

method of observing the summer retreat in India. If we follow the
old practice in China, the date would fall on the seventeenth day
of the fifth moon.) One who receives ordination when the night is
drawing to the end on the sixteenth day of the sixth moon is the
most junior monk among all monks ordained in the same summer
because he is ordained in the second summer retreat.
After having received ordination, the disciple does not have to
make offerings to others, but if his teacher has the means, he may
prepare on behalf of his disciple some gifts, such as a girdle, a
strainer, and the like, for the monks whose presence is required
for the performance of the ceremony at the altar of ordination, in
order to express his mind of gratitude. Then the upadhyaya (spiri­
tual teacher) gives the Text o f the Disciplinary Rules to the dis­
ciple and teaches him the character of offenses and how to recite
the rules. When the disciple is well learned in the rules, he will
read the full text of the Vinaya-pitaka (Collection o f Books on
Monastic Discipline), which he recites every day and tries to ob­
serve from morning to morning. If he does not live up to them
constantly, he might lose his mental power. When he has studied
the Vinaya-pitaka, he begins to learn the sutras and sastras. Such
is the way a teacher instructs his disciple in India. Although a
long period has passed since the time of the Sage, this method of
instruction still prevails unaltered. Therefore, these two teachers
are likened to one’s parents. Is it right for a monk to undergo un­
usual toil and fatigue because of a desire to receive ordination, yet
pay no heed to the disciplinary rules when he has been taught to
observe them? It is a pity that one should have started a good
cause, but failed to carry it through to the end!
There are some people who desire to be ordained at the moment
when they first meet their teachers, but once they are ordained,
they come to study under their teachers no more. They neither
read the book on the precepts nor do they open the texts of the
Vinaya, but unworthily enjoy the advantages of being among the
ranks of monks, doing harm to themselves as well as to others.
Such people will cause the downfall of the Dharma.

99

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

According to the practice o f India, after a monk has received
full ordination, he is called a dahara (junior monk), which is trans­
lated into Chinese as “small teacher.” When he has passed ten
full summer retreats, he is known as a sthavira (an elder), which
is translated as “abiding position. ” As a monk often years’ stand­
ing he is in a position to leave his teacher and abide by himself.
He may also act as an upadhyaya (officiant at the ceremony of
ordination).
In writing letters or exchanging communications, a monk
should style himself Sramanera so-and-so, or Dahara Bhiksu soand-so, or Sthavira Bhiksu so-and-so, as the case may be. If he is
well versed in both Buddhist learning and worldly lore and is a
man of high virtue and noble character, he may call himself
Bahusruta (well-learned) Bhiksu so-and-so. But one must not des­
ignate oneself Sangha so-and-so, because the term Sangha means
a group of no less than four persons. How can one individual use
an appellation indicating a group of persons to denote one man?
In India there is no such custom as calling oneself a Sangha.

220b

One who becomes an upadhyaya must be a sthavira, having
passed ten full summer retreats. There is no seniority require­
ment for the karmacarya who acts as a private tutor and the
other monks who serve as witnesses, but they must be well
learned in the Vinaya and pure in observing all the disciplinary
rules. It is said in the Vinaya that to call one an upadhyaya who
is not an upadhyaya, or to call one an acarya who is not an acarya,
or vice versa, defiling the name o f upadhyaya, incurs the guilt of
evil-doing. I f a man inquires, “W hat is the name o f your
upadhyaya?” or “Whose disciple are you?”, or when one is obliged
to mention the name o f one’s teacher, one should say, “In the
circumstances, I am obliged to tell the name o f my upadhyaya,
whose name is so-and-so. ” In India and on the islands of the South
Seas, it is not haughty to use the word “I.” It is also not a rude
form of address if one says “you. ” It is simply meant to distin­
guish one person from another, without a mind of contempt to­
wards others. This is not like in China, where it is considered

100

Fascicle Three

despicable to use such pronouns. If one dislikes using the word
“I,” one may say “this person” instead of “I.” These points were
taught by the Buddha, and it is fitting to put them into practice.
One should not echo what others have said, making no distinction
between right and wrong.
When laymen who are dressed in white come to the residence
of bhiksus to study Buddhist texts exclusively, with the inten­
tion of shaving their hair and becoming monks clad in black robes,
they are called “children of men.” Those who come to seek secu­
lar learning without the mind to relinquish the world are known
as “students.” These two classes of pupils have to provide food
for themselves. (Yijing’s running note: In the monasteries of In­
dia there are in most cases students who have come to learn secu­
lar literature from the bhiksus. They may serve, on the one hand,
as attendants to their teachers, and, on the other hand, they
may cherish pious aspirations because of the instructions im­
parted to them. As this is beneficial to both sides, there is no
harm in keeping these students. Each of them should keep only
one alms bowl like an ascetic, so as not to cause any trouble to
others. But if fractional alms are given to them, it is also permit­
ted. Let them distribute tooth wood to the monks and serve at
meals. To supply them with sufficient timely requirements is not
detrimental to the principle of compassion.) To let them partake
of the food of the permanent Sangha is totally banned by the
holy teachings. But if they have done some hard work for the
community, they may be given either ordinary food or food pur­
posely prepared for them beforehand by donors, which they may
take without committing a misdeed.
The brilliance [issuing from the Buddha] at the Nairanjana
River has faded away, and his radiance on Vulture Peak has dis­
appeared. How many arhats have survived to transmit the
Dharma? Thus it is said in a sastra: “Since the Great Teacher closed
his eyes, those who have realized sainthood have also passed away
one after another. In this time when moral defilements are on the
increase, we should be more diligent and never relax our spiritual

101

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

efforts. All the virtuous monks should work together to safeguard
the Dharma. If we are listless and inert and give the reins to selfconceit, whither shall we guide men and heavenly beings? It is
said in the Vinaya: “So long as the disciplinary rules are observed,
my Dharma will not perish. If there is no one observing the rules,
my Dharma will come to an end.” It is also said: “When the pre­
cepts exist, I exist. ” These are not empty words; they imply a deep
meaning and are truly worthy o f our respect.
Let me repeat it:
The shadow of the Great Teacher has faded,
With it the Dharma will perish.
Lofty is the mountain of heresy,
The hill of wisdom has collapsed.
The reillumination o f the sun of Buddha
Depends upon men of good virtue.
If we follow the small path,
Who will propagate the great Way?
Let us pray that the well-learned masters
Do their best to bring about its spread.
We hope the Way will thrive without fail,
Passing through endless ages with good fame.
Where rests the good fame?
In the active waves in the sea of precepts.
Thus the teaching will not perish, though near the end.
Actions will not go astray, even on the verge of error.
This coincides with the right words spoken at Rajagrha.
One’s deeds will not break the rules of the Jeta Grove.

20. The Times for Taking a Bath
The customs regarding taking baths in India are different from those
m China. In India the climate is temperate with slight variations in
different regions. There are flowers and fruits throughout the year,
even in the twelfth month. Snow and ice are unknown, except for

102

Fascicle Three

a thin layer of frost. Although the weather is hot at most times,
the heat is never unbearable. Even in hot weather, people do not
suffer from prickly heat, and in the cold season, their feet are not
chapped. Because of this [moderate climate], the people take baths
frequently and set store by bodily cleanliness. Every day they do
not eat before having washed themselves. There are ponds full of
water in all places, and the people consider it a meritorious deed
to dig ponds. If we travel from one post house to another, we may
come within sight of twenty or thirty bathing ponds along the
way, which measure one to five mu (one mu equals one-fifteenth
hectare) in size. On all four sides of the ponds, there are planted
tala trees (palmyra trees) growing to a height of forty or fifty feet.
Rainwater is collected in the ponds, which are as limpid as a clear
river. At the eight caityas, there are the ponds in which the Worldhonored One bathed himself. The water in these ponds is so clear
and serene that it looks different from that in other ponds.
At Nalanda Monastery there are more than ten large bathing
pools, and every morning an instrument is sounded to call the
monks to take baths. Every one of them brings his bathing skirt,
and hundreds or thousands of monks go out of the monastery in
all directions to the pools to bathe themselves. The bathing skirt
is worn in the following manner. Take a piece of soft cotton cloth
five forearms in length and one and a half forearms wide. Wrap it
round the body, and then draw off the undergarment beneath it.
Both ends of the bathing skirt are pulled to the front. Then take
hold of the upper corner of the left end with the right hand and
stretch it down to the waist to touch the body. The right end is
twisted with the left one, and both are pressed in between the
waist and the skirt itself. This is the way of wearing a bathing
skirt. The skirt worn at bedtime is also put on in the same way.
At the time of coming out of the bathing pool, one should shake
one’s body and emerge from the water slowly, for fear that some
insects may cling to the skirt and be taken out of the water. How
to come up to the bank is described in detail in the Vinaya texts.
If a monk does not go to a bathing pond but takes a bath in the

103

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

monastery, the bathing skirt is also put on in the same way, and
someone is asked to pour the water for him. A screen may be put
up anywhere at any time.
The World-honored One taught us how to build a bathroom,
or construct an open-air pool with bricks, or make a medical bath
for the treatment of disease. He also taught us to anoint the whole
body, rub the feet with ointment every night, and dab the head
with oil every morning. Doing so is very good for keeping clear
eyesight and warding off the cold.

221a

Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There
are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath. First,
the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will
have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depression are
dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal
is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may know that
the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and tak­
ing a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of an all-round
scholar. Using a bathing wrapper three feet long, too short to cover
the body, or taking a bath naked without wearing anything, is
incongruous with the teachings of the Buddha. One should use a
bathing skirt four times as long as it is wide, big enough to cover
the body in a decent manner. This is not only compatible with the
holy teachings, but also causes no shame in the presence of men
and heavenly beings. One should also know about other things
that are unwise. Even when taking a bath at night, one should
not be unbecoming in appearance. How can one uncover oneself
before people’s eyes?

21. The Cloth for Sitting On
To spread the sitting cloth [or mat] on the ground for worshiping is
not the practice in the five parts of India. Nor is it mentioned in the
rules of the four schools that one should crouch down and stand up
three times in salutation. How worshipers pay homage will be de­
scribed in other chapters.

104

Fascicle Three

To make a cloth for sitting, a piece of cloth is cut [in two], one
part being placed upon the other and stitched together. There is
no time for me to give a full description of its measurement. The
cloth is needed to preserve the mattresses of others when one in­
tends to sleep thereon. In case one has to use anything belonging
to others, whether old or new, one must cover it with one’s own
sitting cloth. If it is one’s own property and is old, one need not
cover it with the sitting cloth. One must not soil or spoil the gifts
presented by donors.
The sitting cloth is not used for worshiping. The monks [of the
islands] in the South Seas keep a cotton kerchief, three or five feet
long and folded like a napkin, which they place under their knees
as a pad when paying homage. When they are walking, they carry
it on their shoulders. All bhiksus coming from India smiled at them
[because of their curious custom].

22. Rules Concerning Sleeping and Resting
In India, as the living quarters [of the monks] are narrow and
limited, where there are many residents, the beds are lifted up
after the monks have arisen [in the morning]. The beds are put
together at one side o f the rooms, or removed and stored away
out of doors. A bed is two cubits (one cubit equals eighteen to
twenty-two inches) broad and four and a half cubits long, with a
mattress and a mat of the same size, both of which are light and
not heavy. The ground is then wiped clean with dry cow dung,
and sitting couches, blocks of wood, small mats, etc., are ar­
ranged. The monks take their seats in accordance with their
seniority and perform their usual duties. All the utensils for their
sustenance are placed on shelves. There is no rule that the bed
must be screened with a piece of robe. If one is not qualified to
sleep in the monks’ quarters, one should not do so, and if one is
qualified to sleep there, why should one hide oneself behind a
robe screen?

105

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

Before using a bed belonging to the Sangha (community of
monks), one must put a covering on it first. The sitting cloth is
suitable for this purpose. If one does not do so, one is apt to suffer
the grief of having a black back. This was taught by the Buddha,
and one must not be negligent about it.

221b

In the ten islands of the South Seas, as well as in the five parts
of India, people do not use wooden pillows to support the head.
This is a custom prevalent only in China. The pillows used in India
are all similar in style. Silk or cotton, dyed in any color according
to one’s liking, is sewn into a straight bag, one and a half cubits
long and half a cubit wide. It is stuffed with material produced
everywhere, such as wool, hemp fiber, cattail pollen, willow cat­
kins, kapok, reed catkins, vines of the great trumpet flower, soft
leaves, dry moss, cassia tora, ramie, or spotted peas. It may be
high or low according to whether the season is cold or hot, just to
make it comfortable and restful for the body, without feeling hard
or stiff. But a wooden pillow is rough and strong, and as wind may
pass below the neck, it often causes headaches. Customs, however,
differ in various lands, and different things are appreciated. I am
just narrating here what unusual things I have heard, and it is up
to the reader to decide what customs he should adopt. But things
of a warm nature tend to keep off cold, and ramie and peas are
good for brightening eyesight. All these things are beneficial and
may be used without fault. If one exposes the head to cold in a
chilly country, one is liable to suffer from febrile diseases, and ca­
tarrh m the winter season is also due to the same cause. If one
keeps the head warm properly, one may be free from such dis­
eases. The saying “keep the head cold but keep the feet warm” is
not always trustworthy.
A holy image [of the Buddha] is sometimes placed in a monk’s
room, either on a windowsill or in a niche specially made for it.
When sitting down to take a meal, the monks screen off the image
with a cloth curtain. They bathe it every morning and offer in­
cense and flowers to it regularly. Every day at noon, the monks
offer food to it when taking a meal. The case for storing scriptures

106

Fascicle Three

is placed at one side. At sleeping time they stay in a separate room.
In the various islands of the South Seas, the custom is the same.
Such is the way the monks venerate the Buddha at ordinary times
in their private rooms. The holy images of a monastery are all
installed in a special shrine hall. How can an image, after having
been made, never be washed and wiped during its lifetime? If it is
not a festival day, why should one offer food frequently to an im­
age? To speak from this point of view, what is the harm in living
in the same room with an image [of the Buddha]? When the Great
Teacher was living, he permitted the monks to live in the same
room with him. An image is but a representation of the real per­
son. Logically speaking, there is no harm in doing so. This is a
long-standing tradition practiced in India.

23. Walking Up and Down for Good Health
In the five parts of India, both monks and laymen are in the habit
of taking a walk, going straight forward and coming back along
the same route at proper times when they feel like it, but they do
not take walks in noisy places. First, it cures diseases, and second,
it helps digestion. When noontime is approaching, or when the
sun is to the west, it is time to take a walk. They may either go out
of the monastery for a long walk, or just stroll slowly in the corri­
dor. If one does not do so, one is liable to suffer from illness, being
often troubled by swelling of the legs and of the stomach, or pain
in the elbows or in the shoulders, or with phlegmatic symptoms
which will not dissolve. All these ailments are caused by our sed­
entary posture. If one can take this exercise, one will have a healthy
body and increase one’s spiritual cultivation.
So there are paths on which the World-honored One used to
take walks at Vulture Peak, under the bodhi tree, at Deer Park,
in the city of Rajagrha, and at other holy sites. They are about
two cubits wide, fourteen or fifteen cubits long, two cubits high,
and built with bricks. On the surface [of each of the paths], there are

107

221c

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

fourteen or fifteen limestone sculptures of blooming lotus flowers
about two cubits high and one foot in diameter, symbolizing the
footprints of the Holy One. At both ends of the paths, there are
small caityas, equal to a man’s height, in which standing statues
of Sakyamuni are sometimes installed. One goes round a caitya
just as one goes round a temple, with one’s right shoulder towards
the venerated object. As this is a special meritorious deed, one
should perform it with piety and respect.
Taking a walk for exercise is a way to stimulate digestion and
relieve boredom. It is meant to preserve good health or to cure
illness. It was formerly known &sxing-dao (walking along the Way)
or asjing-xing (taking a walk), both of which have the same mean­
ing, without any difference. But this health-preserving exercise
has been lacking in China for a long time. It is said in a scripture,
“They walked while looking at the trees.” I have seen the path
used [by the Buddha] for taking walks beside the Diamond Seat,
but I did not see any of the round pedestals.

24. The Junior Worshiping the Senior
The rites o f salutation should be practiced according to the
Buddha s teachings. A monk whose seniority is determined by
the measurement o f a shadow [with a sundial] at the time o f re­
ceiving full ordination is entitled to be saluted by his juniors. The
Buddha said, “There are two kinds o f men who are worthy to be
saluted. First, the Tathagata (one who has attained Buddhahood),
and second, senior bhiksus.” Since this is the golden word of the
Buddha, why should we take the trouble to be humble and timo­
rous? When a junior monk sees a senior one, he should express
respect in a polite manner, uttering the word “ Vande” (“I salute”)
while he worships the senior monk. When a senior monk is wor­
shiped by a junior^me, he may just sit up straight with his hands
in front and say “Arogya” (“May you be healthy!”). (Yijing’s run­
ning note: This is a form of blessing, meaning “May you be free
from illness. ”) If they do not say these words, both of them are at

108

Fascicle Three

fault. [The one who is saluted] may remain standing or sitting as
he is, without changing his posture. Since he is entitled to receive
salutation, he need not salute in return. Such is the rule for the
monks of the five parts of India.
How can a junior monk expect a senior one to stand up when
the salutation is about to take place? Nor should the senior monk,
while receiving salutation, fear that he might displease or annoy
the junior one. If so, the honored one would get hold of the junior
monk to prevent him from paying homage, while saying, “Don t
take the trouble!” Thus the junior monk would try hard to salute
the senior one, but he could not reach the ground [to prostrate
himself]. If they did not behave so, they would be criticized as
acting against etiquette! Alas! They disregard the holy teachings
to satisfy their human feelings. Both the one who is paying re­
spect and the one who is respected are acting against the rules.
We should make a deep study of this point. A long stream has
been overflowing for a long time, and who would try to bring it
under control with a dam?

25. Behavior between Teacher and Pupil
The instruction of pupils is an important factor for the prosperity
[of the Dharma], If we do not pay attention to it, the extinction of
the Dharma may be expected. We must take precautionary mea­
sures about the matter, and must not let it slip off [as a fish slips
off] the net.
It is said in the Vinaya: “Early every morning, a pupil should
first chew tooth wood, and then come to his teacher to offer him
tooth wood, gleditsia [used for soap], water, and a towel, which
are put at the sitting place. When these things are properly ar­
ranged, he goes to worship the holy image of the Buddha, walks
round the shrine hall, and then returns to his teacher’s place, where
he, having tidied up his robe, makes a salutation without stand­
ing up. Putting his palms together, he touches the ground with
his head three times, and while kneeling on the ground with his

109

222a

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

head bowed down and his hands joined together, he inquires of
his teacher, ‘May my upadhydya be attentive!” ’ (Yijing’s run­
ning note: Upa means “near to,” and adhyaya, “a teacher.” In
India well-learned people are generally called wu-she, which is
not a classical term [but a corrupt abbreviation]. According to
Sanskrit scriptures and disciplinary texts, the word upadhydya,
meaning a personal teacher, is used. In the various northern coun­
tries, the word is pronounced as he-she, and the translators
adopted it [to indicate a monk] erroneously.) Or the pupil may
say, May my dcarya be attentive!” (Yijing’s running note: Acarya
is translated as “instructor. ” He is competent to instruct the pu­
pil in religious rites. Formerly it was mistransliterated as a-sheli.) “Now I beg to inquire whether the upadhydya has slept well
last night, whether his four elements [of the physical body] are
in peace and harmony, whether he is easy and agile in move­
ment and has a good digestion, and whether he is ready to take
his morning m eal.” These inquiries may be lengthy or brief ac­
cording to circumstances.
The teacher answers the inquiries according to whether he is
at ease or not, as the case may be. Then the pupil goes to the
adjoining rooms to salute his seniors. Next, he reads a short sec­
tion of a scripture and memorizes what he has learned before. He
studies new lessons every day and reviews his old acquirements
each month, without wasting a single moment. He should wait
after daybreak, and then ask permission of his teacher to take the
morning meal, if he has a good appetite for it. He need not take
the trouble to seek porridge before dawn, in such haste as not to
ask permission of his teacher, without chewing tooth wood, nor
having time to ascertain that the water [for his daily use] is free
from insects, and even without having washed and cleansed him­
self. Does he not know that for the sake of one bowl of porridge, he
is acting against the four points of the Buddha’s teaching? The
causes of errors and degeneracies come from this violation. I wish
that those who maintain and support the Dharma will consider the
matter well. (Yijing’s running note: The above-mentioned inquiries

110

Fascicle Three

are according to the rules taught in Aryadesa [the holy land], arya
meaning “holy,” and desa, “land,” that is, the western country of
India. Saints and sages emerged there one after another, hence
the name commonly used by the people. It is also known as
Madhyadesa [the Midland Country], as it is in the middle of mil­
lions of countries. Owing to this fact, the name is known to all. In
the countries of the Hu tribes of the north, the holy land is only
known as Xi-du [Sindhu], which is not a popular name, but a dia­
lectical appellation without any special meaning. When this name
is heard in India, most people do not know where it is, and so it is
fitting to call India the Holy Land, which is a suitable name. Or, it
is said by tradition that the word Indu is translated as “moon,”
which is correct, but it is not a popular designation. It is just like
the Land of Great Tang being known in India as Cina, which is
simply a name without special meaning. Furthermore, we should
know that the five parts of India are collectively known as the
Brahmanic Country, while the country of Suri in the north is in­
cluded in the territory of the Hu tribes. They should not be mixed
up and called by one and the same name.)
When one has received full ordination, after having shaved
one’s hair and put on the plain robe of a homeless monk, one has
to ask permission of one’s teacher to do anything, with the excep­
tion, according to the Vinaya, of five things; otherwise one will
incur fault. The five things are (1) chewing tooth wood, (2) drink­
ing water, (3) excreting stools, (4) passing water, and (5) perform­
ing a caitya-vandana (going round a temple) within forty-nine
fathoms inside a consecrated boundary.
For instance, when it is time to take a meal, the pupil should
go to ask permission of his teacher, whom he should salute accord­
ing to the rules of salutation, and then say to him, May my
upadhydya be attentive! Now I ask your permission to wash my
hands and alms bowl to take a meal.” The teacher should say, “Be
careful about it!” The permission required for doing other things is
asked in the same way. After considering the matter and the time
for doing it, the teacher then gives his permission or disallowance.

Ill

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

If the pupil has many things to do, he may ask permission to do
all o f them at one time.

222 b

When, after five summers, the pupil has mastered the Vinaya,
he may leave his upadhyaya to travel in the world to pursue other
subjects of study. But wherever he goes, he must depend on a
teacher. It is only after the completion of ten summer [retreats]
that he may cease to depend on a teacher. The Great Sage was so
thoughtful and considerate as to have laid down this rule. If a
monk is not conversant with the Vinaya, he will have to depend
on a teacher till the end of his life. If there is no senior teacher
available, he may stay with a junior one and do all duties, except
salutation, to him. [In that case,] the pupil does not inquire after
[his teacher’s] health every morning and ask whether he has not
lived up to the Vinaya rules. Whenever he has anything to do, he
should ask for his teacher’s permission. Or he may ask for instruc­
tions in the morning and in the evening, but the admonition given
at the moment may not be congruent with the intent of the Vinaya.
If the pupil who asks for instructions cannot make his point clear,
how can the teacher who responds to his request give him any
good consultation? This is not the way of asking for instructions.
Since such a habit has been handed down for a long time, who
would care to take the trouble to make a point-by-point examina­
tion of it? If we practice in accordance with the teachings of the
Buddha, the Dharma will be maintained without interruption. If
one thinks that this is an insignificant matter, what else is impor­
tant? Thus, it is said in a Vinaya text, “Better to be a butcher than
to give full ordination to others and leave them untaught! ”
According to the manner of serving one’s teacher handed down
m India, a pupil should go to his teacher at the first watch and the
last watch of the night. The teacher first invites him to sit down
comfortably, and then teaches him a passage from the Tripitaka
(the three collections of the Buddhist canon) that is suitable for
the time, leaving no fact or theory unexpounded. He examines his
pupil s moral conduct to prevent him from committing defects and
violating the disciplinary rules. Whenever he finds that his pupil

112

Fascicle Three

has committed any fault, he advises him to repent and confess.
Then the pupil massages the body of his teacher and folds his robes
tidily, or sometimes sweeps the room and the courtyard, and in­
spects the water to see that no insect is in it before it is sent to the
teacher. Whatever is to be done, the pupil does for his teacher.
This is how a pupil respects his teacher.
If a pupil falls ill, the teacher personally attends him with medi­
cine and feels such anxiety as he would feel if the pupil were his
own child. But according to the guiding principles of the Buddha’s
teaching, instruction and edification are first and foremost, just as
a cakravartin (a universal monarch) pays great attention to foster­
ing and educating his eldest son. This is clearly laid down in the
Vinaya, and there are no grounds for us to hold it in contempt.
As regards the above-mentioned caitya-vande or caityavandana, it is said that when the Great Teacher, the World-hon­
ored One, had entered nirvana, men and gods assembled to cremate
his remains. They collected fragrant firewood and built a big fu­
neral pile. That place was known as citi, meaning a pile, which
gave rise to the name of caitya. There are other explanations. First,
it is an object which inspires one to meditate that all the virtues of
the World-honored One are accumulated here, and second, it is
built by piling up bricks and earth. The meaning of the word is
handed down as such. Or it is called a stupa, which has the same
meaning as caitya. Formerly, it was generally called ta (pagoda)
or zhi-ti (a corruption of caitya). Both of these terms are incorrect,
but both may be used, because people understand what is actually
implied without delving into their meanings.
Briefly speaking, there are two ways of explaining a term in
India: first, for a term with a meaning, and second, for a term with­
out a meaning. A term that has a meaning has a reason for its
coinage, which is interpreted according to its meaning, and the term
and its substance are always coincident with each other. For in­
stance, the interpretation of the name Shanru (“well-entering into
truth”) is that it was first invented according to a man’s deeds
of virtue, and so it is a name coined according to its meaning. When

113

222c

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

it becomes familiar to the people, they will not delve into its
meaning, but call the man “well-entering into truth,” simply
because the world calls him so. The name becomes thus a term
without a meaning.
Vandana means salutation. When one wishes to go out to wor­
ship the Buddha’s image, if someone inquires, “Where are you
going?” one may reply, “I am going to such and such a place to
worship the caitya.” Salutation is a manner of paying respect to
one s superiors with a sense of humility. When one is going to pay
homage or to ask permission [of one’s teacher], one should first
adjust one’s religious robe to drape over the left shoulder, and
press the robe under the left armpit to make it fit tightly to the
body, while stretching one’s left hand downwards to get hold of
the left side of the robe. The right hand follows the robe down to
cover the body. When the skirt becomes lower, the robe should be
rolled up to the knees, so that both knees are well covered, with­
out exposing the body. The edge of the robe at the back is quickly
made to stick to the body. Both the robe and the skirt are held
in such a way as not to touch the ground. [When one is kneel­
ing down] the two heels are pointing upwards, with the back and
neck in a straight line. The ten fingers are spread on the ground
before one bows one’s head down, with no part of the robe or any­
thing else used as padding under the knees. One should again join
one’s hands palm to palm and touch the ground with one’s head
once more. In this manner one piously makes salutation three
times. At ordinary times, one salutation is suflicient; there is no
rule that requires one to stand up and then to kneel down again.
Should the people of India see one saluting and standing up con­
secutively three times, they would marvel at it.
If one fears that there might be dust on one’s forehead, one
may rub it off with one’s hand and then wipe it clean. Next, one
should wipe away the dust on one’s knees. After adjusting one’s
robe, one should sit at one side or stand for a while. The elder monk
should ask him to take a seat, but if the pupil is being reprimanded,
it is harmless for him to remain standing. Such is the tradition

114

Fascicle Three

uninterruptedly handed down from teacher to pupil from the time
of the Buddha up to the present age of degeneration. It is said in
the scriptures and the Vinaya texts that when one approached
the Buddha, one should worship him at his feet and sit down at
one side, but it is never mentioned that one should spread the
sitting mat, worship three times, and stand at one side. Such is
the teaching. In the place where an elder is, many seats should be
prepared, so that when people come they may sit in a proper man­
ner. When one sits down, one’s feet touch the ground. There is no
custom of sitting down with one’s knees resting on the ground.
It is said in the Vinaya that one should first assume the
utkutaka posture, which is translated as “a squatting posture,”
with both feet placed flat on the ground and both knees pointing
upwards, the robes being tightly wrapped on the body without
falling on the ground. This is the regular posture for performing
the ceremony of keeping surplus robes, etc., as pure (legitimate)
alms, or making a confession in the presence of other monks, or
expressing respect to an assembly, or asking for pardon when one
is being reprimanded, or worshiping the monks when receiving
full ordination. In all such cases, the posture is the same.
Or one may kneel down on the ground, keeping the back erect
with hands joined palm to palm. This is the posture to praise and
gaze with reverence at the Buddha’s statue on an altar. But wor­
shiping on a couch is not done in any country [except China], nor
does one see the custom of spreading a felt mat [for worshiping].
Is it justifiable to be so insolent while one intends to be respectful?
When one is on a couch or a mat, one should not pay respect to
others even at ordinary times, let alone when worshiping one s
honored teacher or the Great Master. How can such a thing be
permissible?
In the lecture halls and dining rooms [of the monasteries] in
India, no big couches are provided, but there are a large number of
blocks of wood and small chairs prepared for the monks to sit on
while listening to a lecture or having a meal. Such was the original
custom. In China, the monks have long been used to sitting cross-legged

115

223a

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

on big couches. Although customs may be changed according to
circumstances from time to time, one should know what was the
original tradition and what are later derivatives.

26. Conduct towards Visitors and Friends
In the days when the Great Teacher, the founder of the religion,
was living in the world, he used to say “welcome” whenever a vis­
iting bhiksu arrived. The monks of the monasteries in India follow
the rule that when they see a newcomer arriving, whether he is
a visitor, an old friend, a disciple, a pupil, or an acquaintance,
they go forward to greet him with the utterance “ Suagata, ” which
is translated as “welcome.” Should the newcomer be a guest, the
word Susvagata, translated as “hearty welcome,” must be pro­
nounced. If one does not say these words, one infringes upon the
monastic regulations and is also guilty according to the rules of
the Vinaya. No matter whether the newcomer is a senior or a
junior monk, this is done all the same.
Then [the host] takes off the visitor’s water jar and alms bowl,
hangs them up on pegs fixed on the wall, and prepares a seat in a
proper place for him to rest. If the visitor is a junior monk, he is
led to a secluded place, and if he is a senior one, he is invited to sit
m the front chamber. If the host is junior to the guest, he should,
in honor of his senior, massage his calves up to the whole body. If
the host is senior to the guest, he only repeatedly strokes the guest’s
back, but not down to his waist and feet. If both of them are of the
same age, then there will be no difference in the matter.
When [the newcomer] has recovered from fatigue, he washes
his hands and feet and proceeds to the superior, whom he wor­
ships only once. While kneeling on the ground, he touches the
superior’s feet. The superior stretches his right hand to stroke the
shoulders and back of the guest. But if it has not been a long time
since they have seen each other, the superior need not stroke the
guest with his hand. Then the teacher inquires after his health,
and the disciple answers according to circumstances. After that

116

Fascicle Three

the guest withdraws to one side and sits down with due respect.
There is no custom of standing at one side. The general rule in
India is to sit on small blocks of wood, and everybody is barefoot.
Since this is not the custom in China, the etiquette of holding
another person’s feet is not practiced there. It is said in the scrip­
tures that men and gods came to the Buddha, bowed their heads
down to his feet, and then withdrew to sit at one side in the man­
ner as mentioned above.
At the chosen time, hot water or other drinks are offered to
the guest. Ghee, honey, and granulated sugar may be taken at
will. As for the other eight kinds of syrup, they must be filtered
and made clear before one drinks them. If they are thick with
dregs, they are definitely not allowed [to be taken as beverages].
As the juice of apricots and the like is thick, it is reasonable
that it should be totally banned as a beverage. It is said in the
Vinaya: “Syrup must be strained until the color becomes as yel­
lowish as the reed.” Such are the rites of hospitality for receiving
guests in India, whether they are teachers, pupils, visitors, or acquaintances. It is improper for one to perform he-nan (salutation)
in haste when one has just put down one s garments and cap after
arriving at a place, having traveled through severe cold weather
or under the scorching sun, with perspiration all over one’s body,
or with hands and feet benumbed with cold. Such heedless behav­
ior is deeply against the rules of decency. What is more, the teacher
allows the guest to stand there gossiping about irrelevant mat­
ters. How can such a man of excessive impetuosity be able to make
the Dharma continue and prosper?
The word he-nan is derived from the Sanskrit vande or vandana
(worshiping), translated as “paying homage.” As the translitera­
tion is incorrect, it is pronounced he-nan. Since the old translit­
eration cannot be altered, people still say he-nan. If we adopt the
correct pronunciation, it should be said as vande.
When one is on the road, or in a crowd, it is unsuitable to make
salutations; one may just join the hands palm to palm, lower the
head, and utter the word vande. Thus it is said in a scripture,
“Putting the hands together palm to palm, or even lowering the

117

223b

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

head a little, is also a way of paying homage. ” People of the south
do not know that their behavior seemingly conforms with the regu­
lations. If they could change their unawareness into saying vande,
their behavior would be perfect, as is ordained in the Vinaya.

27. The Treatment of Disease
As I have said before, one should consider whether one is feeling
light or h e a v y -th a t is, see whether one’s four physical elements
are strong or weak—before one takes breakfast. If one feels light
and brisk, one may eat the meal as usual, but if anything is wrong,
one must find out the cause. When the cause of discomfort has
been found, one should rest. When one is feeling light and healthy,
one will feel as hungry as if a fire were burning inside, and then
one may take food at breakfast time. Daybreak is usually called
the time of phlegm,” when the remnant fluid of food taken before
the night is still crammed in the chest and has not yet dispersed;
food taken at this time is a cause of trouble. It is just like throwing
fuel into a blazing fire. The fuel will be consumed by the flames,
but if straw is placed on a fire not yet brightly burning, the straw
will remain there, while the fire will not burn.
Breakfast is specially permitted by the Buddha. Whether it is
porridge or cooked rice, the meal is taken according to one’s physi­
cal condition. If one can subsist on porridge alone in order to prac­
tice the Way, one may just eat it without taking anything else. If
one wishes to eat cooked rice for the nourishment of the body, it is
harmless to take cooked rice in the morning. If any food causes
discomfort to the body, it is a source of illness. Do not say that one
is ill when one only has a headache or is lying in bed. When no
other medicine is curative, a physician may prescribe “untimely
food for the patient, and the Buddha said that it might be served
in a secluded place. No monk is allowed to take food at irregular
hours except by the prescription of a physician.
According to the lore of medicine, one of the five lores of India,
a physician should first examine the voice and countenance of his

118

Fascicle Three

patient, and then prescribe for him in accordance with the eight
branches of medical knowledge. If he does not understand the se­
cret of this knowledge, he will cause adverse effects though he
intended to produce advantageous results. The eight branches of
medical knowledge are: (1) the treatment of all kinds of ulcers; (2)
the treatment of ailments of the head by acupuncture; (3) the treat­
ment of diseases of the body; (4) the treatment of illnesses caused
by demons; (5) the treatment of sickness with agada (antidotal)
medicine; (6) the treatment of children’s diseases; (7) the art of
longevity; and (8) the method of strengthening the legs and body.
Ulcers are of two kinds, internal and external. Ailments of the
head are those illnesses that trouble only the head. Diseases be­
low the neck are called bodily diseases. Discomfort caused by de­
mons is a complaint induced by evil demons. Agada is a panacea
for counteracting all kinds of poison. The word “children indi­
cates infants from the stage of an embryo up to the age of sixteen
years. Longevity means to keep the body healthy so as to live long.
When the legs are energetic, the body will be strong and healthy.
These eight arts of healing were formerly contained in eight books.
Lately they have been abridged into one bundle [of palm leaves].
In the five parts of India, [all physicians] practice medicine
according to this book. The physicians who are well learned in it
are all paid with official salaries. Therefore, physicians are greatly
honored in India. Merchants and traders are also held in esteem,
as they do not injure life but benefit themselves and help others
at the same time. I have also spent some time in studying the lore
of medicine, but as it was not my proper duty I abandoned the
pursuit at last.
Moreover, we should know that the medicinal herbs of India
are different from those of China. What is found in one country
may not be found in the other, and so they are not the same in the
two countries. For instance, such herbs as ginseng, tuckahoe,
Chinese angelica, polygala, aconite, monkshood, Chinese ephe­
dra, asarum, and the like are the best medicinal herbs in China,
but I did not see any of them when I made inquiries about them

119

223c

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

in India. In India there is abundant harltaki (yellow myrobalan),
and in the northern part one may sometimes find turmeric, while
the western frontier is rich in ferula. A small quantity of camphor
is produced in [the islands of] the South Seas. All three species of
cardamom are grown in Dvarapati, while the two kinds of cloves are
produced in the country of Kun-lun. Only these herbs are needed in
China; all other medicinal herbs are not worth gathering.
When the body, which is made up of the four elements, is ill,
the illness is caused in all cases by overeating or fatigue, or by
taking a meal early in the morning when the food taken before
the night has not been discharged, or by eating again at noon
when breakfast has not been digested. For these reasons, cholera
develops. One belches consecutively for several nights, and the
belly is swollen for more than ten days. Then one seeks expensive
medicines to cure the kidneys and tries to get costly Gentiana
macrophylla. A rich man can afford to do so, but a poor man can
live only as long as the morning dew. What can one do to save the
life of such a poor man when he is attacked by illness? Even if a
good physician came in the morning to offer pills and medicinal
powder, they would be of no effect. Even if Bianque [the highly
skilled physician] visited him in the evening with medical decoc­
tions and plasters, he could not save his life. Moxibustion and acu­
puncture applied to him are just as if put on wood or stone. He
could only shake his legs and head; otherwise he would be no
different from a corpse.
All this is due to ignorance of the causes of illness and not
understanding how to take good care of oneself so as to recuper­
ate. It is like trying to stop a stream without damming up its source,
or cutting a tree without removing its roots, so that the current will
spread and the branches will sprout again without being extirpated.
The result is that those who engage in studying the scriptures and
commentaries only gaze at the Tripitaka with ceaseless sighs [over
their enfeebled bodies], and those who practice meditation can only
imagine the mental state of the eight kinds of samadhi (intent
concentration) with long lamentations. Lay scholars who aim at

120

Fascicle Three

achieving the Doctorate of Classics curb their bridles at the Gate
of the Golden Horse [being prevented by illness from entering that
government house], and those who are trying to compete for the
position of Advanced Scholar halt outside the Shi-qu-ge (the Im­
perial Library). Is it not a great hindrance that impedes one from
cultivating the Way and performing good deeds? It is not, indeed,
a small matter to lose one’s good repute and glory. So I have made
this narration—I hope that my readers will not deem it prolix and
repetitious—so that chronic complaints may be cured without the
treatment of a physician. When the four elements [of the physical
body] are well regulated, one will never be affected by any kind of
disease. Is it not beneficial to do good for oneself as well as others?
If one is poisoned to death [in the course of taking medicine],
it is the result of one’s deeds done in a previous life. Yet, in our
present life, it is necessary to avoid [what is undesirable] and take
[what is beneficial].

28. Rules for Taking Medicine
All living creatures without exception are liable to suffer from ail­
ments caused by disorders of the four elements; and the eight sea­
sonal changes, coming one after another, may induce illness at no
fixed time. Whenever one is ill, one should rest at once. Therefore,
the World-honored One said when delivering the Sutra on Medi­
cal Prescriptions: “The disorders of the four elements are as fol­
lows: (1) guru (indigestion), (2) kapha (phlegm), (3) pitta (bile),
and (4) vata (wind).” The first is an increase of the element of
earth, which causes the body to feel heavy; the second is an accu­
mulation of the element of water, which causes excessive snivel
and saliva; the third is the burning of the element of fire, which
makes the head and chest strongly feverish; and the fourth is a
great agitation of the element of wind, which makes one pant with
a striking and rushing breath. These four correspond with what
are known in China as serious heaviness, phlegmatic illness,

121

224a

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

yellow fever, and the bursting of breath. But if we discuss disease
according to popular pathology, there are only three kinds of ill­
ness, namely, ailments caused by wind, feverish maladies, and
phlegmatic sickness. Serious heaviness is substantially identical
with phlegmatic illness, without being separately elucidated as
pertaining to the element of earth.
In order to find out the cause of a disease, one should examine
oneself early in the morning. If one feels that the four elements
are abnormal or out of order, one should first refrain from eating.
Even if one is very thirsty, one must not drink any juice or water.
This utmost abstinence should be observed for one or two days, or
sometimes for four or five days, until the disease is cured. This is
the right thing for one to do, but there is no fixed duration for it. If
one feels that there is food remaining undigested in the stomach,
one should press the navel and the chest with one’s fingers
stretched like a fork. It is good for one to drink a large quantity of
hot water and thrust a finger into the throat to cause the food to
eject out. One should drink water again and vomit once more, till
the stomach is completely emptied. Drinking cold water is also
harmless. Hot water with dry ginger soaked in it is a wonderful
cure. On that day food must be cut off, and one may break the fast
on the following morning. If it is difficult for one to fast for a day,
temporary adjustments may be arranged according to circum­
stances. If one is having a high fever, one should particularly avoid
taking a cold shower bath. If one feels seriously heavy and is shiv­
ering with cold, it is good for one to remain near a fire, but this is
inapplicable in the hot and damp places south of the Yangzi River
and in the Five Ranges. It is the local custom of these places to
take a cold shower bath when one is having a fever.
In the case of acute rheumatoid arthritis, ointment may be
applied, and it is also good to use a hot ball of cloth to heat the
affected part of the body. The application of heated oil will pro­
duce an immediate effect.
One may feel phlegm filling the chest, with saliva oozing in­
cessantly out of the mouth, and clear mucus flowing from the nose.

122

Fascicle Three

Breath may accumulate in the pharynx. The throat is sometimes
choked when the mouth is overfull with food so that one cannot
speak properly, and food and drink become tasteless for as long as
some ten days. Merely by fasting, such complaints may be cured
without taking the trouble of cauterizing the head, nor is it neces­
sary to resort to massaging the throat. Such are the general prin­
ciples by which medicine can cure a disease without using medical
decoctions.
I conjecture that when undigested food is removed, high fever
will abate, and that when the flowing saliva is exhausted, phleg­
matic disease will be cured. If the internal organs remain quiet,
and evil air is dispersed, violent wind will cease by itself. Nothing
will go wrong if one regulates the physique in this manner. One
need not trouble a physician to feel one’s pulse, nor is it needful to
consult a witch doctor. Each person is then a king of physicians,
and everyone becomes a Jivaka [a well-known physician at the
time of the Buddha].
As regards the method of the Dharma master Tanluan, who
could cure his own ailments by regulating his breath, it could be
practiced only by hermits. The Dhyana master Huisi could extract
evil influences from his body by composing his mind in abstract
meditation, but this is unknowable to common people. If it is nec­
essary to consult a reputable physician in the eastern capital of
Luo-yang, a poor man will be stopped at the ford [for want of money
to pay the boatman]. When it is necessary to seek the best herbs
in the western suburbs, the solitary and childless will lose their
way. The fasting mentioned above costs no money and is wonder­
ful as a treatment. As it can be applied by both the rich and the
poor, is it not an important remedy?
W ith the abrupt appearance o f carbuncle or acne, hot blood
will rush up all o f a sudden, and both the hands and feet will
feel irritated and painful. At the moment when such diseases
as the plague, punishments sent by heaven, bodily wounds
caused by a sword or an arrow, fractures resulting from stum­
bling and falling, typhoid fever, acute gastroenteritis, half-day

123

224b

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

diarrhea, headaches, angina pectoris, sores around the eyes, tooth­
aches, and the like, have begun to arise, one should start fasting.
A pill made of three components will cure various diseases,
and it is not difficult to obtain. Take harltakl bark, dry ginger, and
granulated sugar, all equal in quantity. Pound the first two into
powder, and then mix the powder with the sugar in a few drops of
water to knead the mixture into pills. About ten pills in the morn­
ing is the limit, and one is not to abstain from eating. No more
than two or three doses will be sufficient to cure a patient with
diarrhea. It will break up gas in the stomach, disperse cold, and
help digestion. As it is widely useful, I have mentioned it here. If
no granulated sugar is available, maltose or honey will do. If one
could chew one piece of harltaki and swallow the juice every day,
one would be free from disease throughout one’s whole life.
This medical lore was handed down by Indra. As one of the
five sciences, it is practiced in all of the five parts of India. Among
its methods of treatment, the most important one is fasting. The
old translators said that when a patient was not cured after having
fasted for seven days, he might invoke the aid of Avalokitesvara.
In China, most people do not understand this method and think of
it as a separate system of religious fasting; thus they do not care
to study it. This is because the translators did not understand the
art of healing. Those who suffer from illnesses caused by taking
cinnabar and crystal [for immortality], or from a chronic disease,
such as a lump in the belly, may also apply this method. (Yijing’s
running note: But I fear that it might be unsuitable for those who
take cinnabar and crystal to go hungry. The cinnabar drug that
enables one to levitate is not found in any other country, and the
eating of [pulverized] crystal is practiced only in China. But some
kinds of crystal or moonstone may produce fire, and if they are
taken, the body will explode. As people of the present day cannot
distinguish them, numerous men have died in vain [of this bad prac­
tice], Thus we should be deeply aware of the harmfulness of this.)
Poisoning caused by snakebite or scorpion sting cannot be cured
by this treatment [fasting]. When one is fasting, roaming about

124

a

Fascicle Three

and doing hard work should be strictly avoided. A long-distance
traveler may go on his way without harm even if he is fasting, but
he should rest after his recuperation, and eat newly cooked rice or
drink any amount of well-boiled mung bean soup, seasoned with
fragrant giant hyssop. If he feels chilly, he may add pepper, gin­
ger, and Piper longum to the soup. If he knows that it is a cold,
scallion andNepeta japonica should be put into the soup. It is said
in a work on medicine that all pungent things are liable to pro­
mote cold, with the exception of dry ginger, and so it is also good
to add them to the soup. On days of fasting, one should regulate
one’s breath and abstain from drinking cold water. Other absten­
tions are just the same as taking regular medicine, but if one is
sure to be suffering from cold, one may take porridge without harm.
In the case of suffering from fever, it is good to drink well-boiled
decoctions of the root of bitter ginseng (Sophora flavescens). Tea is
also good. For more than twenty years after I left my native coun­
try, I only drank this as a medicinal beverage to preserve my
health, and I scarcely suffered from any disease.
The medicines in China, including the stone needle for acu­
puncture, amount to more than four hundred kinds of herbs con­
sisting of roots and stalks of different plants, most of which are
fine and rare in color and have a fragrant flavor. They are effective
for curing diseases and can invigorate one’s spirit. Acupuncture
and the skill of feeling the pulse [in China] are never surpassed
by any country in Jambudvipa, and the drugs for long life are
found only in China. Because our hills are connected with the
Himalayas and our mountains are linked with the Gandhamâdanas, many strange and precious things are produced here in
abundance. On account of the natural disposition of her people
and the quality of her products, China is known as the Divine
Land. In all the five parts of India, who does not esteem China,
and who within the four seas does not hold her in respect? It is
said that Manjusri is now living in that country. Wherever a monk
goes, if the people hear that he is a monk from the Devaputra,
they will worship him with great honor. Deva means heaven,

125

224c

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

and putra “a son,” denoting that he is coming from the place
of the Son of Heaven in China.
The medicinal herbs and the acupuncture [used in China] are
really wonderful, but recuperative measures and the discovery of
the causes of disease are very much neglected. So I am here giving
a rough description of how to meet the need in time. If fasting fails
to alleviate one’s ailment, one may then resort to medical treat­
ment according to a prescription. A decoction of bitter ginseng is a
specific remedy for feverish diseases, while ghee, honey, and fruit
juice are particularly good for curing colds. In the country of Lata
in West India, people who are ill abstain from food for a fortnight,
or a full month, and will take food only after they have been cured
of their illness. In Central India the limit for fasting is seven days,
and in the South Seas it is but two or three days. This is because of
different local conditions and variant physical constitutions. So
the number of days for fasting is more in one place and less at
another, without a uniform limit.
I do not know whether or not fasting is suitable to be practiced
in China. Most people die after abstaining from food for seven days,
but this is because one is not afflicted with any illness. But if one is
infected with illness, one will not die even [after fasting] for many

225a

days. Once I saw a sick man who fasted for thirty days and recov­
ered afterwards. So it is not surprising to see one fasting for many
days. How can one force a man to drink hot porridge in spite of his
sickness, simply on seeing that he is attacked by a burning fever,
without examining the cause of his illness? Such an act is deeply
dreadful! If by any chance one is cured by such a treatment, it is
after all not to be taught to the laypeople. It is strictly prohibited
to do so in the lore of medicine.
Furthermore, the people of present-day China mostly eat raw
fish and vegetables, but the Indians never eat anything uncooked.
All sorts of vegetables are well cooked and mixed with ferula, ghee,
and spices before being eaten, and they never eat pickles or mince­
meat made of pickles. I remember once I ate some of these things,
and they caused me to suffer from a painful lump in the abdomen,

126

Fascicle Three

which hurt my belly, clogged my intestines, induced sore eyes,
and enfeebled me all the more. That is why the Indians do not eat
them. Wise people should consider the matter well as to what is
useful and practicable, and what should be abandoned or be kept
in mind. If one has heard the advice of a physician, but does not
act accordingly, is the physician to be blamed? If one acts in accor­
dance with medical advice, one will live at ease and be able to
follow the Way in a perfect manner, benefiting both oneself and
others. If one abandons good advice, one will have a weak body
and be feeble-minded, while all one’s efforts to do good for oneself
and others will be lost.

29. Avoidance of Evil Drugs
At certain places where the vulgar custom has long been preva­
lent, the people take feces and urine in time of illness, and when a
disease comes on, the dung of pigs or cats is used. Such things,
entitled “dragon decoctions,” are kept in an urn or ajar. In spite of
their nice name, they are the worst of all filthy things. Even after
eating onion or garlic, which are permissible for a monk to eat,
one has to stay in a side room to purify oneself by washing and
bathing for seven days before joining others. When one’s body is
not yet purified, one should not enter the assembly of monks, nor
is it fitting for one to walk round a stupa. One must not worship
[an image of the Buddha]. Owing to their offensive smell, a monk
is not allowed to eat these things, unless he is ill.
What is called “putrid-discharged[-medicine],” which is one of
the four dependences, is the medicine which is putrid and dis­
charged [by a cow]. It is meant to save trouble and get what is
merely for the preservation of the body. Costly medicine is, of
course, allowable, and there is no harm in taking it. In the San­
skrit term puti-mukti-bhaisajya, puti means “putrid, mukti is
“discharged,” and bhaisajya is translated as “medicine.” (Yijing s
running note: Thus we have “putrid-discharged-medicine.”)

127

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

The Vinaya permits feces and urine to be used as medicine,
but the dung of a calf and the urine of a cow are meant. In India,
the body of one who is condemned to capital punishment is smeared
with [human] feces and discarded in the wilderness outside hu­
man habitation. Night-soil removers and scavengers strike sticks
to distinguish themselves while going about. If anybody touches
them accidentally, he has to wash himself and his garments thor­
oughly clean.

225b

It was the principle o f the Great Teacher to act according to
circumstances and take precautions against people’s derision and
slander. How could he have asked others to take such things against
the customs of his time? The reasons for his disallowance are fully
explained in the Vinaya. It is really despicable for one to give such
things to others for their use. We should not allow vulgar customs
to become a regular practice. If foreigners heard about it, it would
be detrimental to the good name of our morals and manners. More­
over, we have plenty of fragrant medicinal herbs, and why should
we not use them? Why should one give others what one does not
take for oneself? To counteract the poison of snakebite, we have
such minerals as sulfur, realgar, and orpiment, and it is not difficult
to get pieces of them and take them with us. If one is suffering
from miasma fever, there are such febrifuges as the decoction pre­
pared with licorice, [the wild tea of] Mount Heng, and bitter gin­
seng, which may be kept in large or small quantities and are easily
obtainable. Colds can be completely cured by taking some ginger,
pepper, or Piper longum in the morning. Rock candy and granu­
lated sugar, when eaten at night, may satiate hunger and thirst.
If nothing is laid aside to meet the cost of medicine, one will cer­
tainly be short of money in time of need. If one acts contrary to the
teaching [of the Buddha] and does not put the teaching into prac­
tice, how can one be free from committing faults? When money is
squandered aimlessly, one will be in a tight corner in an emer­
gency. Who can have a direct understanding of this, if I do not
explain it in detail? Alas! People do not utilize good medicine but,
in order to save trouble, they use the “dragon decoction”! Although

128

Fascicle Three

they have some small benefit in mind, they are not aware that it
is a great offense against the holy teaching. Followers of the
Sammitiya School speak of the putrid-discharged-medicine, but
as it is a different school from ours, we should not follow its ex­
ample. Although it is mentioned in the Vinaya-dvavimsatiprasannartha-sastra, this is not a work studied by the adherents
of the Sarvastivada School.

30. On Turning to the Right and the
Observation of Time
Turning to the right is pradaksina in Sanskrit. The prefix pro has
various meanings, but here in this word it denotes going round.
Daksina means “the right side,” generally signifying what is re­
spectable and dexterous. Thus my contemporaries [in India] call
the right hand the daksina hand, meaning that it is on the right
side and is respectable and dexterous. It is, therefore, in confor­
mity with the rites of walking round [a respectable person or ob­
ject]. Daksina also means a donation to the monks, and in this
case it is different in meaning from what is mentioned here, as I
have explained before. In all the five parts of India, the east is
called the front, and the south is at one’s right side, but this is not
the point by which to decide what is right and left [when going
round a respectable person or object].
In the scriptures it should be said that one walked round [the
Buddha] three times towards the right side, but it is wrong to say
that one walked beside the Buddha. In some scriptures it is said
that one walked round three times towards the right side, and
this is in conformity with the rites. It is an abridgment to say that
one walked round a hundred or a thousand times without saying
“towards the right. ”
It is somewhat difficult to decide which is walking round to­
wards the right and which is towards the left. Shall we deem walk­
ing towards one’s right hand to be towards the right, and walking

129

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

towards one’s left hand to be towards the left? Once a Chinese
scholar elucidated the point, saying that when one’s right hand is
towards the interior of the circle in going round an object, it is
called right side circumambulation, and when the left hand is to­
wards the interior of the circle, it is called left side circumambulation. He argued that one can complete right side circumambulation
only by walking round an object towards its left side. This is merely
his conjecture. It is irrelevant to the correct theory, and it mis­
guided ignorant people. Even some men o f great virtue and erudi­
tion are so puzzled as to echo that scholar’s opinion.
What shall we do to make a compromise according to reason?
We should depend upon only the Sanskrit texts and stop up our
personal feelings. To walk round towards the right side [of a per­
son or an object of veneration] is right side circumambulation, while
to walk towards the left side is left side circumambulation. This is
the rule laid down by the Holy One, and there is no doubt about it.
As regards what are [proper] and what are improper times,
there are various implications according to different circumstances’
as is explained in the Scripture on Proper Times and Improper
Times. But in the Vinaya texts of the four schools, it is unani­
mously affirmed that noontime is the proper time [for taking a
meal]. If the shadow of the needle on a sundial has passed even as
httle as a thread, it is considered an improper time. If a person
wishes to determine the cardinal points in order to guard himself
against committing the fault [of eating at an improper time], he
should measure the north star and observe the southern constel­
lation at night, so as to fix the correct line [between the south and
the north poles], and to find out when noontime is approaching.
Again, he may also build a small earthen mound, one foot in di­
ameter and five inches in height, at a key position. At the center
of the mound a slender stick is inserted. Or a nail is sometimes
fixed on a piece of stone. It is as slim as a bamboo chopstick, four
finger-widths in length. A line is to be drawn over the shadow of the
nail at the moment of high noon. If the shadow has passed the line it
becomes improper for one to eat food. In India such a sundial, known

130

Fascicle Three

as a velacakra, translated as a round instrument for marking time,
is set up in most places. The purpose of measuring the shadow is
to find out when it is at its shortest, which marks the moment of
the meridian.
But in Jambudvipa the midday line varies in measurement at
different locations. For instance, in the region of Luo there is no
shadow at all, and this is different from other regions. Again, in
the country of Srlbhoja, the shadow on the sundial is neither long
nor short in the middle of the eighth moon. At midday a man, or
any object under the sun, casts no shadow on the ground. Such is
also the case in the middle of spring. The sun passes overhead
twice a year. When the sun is traveling in the south, the shadow
[of a man] falls northwards and is two or three feet m length.
When it is in the north, the shadow is the same towards the south.
In China, the shadow towards the south and that towards the north
are different [in length], and doors with the north at the back al­
ways face the sun. When it is midday on the eastern coast of China,
it is not yet noontime in the western part of the country. Since it is
difficult to hold one principle for all matters, it is said in the Vinaya.
“When time is to be determined, one should do so according to the
[local] zenith, and then the time is fixed.”
All homeless monks should behave according to the holy teach­
ing. As taking food is absolutely necessary every day, one should
be mindful about measuring the shadow before eating. If one ne­
glected this rule, how could one observe the other precepts? There­
fore, those eminent monks who are engaged in propagating the
Dharma and making it prosperous never complain of the minute
and complicated [disciplinary rules]. Even when they are travel­
ing on the sea, they carry the sundial with them; will they go
without it when they are on land? In India, tradition says that one
who inspects the water [to ensure that it is free from insects] and
affirms that it is high noon is a master of Vinaya.
Furthermore, clepsydras are kept in all the large monasteries
in India. They are gifts donated by successive generations of kings,
together with watchers, to keep the monks informed of the hours.

131

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

226a

The lower part of the device is a copper vessel filled with water on
which a copper bowl is floating. The bowl is thin and delicately
made, capable of holding two shengs (one sheng equals one liter)
of water, with a hole as tiny as a pinhole at the bottom, from which
water leaks in. It is an accurate device for the measurement of
time. When the bowl is full of water, it sinks, and a drum is sounded.
Commencing at dawn, one stroke of the drum is sounded at the
first sinking of the bowl, two strokes at the second sinking, and
three strokes at the third sinking. After the four strokes of the
drum at the fourth sinking, a conch is blown twice, ending with
one more stroke of the drum, indicating the first hour, when the
sun is rising in the east. After the second round of the bowl sink­
ing four times and the drum being beaten four times with the
conch being blown once more, the drum is sounded twice to indi­
cate the second hour; this marks the exact moment of high noon.
When the drum has been struck twice, the monks should stop eat­
ing. If anyone is found eating, he is expelled [from the community
of monks] according to monastic regulations. In the afternoon, there
are also two hours, announced in the same way as in the forenoon.
The four hours of the night are similar to those in the daytime. As
a whole, one day and one night consist of eight hours.
At the end of the first watch, the director of duties strikes a
drum in a loft of the monastery to announce the time for the monks
Such is the way of using the clepsydra in Nalanda Monastery. At
dusk and dawn, a drum is beaten for one stretch at the gate. These
miscellaneous affairs are performed by servants or porters. From
sunset to dawn, the ordinary monks are not obliged to sound the
ghanta (bell), nor is it the duty of servants; the director of duties
has to do it himself. There is a difference between beating four or
five strokes [on the ghanta], and it is fully explained elsewhere.
The clepsydras are somewhat different in the monasteries in
Mahabodhi and Kusinagara, where the bowls sink sixteen times
between dawn and midday. In the country of Ku-lun in the South
Seas, a copper cauldron filled with water is used, and the water
leaks down through a tiny hole at the bottom. When the water is

132

Fascicle Three

drained away, the drum will be sounded. Each time the cauldron
is emptied, the drum is beaten once, and when the drum has been
beaten four times, it is midday. This process is repeated till sun­
set. At night there are also eight hours as in the daytime, and
there are sixteen hours altogether [in a day and a night]. These
clepsydras are also gifts presented by the king of that country.
It is due to the use of the clepsydra that one is never perplexed
about noontime even on a dark day with thick clouds overhead,
and that during a night of continuous rain there is no doubt about
the watches. We should also present a memorial to the [Chinese]
emperor, asking for the installation [of clepsydras in our monas­
teries], as it is an important piece of equipment for monks.
In making a clepsydra one should first divide a day and a night
in such a way as to let the bowl sink eight times from dawn to
noontime. If it is to sink fewer than eight times, the hole in the
bowl should be drilled bigger. A skillful mechanic is required to
regulate the device correctly. When the day or night gradually
becomes shorter, half a spoonful of water is added to the device.
When they become gradually longer, half a flagon of water is taken
out. But this is done within the limit of increments or decrements
of time. It is reasonable for the director of duties to keep a small
bowl [to mark the time] in his chamber without incurring any fault.
In China there are five watches [in the night], and in India
there are four parts, but according to the teaching of the Buddha,
the Tamer of Men, there are three hours in the night, i.e., a night
is divided into three parts. During the first and third parts, one
should recite [the holy texts], and only during the second part
may one sleep with a concentrated mind. One who deviates from
this rule incurs the fault of violating the Buddha s teaching, un­
less he is ill. If one puts this into practice with a mind of venera­
tion, one will ultimately benefit oneself and others.
End of Fascicle Three

133

Fascicle Four

31. Bathing the Buddha’s Image
It has been explained in detail that none is more venerable than
the three honored ones, and that nothing can surpass the four
noble truths as subjects for meditation. But the intrinsic principle
of the truths is so profound that it is beyond the understanding of
an uncultivated mind, while the lavation of the holy image [of the
Buddha] can be performed with benefit by all people. Although
the Great Teacher has entered nirvana, his image still exists, and
we should venerate it as if he were in the world. Incense and flowers
should often be offered to the image; by doing so our mind may be
purified. To bathe it regularly is good enough to clear away the
evil influence of our deeds caused by idleness. With this point in
mind, one will receive invisible benefits, and if one advises others
to do so, one will gain visible advantages both for oneself and for
others. I hope that those who wish to obtain bliss will bear this
practice in mind.
In the monasteries of India, at the time for bathing the
Buddha’s image, usually in the forenoon, the director of duties
strikes a ghanta. (Yijing’s running note: The director of duties, or
the giver of duties, is karmadana in Sanskrit. Dana means “giv­
ing,” and karma, “action,” i.e., one who gives various duties to the
monks. This term was formerly rendered as wei-na, which is in­
correct. In Chinese, the character wei means “a cord” or “to tie
together,” while na stands for the last syllable o f the Sanskrit
karmadana, and was used as an abbreviation of the word.) A pre­
cious canopy is stretched in the court of the monastery, and bottles
containing perfumed water are put in a row by the side of the

135

226b

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

shrine hall. An image of the Buddha, made of either gold, silver,
bronze, or stone, is placed in a basin of copper, gold, wood, or stone,
while dancing girls are asked to play music. The image is rubbed
with scented paste, and then perfumed water is poured over it.
(Yijing’s running note: Take any scented wood, such as sandal­
wood or aloeswood, and grind it with water into paste on a flat
stone which [looks like] a plinth. The image is rubbed with this
paste before perfumed water is poured over it.) It is then wiped
clean with a piece of pure white cloth and set up in the shrine hall,
which is decorated with flowers and colored ribbons. This is the
ceremony performed by the monks of a monastery under the guid­
ance of the director o f duties. In their separate rooms the monks
also perform this ceremony in an individual way, and they do so
every day without negligence, regarding it as important.
All kinds of flowers, either from herbs or trees, may be used as
offerings. Whether in the winter or in the summer, there are al­
ways fragrant flowers, and there are also many flower sellers in
the markets. In China, for instance, lotuses and pinks display vari­
ous colors in summer and autumn, while golden vitex, peach, and
apricot trees bloom profusely in the springtime. The althaea bushes
226 c
and pomegranate trees blossom one after the other at different
times, and the red cherry and white crab apple trees put forth
new buds from season to season. Such flowers as those from holly­
hocks in gardens or from vanilla trees in the villages must be
brought in and properly arranged [before the image]; they should
not be left in gardens for one to view from afar. In the winter
when flowers may run short for some time, we may cut colored
silk [into artificial flowers] and mix them with powdered perfume.
It is really good to place them before the image of the Buddha.
The bronze images, regardless of size, must be polished brightly
with fine brick dust, and then pure water is poured over them,
until they become as clear and brilliant as a mirror. A large image
must be washed as a joint effort by all of the monks in the middle
and at the end of each month, while a small one may be washed
every day by an individual monk according to his ability. Although

136

Fascicle Four

the cost of this performance is small, the bliss and benefit gained
therefrom are great.
The water in which an image has been bathed is known as the
water of auspiciousness. One may wish for success by sprinkling it
with two fingers over one’s head. One should not smell the flowers
that have been offered to an image, nor should one trample on
them when they are taken off [the altar], but they should be put
away in a clean place. How can a monk be allowed not to bathe the
holy image during his lifetime till his hair has turned white? Al­
though red flowers may be spread all over the fields, he has no
mind to pick them as offerings to an image. Thus he becomes lazy
in performing [religious functions], and when people point out [lo­
tus] ponds and gardens, he remains indolent and shirks the bore
[of picking flowers]. He is so idle as to be reluctant to open the
Buddha hall, and is contented with collective worship. In this
manner the line of succession from teacher to pupil will be broken,
and there will be nowhere to pay homage [to the Buddha].
It is the duty of monks and laymen in India to build caityas
with clay and mold images out of clay, or to print [images] on silk
or paper to be worshiped wherever one goes, or to pile up heaps of
clay and surround them with bricks to form stupas in the wilder­
ness, to be left there to fall apart and disappear naturally. (There
is a Chinese note.)
When they make an image or build a caitya out of gold, silver,
copper, iron, clay, lacquer, bricks, or stone, or even by piling up
sand or snow, they put two kinds of relics inside them. One is the
Great Teacher’s relic bones, and the other is the verse on depen­
dent origination, which reads:
All things arise from conditions;
The Tathagata has expounded the causes.
All things end with the end of the conditions.
Thus was spoken by the Great Sramana.
If these two kinds of relics are placed inside the image or caitya,
one will gain plenty of bliss. Therefore, many parables are widely

137

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

used in the scriptures to praise the unthinkable advantages of
doing so. If a man makes an image even as small as a grain of
barley, or builds a caitya as tiny as a jujube with a wheel sign and
a spire as little as a pin on it, he will obtain special good causes as
limitless as the seven seas, and his good rewards will last as long
as four rebirths. A full account o f this matter is given in detail
in separate scriptures.
I hope various teachers will perform this function from time
to time. To bathe and venerate a holy image is an action that makes
one meet a Buddha in all lives, and the offering of flowers and
incense is a cause for one to enjoy wealth and happiness in all
future rebirths. Whether one does the work oneself or advises oth­
ers to do it, one will get unlimited bliss.
227a

I have seen in some places that the monks or laymen brought
out an image to the roadside, poured water over it and washed
it properly, but they did not know how to dry it with a wiper.
They simply exposed the image to the sun to be dried by the
wind. This is incongruous with the rites.

32. The Ceremony of Chanting
It is a tradition handed down from ancient times in the Divine
Land that the monks worship the Buddha by repeating his name;
most of them do not extol him and praise his virtues. One may
only listen to the repetition of his name and not know the height
of his wisdom, but when his virtues are praised and fully enu­
merated, one will realize the greatness and depth of his virtues.
In India the monks practice caitya-vandana (walking round a
caitya) and pay regular homage late in the afternoon or in the
evening. The monks gather in an assembly, go out o f the gate [of
the monastery], and walk three times round a stupa to which
incense and flowers are offered. Then they crouch on the ground,
and a competent monk is asked to praise the virtues o f the
Buddha in ten or twenty stanzas, with a lamenting and elegant
voice and in a clear and solemn manner.

138

Fascicle Four

After that they return in regular sequence to the usual meet­
ing place in the monastery. Having taken their seats, they invite
a scripture-reciter to mount the lion seat to read a short scrip­
ture. The lion seat, which is well proportioned, being neither too
high nor too big, is placed at the head of the line of seats, with
the chief monk’s seat next to it. The recitation mostly consists of
three statem ents selected and arranged by the Venerable
Asvaghosa. The first statement, containing about ten stanzas, is
a hymn praising the three honored ones according to the con­
tents of the scriptures. The second statement is the full text of
the scripture recited, which consists of the words of the Buddha.
After the conclusion of the hymn and the reading of the scrip­
ture, a resolution is made in more than ten stanzas for the trans­
ference of merits. As the recitation is divided into three sections,
it is known as the three statements.
When the recitation is over, all the monks in the assembly
exclaim “ Subhasita!” Su means “w ell,” and bhasita, spoken,
that is, “Well-spoken!” Their intention is to praise the scripture
as a text of wonderful sayings. Or they exclaim Sadhu, mean­
ing “Excellent!”
When the scripture-reciter has descended, the chief monk rises
first to salute the lion seat, and then salutes the seats of the holy
monks. After doing so, he resumes his own seat. The monk second
in order salutes the two places as the chief monk did and also
worships the chief monk; then he returns to his own seat. The
monk who is third in order performs the rites in the same manner.
This is done by all the other monks till the last one has made his
homage. If the assembly is too large, after three or five persons
have performed the ceremony mentioned above, all the rest may
salute the assembly collectively at one and the same time, and
then they retire at will. This is the normal practice for performing
the ceremony of the monks of Tamralipti in eastern India.
In Nalanda Monastery where there are so many resident monks
that they exceed three thousand in number, it is difficult to as­
semble all the monks in a hurry. There are eight courtyards with

139

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

227b

three hundred rooms, but the monks may perform the rites of paymg homage and recitation at any time in their separate places. It is
the custom of this monastery to appoint a preacher capable of chantmg to go round from place to place every evening to conduct the
ceremony of worshiping and praising [the virtues of the Buddha],
with a servant and a boy holding incense and flowers leading the
way. He goes through every courtyard and pays homage in all the
shrine halls. Each time he pays homage, he chants the praises of the
Buddha in three or five stanzas in a high voice that is heard all
around. He completes the round in the twilight. This preacher al­
ways receives special offerings provided by the monastery.
One may sit alone, facing the shrine, and praise the Buddha
m his mind, or go to a temple and kneel on the ground together
with others to chant in a high pitch. One may then put one’s hands
on the ground and touch it with one’s head three times. This is the
traditional ceremony of paying homage practiced in India. The
aged and sick monks may be allowed to use small seats [while
performing the ceremony]. We [in China] have had the stanzas in
praise of the Buddha since ancient times, but our way of chanting
them is somewhat different from that of the Brahmanic land of
India. For instance, when the stanza in praise of the Buddha’s
excellent physical marks is chanted while worshiping the Buddha,
it is intoned in an even tone with a long trailing voice, in ten or
twenty verses. This is the proper way of chanting it. Moreover,
the hymn m praise of the Tathagata, etc, is really sung to extol
the Buddha, but as the intonation is somewhat prolonged, the
meaning becomes difficult for one to understand. When the as­
sembly of monks is feeling sad on a quiet night on the day of per­
forming ceremonies in memory of the dead, it is really good to ask
a competent monk to recite the Hymn o f One Hundred and Fifty
Verses and the Hymn o f Four Hundred Verses, as well as other
panegyrics.
In India, numerous panegyrics have been handed down to be
sung when paying homage, and there was no man of literary tal­
ent who did not compose an encomium in praise of a person whom

140

Fascicle Four

he deemed worthy to be eulogized. The Venerable Matrceta was
such a man of great talent and high virtue, who excelled above all
scholars of good learning of his time. Tradition says that when the
Buddha was living, he once led a group of disciples, wandering
among the people. An oriole, on seeing the features of the Buddha
as magnificent as a golden mountain, began to trill melodiously m
the wood as if it were eulogizing him. The Buddha looked bac
and said to his disciples, “This bird is so delighted with my appear­
ance that it can’t help warbling in a quavering manner. Owing to
this good deed, it shall be reborn, after my departure from the
world, in the form of a man with the name of Matrceta, who will
extensively exalt me for my great virtues.” (Yijing’s running note:
Matri means “mother,” and ceta, child. )
At first this man became an ascetic of a heretical religion and
worshiped Mahesvara. Since this deity was the object of his ven­
eration, he composed hymns in praise of him. Afterwards, when
he saw that his name had been mentioned in a prediction, he turned
his mind to believe in the Buddha and dyed his garment to live as
a monk away from secular life. He widely glorified the Buddha,
repenting what wrongs he had done in the past and desiring to
follow the superior Way in the future. He regretted that he had
not met the Great Teacher in person but had only seen his image.
Thus he wrote, in accordance with the prediction, encomiums m
an ornate style to extol the virtues of the Buddha. He composed
first the Hymn o f Four Hundred Verses and then the Hymn o f One
Hundred and Fifty Verses, both for the elucidation of the six
paramitas (the six perfect virtues) and for the exposition of the
superior virtues of the Buddha, the World-honored One. These
compositions are graceful and brilliant in phraseology, equal m
beauty to heavenly blossoms, and the principles contained m them
are so lofty as to rival earthly mountains in height. All eulogists
in India imitated his style and regarded him as the father of eulo­
gistic literature, and both Asahga and Vasubandhu greatly admired him. In all the five parts of India those who become monks
are first taught these two compositions as soon as they can recite

141

227c

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

the five and ten precepts, this being the rule for all monks regard­
less of whether they belong to the Mahayana or the Hinayana
schools.
There are six significances in the hymns. First, they enable us
to know the profound and far-reaching virtues of the Buddha; sec­
ond, they teach us how to write compositions; third, they ensure
the purity of our tongue; fourth, the chest is expanded [while sing­
ing them]; fifth, one is not nervous in a congregation [while recit­
ing the hymns]; and sixth, they enable us to live long without
illness. After having studied these hymns, one proceeds to learn
other scriptural texts. But these fine literary works are not yet
introduced to China in the east. There are, however, many exposi­
tors of these works; but none o f them may really be counted as a
sufficiently good poet to write after the same rhymes.
Dihnaga Bodhisattva personally wrote some hymns of the same
caliber in the same style. At the beginning of each verse, he added
one of his own, making a total number o f three hundred verses,
known as the Composite Panegyric. A well-known monk, named
Sakyadeva of Deer Park, again added one verse before each of
Dinnaga’s stanzas, producing a work of four hundred and fifty
verses in all, known as the Mixed Composite Panegyric. All com­
posers of eulogies take this work to be a criterion.
Once Nagarjuna Bodhisattva wrote a letter in verse, entitled
the Suhrllekha, meaning “a letter to a bosom friend,” to his old
supporter Jetaka who had the title o f Satavahana, the king o f a
great country in the south. The style of the letter is highly orna­
mental with earnest greetings and exhortations, aiming at the
Middle Way as the target o f achievement and showing more
affection than that shown to a kinsman. The purport of the letter
is really manifold. First it advocates respect for and faith in the
three honored ones and supporting one’s parents with filial piety.
One should observe the precepts, relinquish what is evil, and be
prudent in choosing friends. The contemplation of impurity should
be practiced in matters o f wealth and women. One should look
after one’s household and keep in rightful remembrance that

142

Fascicle Four

everything is impermanent. One should widely narrate the condi­
tions of hungry ghosts and animals, and describe in detail the
affairs of men, gods, and the hells. Even if a fire were burning on
the head, one would have no leisure to wipe it out, as one’s mind is
so deeply absorbed in the truth of the chain of causality in order to
gain spiritual liberation. One should diligently practice the three
modes of attaining wisdom, and clearly understand the eightfold
noble path. It advises us to learn the four noble truths, so as to
realize the two perfect virtues. One should be like Avalokitesvara
and make no distinction between friend and foe; then we shall be
able to live together with Amitabha Buddha in the Pure Land
forever. This is the way to save living beings; no other way is bet­
ter than this one.
In the five parts of India, all students first studied this letter
in verse when they began to receive schooling. None of those who
turned their mind [to Buddhism] did not spend their whole life­
times learning this epistle, just as the monks in China recite the
Sutra on Avalokitesvara and the laity read the One Thousand
Character Composition or the Book o f Filial Piety. It is univer­
sally studied with keen interest. The Jatakamala is a work of the
same sort. (Yijing’s running note: Jdtaka means “previous incar­
nation,” and mala, “a collection,” i.e., a collection of stories about
the hardships the Bodhisattva experienced in his previous incar­
nations.) If it is translated into Chinese, it would amount to over
ten rolls. In order to edify living beings, the birth stories are writ­
ten in poetry for the purpose of catering to the literary taste of
those readers who take delight in perusing fine writings.
At one time, King Slladitya, who was exceedingly fond of literature, issued an order saying, “If any one of you gentlemen has
any fine panegyric poetry, show it to us at the audience tomorrow
morning.” When the metrical compositions were collected, they
amounted to five hundred bundles. When the king opened them
and read the verses, he found that most of them were adapted
from the Jdtaka stories. From this fact he came to know that these
stories were the most excellent writings among all eulogistic works.

143

228a

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

On the islands of the South Seas, there are more than ten coun­
tries where both monks and laymen chant and recite the abovementioned eulogistic poems, which are not yet translated into
Chinese.
King Slladitya also composed songs to glorify the deed of
Jimutavahana Bodhisattva, who volunteered to sacrifice himself
in place of a serpent. Musicians were employed to play wind and
stringed instruments to accompany the singers and dancers, and
the songs were thus rendered popular in his time.
Candragomin Mahasattva of eastern India wrote a song about
Prince Visvantara, and it is sung with dancing in all of the five
parts of India. This prince was formerly known as Prince Sudana.
The Venerable Asvaghosa also wrote verses as well as the
Sutralahkara-sastra and the Buddhacarita-kavya, of which the
full version, if translated [into Chinese], would consist of more than
ten fascicles. In this work, the career of the Buddha, beginning
from his life in the royal palace up to his death under the twin
sala trees, is told in verse. It is widely read and sung in the five
parts of India and in the islands of the South Seas. It is concise in
style, but the meaning is clear and the significances, which are
manifold, render readers delighted. They never feel bored while
reading it. As it conveys the holy teachings, it enables us to gain
blessedness and benefits. I am sending home separate copies of
the Hymn o f One Hundred and Fifty Verses and the letter written
by Nagarjuna Bodhisattva, with the hope that those who take
delight in reading eulogistic poems will study and recite them.

33. Absurd Ways of Worshiping
the Buddha’s Image
In our religion there are clear regulations concerning the rites of
paying homage. A monk should always exert himself to practice
mindfulness during all of the six periods of the day and night,
lodging in a single room and living by alms-begging according to

144

Fascicle Four

the dhutaguna (ascetic practices) while cultivating the Way of
contentment. He wears only the three robes, without keeping any
surplus garments. He should concentrate his thoughts on nonex­
istence and free himself completely from the encumbrances of ex­
istence. Can he now do things in a variant way different from the
monastic rules, things such as wearing a monk s robe, and thus
not looking like an ordinary man, but worshiping like a layman in
the marketplace? When we examine the Vinaya texts, we shall
see that such a thing is totally forbidden. The Buddha said, “There
are two categories of things that one should worship, namely, the
triple gem and senior bhiksus.” There are some people who bring
the Buddha’s image to the highway, where the holy object will be
defiled by dust and dirt, in order to get money [from worshipers].
There are some others who bend their bodies, tattoo their faces,
break their joints, and pierce their skin, pretending to do so with a
good mind, but actually they are trying to earn their livelihood.
Such spectacles are never seen in India. I would advise people not
to do such things any more.

34. The Ways of Learning in India
The unique voice of the Great Sage embraces all of the three thousand worlds as a whole. It is uttered in accordance with the capac­
ity of the beings of the five ways of existence, by illustrating the
seven cases and nine personal terminations [of the Sanskrit lan­
guage], in order to effect extensive salvation. (Yijing s running
note: The seven cases and nine personal terminations of Sabdavidya [the science of words] will be briefly explained below.) There
is a store of Dharma, consisting of mental words; and Indra, the
Emperor of Heaven, comprehended the inexpressible scriptures.
Or the explanation is given in accordance with the usages of gram­
mar in order to enable the people of China to understand the words
of the original language, so that those who have cause to read
them may develop their wisdom and be gratified, each according

145

228b

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

to his own modest mentality, and thereby get rid of defilements in
conformity with truth and realize the state of perfect quietude. As
regards the supreme truth, it is far beyond the reach of words or
speech, but the worldly principles of concealment are not apart
from wording. (Yijing’s running note: The term “worldly principles”
was formerly known as worldly truth, which was not fully expres­
sive of its meaning. The meaning is that ordinary matters conceal
truth. The material clay, for instance, is originally not a pitcher,
but people erroneously think of it as a pitcher, and in the sound of
human voice there is no song, yet people mistake it for the essence
of a song. Moreover, when perception arises, its substance is nondistinctive, and it is due to the covering of ignorance that various
forms take shape illusorily. Not understanding one’s own mind,
one thinks that objects exist outside the mind. Both the snake and
the rope [that causes the illusion of a snake] are fallacious concep­
tions. When right knowledge is hidden away, the truth is con­
cealed, and it is thus known as worldly principles of concealment.
The word “concealment” implies “worldly,” and so we have the
term “worldly concealment. ” Or we may simply say veritable truth
and concealed truth.)
But the translators of old times rarely talked about the gram­
mar of the Sanskrit language. Those who recently introduced scrip­
tures into China enunciated only the first seven cases. It was not
that they did not know the eighth one (i.e., the vocative case), but
they saw no need to discuss it. Now I hope you will all study San­
skrit, so that we can spare the translators the trouble of repeti­
tion. Thus I am just writing these paragraphs, merely to give a
brief account of the fundamentals of the language. (Yijing’s running note: Even in Ku-lun and Suli, the people can read Sanskrit
scriptures. Why should the people of the Divine Land, which is a
land of abundance, not probe into the original language of the
scriptures? In India it is said in praise [of the Chinese people] that
as ManjusrI is now living in Bing-zhou [in China], the people there
are blessed by his presence, and thus they should be admired and
praised. The full account is too long to be copied here.)

146

Fascicle Four

The Sabda-vidya—sabda means “words,” and vidya, “knowl­
edge,” i.e., the Knowledge o f Words—is one of the five treatises. In
the five parts of India, secular books in general are known as
vyakarana (grammar), of which there are five principle works, simi­
lar [in popularity] to the Five Classics of the Divine Land of China.
(Yijing’s running note: Formerly it was wrongly translated as the
Pi-qie-luo Treatise.)
1. The Siddhavastu (a spelling book), also known as the
Siddhirastu, is an initiatory book for beginners in primary school
to achieve the aim of gaining good luck in learning. It deals with
the forty-nine letters of the alphabet, which are multiplied and
arranged in the eighteen sections of a total of more than ten thou­
sand syllables, comprising over three hundred stanzas. There are
four lines in each stanza, and each line consists of eight syllables,
making thirty-two syllables in a stanza. There are short and long
stanzas, and it is impossible for me to give a full account of them
here. Children begin to learn this book at the age of six and com­
plete the course in six months. According to tradition it was com­
posed by Mahesvara.
2. The Siitra is the groundwork of all grammatical writings.
The name may be translated as “short aphorisms” or explana­
tions of the rules [of grammar]. Consisting of a thousand stanzas,
it was composed by Panini, a great scholar of wide learning, in
the old days. He was said to have been inspired and aided by
Mahesvara in writing this work, and when he appeared with
three eyes, the people of his time believed that it was truly so.
At the age of eight, children can complete the study of this Sutra
in eight months.
3. The Book on Dhatu (verbal roots). It contains a thousand
stanzas especially for the explanation of grammatical roots, and
it is as useful as the above work.
4. The Book o f the Three Khilas (supplementary works). Khila
means “wasteland”; the metaphor is of the wasteland reclaimed
by a farmer. It should be named the Book on Three Pieces o f Desert
Land; namely, (1) the Astadhatu, in a thousand stanzas, (2) the

147

228c

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

Munda, in a thousand stanzas, and (3) the Unadi, also in a thou­
sand stanzas.
(1)
The Astadhâtu deals with the seven cases and the ten
las (the ten tenses and moods of a finite verb), and also ex­
plains the eighteen personal terminations of verbs and nouns.
The seven cases are possessed by all nouns, and in each case
there are three numbers, namely, singular, dual, and plural.
So there are altogether twenty-one forms for every noun. For
instance, one man is indicated by purusas, two men by
purusau, and three [or more] men by purusas. These forms of
a noun are also distinguished by being pronounced in a heavy
or a light breath. Besides the seven cases, there is the vocative
case, which is the eighth one. As the first case has three num­
bers, so do the other cases, which are, I am afraid, too compli­
cated to be mentioned here. The cases of a noun are called
subanta, having twenty-four inflections. The ten las denote
the ten grammatical terms [beginning with the letter “1”] by
which the three different tenses of a verb are expressed. The
eighteen personal terminations indicate the first, the second,
and the third persons in the three numbers o f a verb to
differentiate the worthy and unworthy or this and that. These
eighteen terminations are collectively called tinanta.
(2) The Munda treats the formation of compound words.
For instance, the Sanskrit word for “tree” is vrksa, with which
more than twenty compounds are formed. It is combined with
other words to produce the name of another thing.
(3) The Unadi is roughly the same as the preceding work,
except that what is fully explained in the one is only briefly
mentioned in the other. Only by studying hard for three years
can a ten-year-old child grasp the meanings of these books on
the three Khilas.
5.
The Vrtti-sütra. This is a commentary of the above-men­
tioned Sutra, on which quite a number of commentaries have been
composed since ancient times, but this is the best one, consisting
of eighteen thousand stanzas for the elucidation of the text of the

148

Fascicle Four

Sütra, with a detailed explanation of its manifold meanings, and
giving a full exposition of the normality of the universe and the
rules of gods and men. A fifteen-year-old child can understand the
book after five years’ study.
People of China going to India to acquire knowledge must learn
this work before studying other books, otherwise they will labor
in vain. All these books should be memorized, but this applies, as
a rule, only to men of higher talent, while those of medium or
inferior capability may pass a test merely by understanding the
meaning. They should study hard day and night without any lei­
sure to sleep restfully, just like Confucius, who studied the Book
o f Changes with such effort that three times he wore away the
leather binders that strung together the bamboo slips on which
the Book was written, or like Tong Yu [a scholar of ancient times],
who advised his pupils to utilize all their spare time to read books
a hundred times [in order to understand them thoroughly]. The
hairs of a bull are counted by the thousands, but a unicorn has
only one horn. One who has mastered this work is equal in aca­
demic rank to the holder of a Master of Classics in China.
This Vrtti-sUtra was composed by the scholar Jayâditya, who
was a man of great capability and literary talent. He could under­
stand whatever he had heard once, without having to learn it a
second time. He respected the three honored ones and performed
various meritorious deeds. His death occurred nearly thirty years
ago. After having mastered this commentary, one may proceed to
learn the composition of letters and memorials submitted to em­
perors, write poems, devote one’s mind to the study of the hetuvidyci
(logic), and pay attention to the Abhidharma-kosa-sastra. By por­
ing over the Nyâya-dvâra-tarka-sâstra, one may know how to draw
inferences in the right way, and by reading the Jatakamala, one s
fine talent may be developed.
After that one receives instructions from a tutor for two or
three years, mostly at Nâlandâ Monastery in Central India, or in
the country of Valabhi in Western India. These two places are
similar to Jin-ma (the Imperial Academy), Shi-qu-ge (the Imperial

149

229a

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

Library), Long-men (the Main Gate of the Imperial Examination
Hall), and Que-li (the birthplace of Confucius) in China, where
brilliant scholars of outstanding talent assemble in crowds to dis­
cuss questions of right and wrong. Those who are praised by wise
authorities as excellent scholars become famous for their ability
far and near. They may then believe that their sword of wisdom is
sharp enough for them to go as competent persons to serve at the
court of a king, making suggestions and displaying their knowl­
edge, in hopes of being employed. When they take part in a de­
bate, they always win the case and sit on double mats to show
their unusual intelligence. When they carry on arguments to re­
fute [heretics], they render their opponents tongue-tied in shame.
Their fame resounds through the five mountains and their repute
spreads within the four quarters. They receive feudal estates and
are promoted to higher rank, with their names written in white
high up on the gates of their houses. After that they may continue
to study other subjects of learning.
6. Next, there is a commentary on the Vrtti-sutra, entitled
Curni, consisting of twenty-four thousand stanzas. This work, com­
posed by the scholar Patanjali, makes an analytical explanation of
the frame and structure of the above-mentioned Sutra [of Panini],
and gives a full elucidation of the latter commentary (the Vrttisutra). In order to understand [Panini’s] Sutra, one has to spend
three years completing the study of this work, which is similar in
merit to the Spring and Autumn Annals or the Book o f Changes.
7. There is also the Bhartrhari-sastra, a commentary on the
foregoing Curni, composed by the great scholar Bhartrhari in
twenty-five thousand stanzas, dealing extensively with the essen­
tials of human affairs and grammatical knowledge, and relating
in great detail the causes of the rise and fall of various families.
He was profoundly learned in the theories of vijhapti-matra (con­
sciousness only), and was well versed in syllogisms. The repute of
this scholar resounded in the five parts of India, and his virtue
was known to the remotest frontiers. He had thorough faith in the
triple gem and concentrated his mind on the truth of the twofold

150

Fascicle Four

voidness. In hopes of gaining the superior Dharma, he became a
monk; but as he was much attached to worldly pleasure, he re­
turned to secular life; this he did seven times. If it were not for a
deep belief in the law of cause and effect, who could have stuck to
the robe as he did so persistently? He wrote the following poem in
self-reproach:
Because of impurities, to secular life I returned,
Free from desires, the robe again I donned.
Why do these two mentalities
Tease me as if I were an infant?
He was a contemporary of the Venerable Dharmapala.
Once a monk in the monastery had the mind to return to secu­
lar life because he was persistently pressed by worldly desires. He
asked his pupils to carry him out of the monastery in a sedan chair.
When people asked him his reason for doing so, he said in reply,
“All places of blessedness are intended for the residence of those
who observe the moral precepts. Since my mind is impure now, I
am doing wrong to the right Dharma. ” As he could not find a foot­
ing in any monastery, monasteries being for the use of monks from
the ten quarters, he became a lay devotee clad in white garments
and then entered a monastery to disseminate the right Dharma.
It has been forty years since he passed away.
8. There is also the Vakya-sastra (or Vakyapadiya), also
composed by Bhartrhari, in seven hundred stanzas with a com­
mentary in seven thousand stanzas, giving a description of argu­
mentation based on the authority of the sacred teachings and of
inference by comparison [as used in syllogisms].
9. Next, there is the Vital(-vrtta) in three thousand stanzas
with a commentary in fourteen thousand stanzas, the main body
of the work being composed by Bhartrhari and the commentary
by the commentator Dharmapala. This work makes an exhaus­
tive inquiry into the abstruse secrets of heaven and earth and
investigates to the utmost the essence of human principles. Only a
man whose learning has reached the stage of studying this book

151

229b

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

may be said to have mastered the science o f grammar and be com­
pared to one who is versed in the Nine Classics and the works of
all schools of thought in China. All these books must be studied by
both monks and laymen; otherwise they cannot win fame as wellinformed scholars.
In the case of monks, they should learn all the Vinaya texts
and do research into the scriptures and commentaries, so as to be
able to defeat heretics in debate, like warriors winning in combat
on the battlefield, and to solve queries as ice is melted in boiling
water. In this way they become famous in Jambudvipa and re­
ceive more respect than men and heavenly beings, assisting the
Buddha in spreading his edification and guiding all living beings
[to emancipation]. There may be only one or two such outstanding
persons appearing in each generation, and they may be compared
to the sun and moon and regarded as naga elephants (the most
excellent elephants). In the remote past there were such people as
Nagarjuna, Deva, Asvaghosa, and the like. In the middle ages
there were Vasubandhu, Asanga, Samghabhadra, Bhavaviveka,
and others; while in recent times we have Dinnaga, Dharmapala,
Dharmaklrti, Sllabhadra, as well as Simhacandra, Sthiramati,
Gunamati, Prajnagupta, Gunaprabha, Jinaprabha, and so on. None
of these great teachers was lacking in the various religious and
secular virtues mentioned above, and all of them were men of little
desire, with self-contentment. Nobody could be a match for them.
Men of such caliber can scarcely be found among heretics and other
secular people. (Yijing’s running note: A full account of them is
found in the Biographies o f the Ten Virtuous Monks o f India.)
Dharmaklrti reglorified the study o f the hetuvidya, while
Gunaprabha popularized the Vinaya texts for a second time.
Gunamati engaged in the practice of meditation according to the
School of Dhyana (mental concentration), and Prajnagupta made
complete distinctions between truth and heresy. They verified that
valuable jewels might shine colorfully under the deep blue where
the whales lived, and that superb medicines might work wonders
on the lofty Fragrant Mountain. From this we may know that the

152

Fascicle Four

Buddha-dharma is all-inclusive and nothing is excluded, and that
these teachers could write a composition as swiftly as the echo of a
sound. They did not need to take the trouble to study the Fourteen
Classics in full, nor did they need to repeat a book in two volumes
a hundred times, being able to understand whatever they had
heard once. (Yijing’s running note: A heretic composed [a treatise
in] six hundred stanzas, and came with them to debate with
Dharmapala, who, having listened to the stanzas only once before
the audience at an assembly, committed the verses to memory
and grasped their meanings.)
In all the five parts of India, the Brahmans are regarded as the
noblest caste. Wherever there is a meeting, they never associate with
people of the other three castes, and keep those of mixed caste at a
distance. Their sacred texts are the four Vedas, consisting of about a
hundred thousand stanzas. The word veda means “clear understand­
ing,” which in former times was wrongly transliterated as wei-tuo.
The Vedas are handed down by word of mouth, not by writing them
on paper or leaves. From time to time there are intelligent Brah­
mans who can recite the hundred thousand stanzas.
In India there are knacks for acquiring intelligence. First, by
repeated and careful reading, one may gain intellectual power,
and second, the alphabet may stabilize the mind. In ten days or a
month of practice, one’s thoughts will come out gushing like a
fountain, and one can understand whatever one has heard once
without resorting to a second discussion. As I have seen such men
with my own eyes, it is certainly not a falsehood. In Eastern India,
there lived a great man nam ed Candragom in, who was a
bodhisattva (a being on the way to enlightenment) endowed with
great talent and eloquence. When I arrived there, this man was
still living. Somebody asked him, “Which is more harmful, pas­
sion or poison?” He replied at once, “Poison and passion are really
quite different from each other. Poison can harm you only when
you take it, but passion will burn you the moment you think of it.
There were also Kasyapa-matanga and Dharmaraksa, who
spread the good gospel to the eastern capital of Luo-yang, and

153

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

Paramartha, who conveyed the excellent voice to the South Seas.
Kumarajlva, the great virtuous one, worked as a master of virtue
in an alien land, while Xuanzang, the Dharma teacher, performed
the function of a teacher in his homeland. All these teachers, both
of the past and in the present, carried forward and spread the
light of the Sun of the Buddha. They propagated the theories of
both existence and nonexistence, taking the Tripitaka as their
teacher, and practiced meditation as well as developed wisdom,
depending on the sapta-bodhyahga (the seven requisites for at­
taining enlightenment) as their master.
There are now living in [Central] India the Dharma master
Jnanacandra of Tiladhaka Monastery; Ratnasimha of Nalanda
Monastery; Divakaramitra of Eastern India; Tathagatagarbha in
the southern borderland of India; and Sakyakirti of Sribhoja in
the South Seas. (Yijing’s running note: He is now living in Sribhoja.
He has traveled extensively in the five parts of India and is well
learned.) All of them may be compared with the former wise men
in brilliant intellect, and they follow the track of past sages. In
understanding hetuvidya, they try to emulate Dinnaga, and while
ruminating upon the theories of the Yogacara School, they respect­
fully cherish the memory of Asanga. In talking about the doctrine
of voidness, they happily coincide with Nagarjuna, and in discuss­
ing the teaching of existence, they have an intimate knowledge of
Samghabhadra. I had the opportunity to come into contact with
these teachers of the Dharma and receive profound instructions
from them. I am happy to have acquired new knowledge of what I
did not hear before and that I could review my old lessons [through
their guidance]. In hopes of transmitting the lamp of truth, I am
really glad to have heard the Dharma in the morning, so much so
that as my hundred points of doubt were solved like dust being
washed away, I would not have regretted it if I were to die in the
evening. I was still able to pick up some pearls that were left be­
hind on Vulture Peak and often obtained genuine ones. While I
collected scattered jewels in the Dragon River, I came upon the
best pieces more than once.

154

Fascicle Four

Under the far-reaching protection of the triple gem and with
the favor of the Emperor who is a great distance away, I was able
to start my homeward voyage to the east. Sailing over the South
Seas from Tamralipti, I arrived in Sribhoja, where I have been
sojourning for four years. I am lingering here without a date on
which to come back home.

35. On Keeping Long Hair
To receive full ordination with one’s hair kept long is something
unheard of in the five parts of India, nor is it mentioned in the
texts of the Vinaya-pitaka, because no such thing has happened
ever since ancient times. If a monk had the appearance of a lay­
man, it would be difficult for him to guard against committing
faults. If one cannot observe the disciplinary rules, what is the
use of accepting them? If a man has the pure mind [to become a
monk], he should ask [a teacher] to shave his hair, put on the
dyed robe, purify his thoughts, and cherish emancipation as his
aim. He should observe the five and ten precepts perfectly. Hav­
ing received full ordination with a perfect mind, he should prac­
tice the rules laid down in the Vinaya-pitaka. After having
completed the study of the Yogacara-sastra, he should then learn
the eight branch works designated by Asanga. (Yijing’s running
note: (1) The Vijnapti-matrata-siddhi-vimsatika-karika, (2) the
VijUapti-matrata-siddhi-trirnsika-karika, (3) the Mahaydnasamgraha-sastra, (4) the Abhidharma-samuccaya-sastra, (5) the
Madhyantavibhaga-sastra, (6) the Pratityasamutpada-vyakhydsastra, (7) the Mahayana-sutralankara-sastra, and (8) the Karmasiddhi-prakarana-sastra. Although some works on this list were
composed by Vasubandhu, the merits [that they contributed to
the Yogacara School] should be ascribed to Asanga.) W hen a
monk has made achievements in the study of the hetuvidya, he
should th en th orou gh ly understand the eigh t sa s tra s o f
Dinnaga. (Yijing’s running note: (1) The Trikala-pariksa-sastra,

155

230a

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

(2) the Samanyalaksana-pciriksa-sastra, (3) the Alambana-parlkscisastra, (4) the Hetu-mukha-sastra, (5) the Sastra on the Gate o f
the Pseudo-cause, (6) the Nyaya-mukha-sastra, (7) the Updddyaprajhapti-prakarana-sastra, and (8) the Pramana-samuccayasastra.) In studying the Abhidharma (metaphysics), a monk should
read through the Six Padas (the six ancillary works to the Dharmasahgani), and in learning the Agamas, he should make a complete
investigation of all four of them. He will then be able to subdue
heterodox views and defeat heretics, so as to deliberate the right
principles for the wide salvation of living beings and give guid­
ance tirelessly to all people. Those who can contemplate the two­
fold voidness, keep the eightfold noble path in their pure minds,
be intent on practicing the four meditations, and strictly observe
the disciplinary rules o f the seven sections [of the Pratimoksa]
for life are monks of high rank.
There are some people who cannot behave in the way men­
tioned above, but who remain unstained in their private cham­
bers, even though they are living with their families. They are
actually living alone in hopes of getting out of the world. They beg
for alms to pay taxes to the court, and wear coarse garments just
to hide their shame. They observe the eight precepts (Yijing’s run­
ning note: (1) not to kill living creatures, (2) not to steal, (3) not to
engage in sexual conduct, (4) not to tell lies, (5) not to drink intoxi­
cants, (6) not to play music, wear garlands, or use perfume, (7) not
to sit on a high or big bed, and (8) not to take food at wrong times)
till the end of their lives, with a mind to gain the essential way of
getting out of transmigration. And they take refuge in and re­
spect the three honored ones with their thoughts concentrated on
the attainment o f nirvana. Such persons are next in rank.
There are people who are obliged to live in the confinement of
family life, but they support their wives and children, respect their
seniors with a mind of veneration, treat their juniors with kind
consideration, abide by the five precepts, and always observe the
four fast days. (Yijing’s running note: On the eighth and four­
teenth or fifteenth days of the dark half of the moon, and the eighth

156

Fascicle Four

and fifteenth days of the bright half of the moon, the eight pre­
cepts should be observed; this is known as the holy practice. If
one observes only the eighth precept without keeping the other
seven, the merit gained therefrom is very small. The observance
of the eighth precept is meant to prevent violations of the other
seven precepts and not merely to keep the stomach hungry for no
purpose.) They treat others with honesty and sympathy and have
the capacity to make themselves be industrious. They live by a
faultless occupation in order to pay official impositions. Such people
are also regarded as good men. (Yijing’s running note. A fault­
less occupation” means the profession of trading, as it does not
cause harm to living creatures. According to the customs of India,
merchants are held in esteem, while farmers are not regarded as
important, because the tilling of land involves the killing of living
things. Sericulture and butchering, which are causes of deep
suffering, injure hundreds of millions of lives every year. When
they are practiced for a long time no one thinks they are wrong,
but in one’s future lives, one will suffer unlimited pains. One who
does not follow such occupations is deemed faultless.)
As regards those vulgar people who are so ignorant as not to
know about the three refuges and who lead aimless lives without
observing a single precept in their lifetimes, unaware that nir­
vana is a state of tranquility and that birth and death rotate like
a wheel, and who always commit sinful deeds, they are in the
lowest rank.

36. Disposal of the Property of a
Deceased Monk
When it is deemed desirable to divide the property of a deceased
bhiksu, a full description of the matter can be found in the Vinaya.
I will give a brief account of it here to provide a ready reference in
time of need. First of all one should make an inquiry as to whether
he had any debts, or he has left a will, and if anyone nursed him

157

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

230b

while he was ill. These must be considered according to the law,
and nothing contrary to reason should be done. One should know
that the remaining things may be disposed o f in specific ways.
It is said in the Udana (a section of the Tripitaka):
Land, houses, shops, and bedding,
Copper, iron, and leather goods,
Razors, jars, and robes,
Various rods and miscellaneous livestock,
Drinks, food, and medicine,
Beds, seats, and title deeds,
The three precious things such as gold and silver
Either made or unmade into articles,
All those different things
May or may not be divided.
One should know how to differentiate them.
This was told by the World-honored One.
By differentiation, it means that lands, houses, shops, bedding,
felt blankets, and copper and iron implements are not to be di­
vided. Among the articles in the last-mentioned category, large
and small iron bowls, small copper bowls, door keys, needles, awls,
razors, knives, iron ladles, stoves, axes, chisels, etc., together with
their bags, as well as earthen vessels, such as bowls, small bowls,
kundikas for keeping clean water, oil pots, and pails should be
distributed, while the rest are not to be divided. Wooden and bam­
boo furniture, leather bedding, and hair-cutting tools, male and
female servants, beverages and edibles, corn and beans, as well as
land and houses, etc., are to be transferred to the community of
monks from the four quarters. All movable things are to be kept
in the storehouse for the use of monks from the four quarters.
Immovable property, such as land, buildings, villages, gardens,
and houses, should be transferred to the community of monks from
the four quarters. All other things, such as garments, quilts, reli­
gious robes, and bathing clothes, dyed or undyed, as well as
leatherwork, oil bottles, shoes, footgear, and the like, should be

158

Fascicle Four

distributed to the monks who are present on the spot. Formerly it
was said that a garment with sleeves was not to be divided, but
that a white double robe could be divided at one s discretion. Long
poles may be used as flagstaffs for hanging streamers before the
jambunada-prabha image (an image of the Buddha made of gold
from the Jambu River). (Yijing’s running note: Vn&jambunadaprabha image is mentioned in the Vinaya. Its origin is that when
the Buddha was not among the assembly of monks, they behaved
without strictness and solemnity, so much so that the Elder
Anathapindada asked permission of the World-honored One, say­
ing, “I wish to make a jambunada-prabha image of thee, to be
installed at the head of the assembly of monks. The Great Teacher
consented.) The slender rods may be used for making tin staffs to
be carried by bhiksus while going round [collecting alms]. (Yijing’s
running note: In Sanskrit a tin staff is called a hikhala, represent­
ing the sound produced by it. Ancient people translated the word
as “tin” because the sound is caused by tin [rings]. It may be called
a ringing staff or a tin staff at will. The tin staffs I saw in India
have an iron ring on top with a diameter of two or three inches, in
which is fixed a bronze tube four or five fingers in length [which
produces a sound when percussed]. The staff is made of wood, and
it may be thick or slender according to circumstances. It is so long
that it reaches the shoulders [when held vertically]. Below the top
there is fastened an iron chain about two inches long, the links of
which are either round or elliptical. Each link is as large as a thumb
and is made by bending a wire so as to let the two ends meet
through another link. There are six or eight links in the chain
which is attached to the ring on the top. They may be made of
copper or iron as one likes. The purpose of making such a staff is to
ward off cows or dogs while one is collecting alms. It is not neces­
sary to hold it high in a tiresome manner that fatigues one’s mind.
Moreover, some people make the whole staff entirely of iron with
four rings on top. This is heavy and difficult for one to carry about,
and it is very cold for one to hold. This is not in keeping with the
original purpose of the staff.)

159

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

230c

Among the quadrupeds, such beasts for riding as elephants,
horses, camels, asses, and mules are given to the royal household,
while cattle and sheep should be transferred to the community of
monks from the four quarters and must not be divided. Such artides as armor and coats of mail should also be given to the royal
household, while miscellaneous weapons may be made into needles,
awls, knives, and crowns for the tin staffs and then given to the
monks who are present on the occasion. (Yijing’s running note: If
there are not [enough] for general distribution, they may be given
only to the senior monks.) Such things as nets are to be made into
screens for windows. The best paints and yellow, vermilion, azure,
blue, or green dyestuffs are sent to the shrine halls to be used for
coloring the images, while red clay and inferior blue substances
should be distributed to the monks who are present on the occa­
sion. If wine is nearly turning sour, it may be buried underground,
and when it has become vinegar, monks may eat it; but if it is still
wine, it should be discarded and must not be sold. The Buddha
said, “Bhiksus, since you have become monks under my guidance,
you should not give wine to others nor drink it yourselves. You
should not even drip a single drop of wine into your mouths with
the tip of a reed.” If one leavens dough with wine or distillers’
grain, or takes broth prepared with wine lees, one incurs the guilt
of transgressing the rules laid down in the Vinaya; one must have
no doubts about it. (Yijing’s running note: In Ling-yan Monas­
tery, dissolved yeast is often used for leavening dough to avoid the
fault of taking wine.) All miscellaneous medicines should be kept
in a clean storeroom to be supplied to sick persons when needed.
All precious gems, pearls, and jade are divided into two portions,
one being used for the Dharma, and the other given to the com­
munity of monks from the four quarters. Those for the Dharma
are spent for copying scriptures and maintaining the lion seat [used
for preaching the Dharma], while the objects for the monks are
distributed to those who are present on the occasion. Beds and
couches, if inlaid with jewels, should be sold and the proceeds dis­
tributed to the monks who are present on the occasion, but wooden

160

Fascicle Four

beds should be transferred to the community of monks from the
four quarters. All scriptures and their commentaries and annota­
tions are not to be divided, but should be preserved in the scrip­
ture library for the common use of monks from the four quarters.
Other books should be sold and the proceeds distributed to the
monks who are present on the occasion. Those receipts for loans
that are claimable at once may be divided right away. If not claim­
able at once, they should be kept in the monastic treasury, and
when the money is reclaimed at a later time, it should be used to
replenish the fund of the community of monks from the four quar­
ters. All gold and silver, either wrought articles or unwrought in­
gots, should be divided into three portions for the Buddha, the
Dharma, and the Sangha. The portion for the Buddha should be
spent on repairing the Buddha halls and the stupas containing
[the Buddha’s] hair and nails, and for mending other dilapidation.
The portion for the Dharma is used for copying scriptures and
maintaining the lion seat. The portion for the community of monks
should be shared by them right away. The six requisites of a monk
should be given to the person who took care of the deceased when
he was on his sickbed. Other miscellaneous things should be dis­
posed of in a suitable way as mentioned above. This subject is fully
deliberated in the Mahasamghika-vinaya.

37. Use of the Property of the Sangha
At present the clothing of the bhiksus in all the monasteries in
India is provided out of [the storehouse of] the resident monks.
The surplus produce of the farms and gardens, or the profits gained
from trees and fruits, are distributed to them annually to cover
the cost of clothing. One might ask the question: even corn and
other foodstuffs left by a deceased monk are transferred to the
community of monks, so how can an individual monk share the
beans and millet, which are the property of the community? The
answer might be that the alms-givers gave up their villages and

161

2 3 ia

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

manors in order to support the monks. Did that mean that only
food was to be provided while they were to be allowed to go naked?
In consideration of the practice of providing clothing even to meri­
torious servants, why should it be unsuitable for householders to
do the same [for monks]? If we reason in this way, it is harmless
for them to supply clothing as well as food. Such is the general
view of the monks of India. However, the Vinaya texts are some­
times explicit and sometimes implicit about the matter.
The monasteries in India possess special farms for their sup­
ply of clothing, and the temples in China have their own places
from which clothing is obtained. Food is also provided to both monks
and laymen. As this is done according to the original intention of
the alms-givers, it is logically not wrong for them to partake of
the food. All donations of fields and houses and even miscellaneous
things are given to the monasteries as a means of providing the
monks with food and clothing. There is certainly no doubt on this
point. If the original intention of the alms-givers is to give dona­
tions for general distribution without restriction, then the alms,
though given to the monastery, may be considered gifts for all.
Anyone who partakes of the food is faultless because it is what the
alms-givers expected beforehand. But in China, monks living in­
dependently cannot get clothing from a monastery. Thus they have
to work hard to meet their needs, which is really an obstacle in
their career [of spiritual cultivation]. Even though they can sur­
vive by alms-begging, they are not spared mental or physical ex­
ertion. But those who permanently reside in a monastery with
food and clothing provided for them may lead a quiet and unper­
turbed life without going out of the gate of the monastery; then
things are much easier for them. Moreover, there are monks who
possess only the three robes made of rags, beg food from house to
house, live under a tree in a forest, sustain themselves by right
livelihood, practice meditation to develop wisdom inwardly so as
to fix their thought on the path of moksa (emancipation), and show
kindness and compassion outwardly. One who can lead such a life
to his last days is a man of the highest rank.

162

Fascicle Four

The property of the community of monks, such as garments,
quilts, mattresses, and the like, as well as other miscellaneous
articles, should be equally distributed to the monks, but not given
to those who live independently. This property should be
handled with more care than one would use with one’s own be­
longings. When bigger donations arrive, smaller ones should be
picked out and given away. This is the holy teaching expressly
taught by the Buddha.
When this property is used in the right way, one will not be
guilty or at fault. These things are good enough to nourish one’s
body, and can spare one the trouble of acquiring sustenance. How
can we allow a monastery to be enormously rich, with corn and
wheat going rotten in the granaries, male and female servants
crowding in the houses, and money and wealth accumulating in
the treasury, while the monks do not know how to make use of
them but hang together in poverty? What should or should not be
done depends upon the discernment of wise people.
There are some monasteries where no common food is sup­
plied, but the monks [in charge of the establishment] divide the
monastic property among themselves to prepare private meals
to the exclusion of other resident monks. They are the persons
responsible for the wrong livelihood of the monks coming from
the ten quarters. As they practiced such unlawful deeds of their
own accord, who can substitute for them to suffer the painful re­
sults in the future?

38. The Impropriety of Self-Immolation
Among Buddhist monks there are quite a number of beginners
who are endowed with a fiercely enthusiastic temperament, but
who do not know how to win the confidence of their predecessors
by mastering the sacred scriptures. They think that finger burn­
ing is an act of religious valor and that the cauterization of their
own flesh is a deed of great bliss. They do such things as they

163

23ib

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

wish, with the decision made in their own minds. But what is stated
in the scriptures concerns the laity, who are exhorted to sacrifice
even their own bodies, not to mention their wealth, which is apart
from the bodies. Therefore, the scriptures only mention those people
who have the mind to do so. No allusion is made to homeless monks,
because the monks have to abide by the disciplinary rules of the
Vinaya-pitaka. Only conduct which is not in violation of the rules
may be considered to be in agreement with the scriptures; if it is
against the rules, it cannot be done. Even if the shrine hall is over­
grown with weeds, not a single stalk of grass should be damaged;
and if a monk is hungry even when he is alone in the wilderness,
he should not eat as little as half a grain of rice [at an improper
time]. As Priyadarsana was a layman, it befitted him to burn his
arms as offering to a Buddha. The Bodhisattva might forsake his
male and female offspring, but should a bhiksu try to look for chil­
dren in order to forsake them as alms? As the Mahasattva gave
his eyes and body, so mendicants were asked to give up their eyes
and bodies in alms-giving. Although King Rsisvara once slaugh­
tered [five hundred Brahmans], is that what observers of the
Vinaya should do? King Maitribala sacrificed himself [to feed five
yaksa demons], but this is not what monks should do.
Recently I heard that some young people devoted their minds
so zealously to the pursuit of the Way that they thought that by
burning their own bodies they might attain enlightenment. Thus
they made light of their lives and discarded their bodies one after
another, not knowing that it is difficult for one to be reborn in the
form of man in tens and hundreds of kalpas, and that even if one
is born as a human being a thousand or ten thousand times, one
may yet be short of intelligence, seldom hearing of the seven
bodhyangas (the seven requisites for attaining enlightenment) and
having no chance to meet the three honored ones.
Now they were born in excellent places and engaged their
minds in studying the wonderful Dharma, but they forsook their
exquisite bodies too readily after having acquired only one stanza,

164

Fascicle Four

and turned their corporeal substance into sacrificial offerings,
which were not weighty gifts at all, when they had just learned
how to meditate on impermanence. They should have persistently
observed the disciplinary rules in order to requite the four kinds
of favors, and steadily pondered on the gate of meditation so as to
free themselves from the three realms of existence. They should
have had great apprehension about small faults, just as one pro­
tects one’s floating bag while swimming across the deep sea, and
should have practiced wisdom guarding themselves steadily
[against errors], as one takes precautions while galloping on thin
ice. Then, with the assistance of friends of virtue, they would have
been able to remain composed without fear on their deathbeds
with right thought cherished in their minds, wishing to be reborn
in the future to meet Maitreya Buddha.
If they had wished to gain the lesser fruition [of the Hinayana],
they might have followed the eightfold noble path. Had they in­
tended to learn the greater cause [of the Mahayana], that would
have been the commencement of studying it in three periods, each
consisting of an asamkhyeya (an exceedingly large number of)
kalpas. But they rashly cut off their lives. I really do not know
the reason for it.
The guilt of committing suicide is next only to a breach of the
first section [of the four grievous faults] of the disciplinary rules.
When I examined the Vinaya-pitaka, I never saw any passage
allowing one to commit, suicide. For the destruction of passion,
the Buddha has personally taught the important method. How
can one cut off delusion by burning oneself? The Buddha disal­
lowed castration, and on the other hand he praised those who
preserved the lives of fishes in a pond. His golden words forbade
us to break the grave precepts at will. It is certainly not the holy
teaching of the Buddha to fix our minds on such a practice. But
those who practice the Way of the bodhisattva, without restrict­
ing themselves by the Vinaya rules, in order to perform selfsacrifice for the salvation of others, are beyond our discussion.

165

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

39. The Bystanders Become Guilty
2 3 ic

Such actions as body burning are manifestations of inner emo­
tions. Two or three intimate friends may work together to insti­
gate neophytes to commit suicide. Those who die first in this way
are involved in a sthulatyaya offense (a gross transgression), and
those who follow suit will certainly incur the guilt of a parajika
(expulsion from the Order) offense, for they refused to live in keep­
ing with the prohibitive rules and wished to die by breaking the
precepts. They persisted in [such an evil practice] and never stud­
ied the Buddha’s teachings. If a monk persuades others to put the
idea of suicide into action, he commits a sin that renders him, as
the saying goes, as useless as a needle without an eye. If he says to
another man, “Why do you not jump into the flames?”, he incurs
unpardonable guilt, like a broken stone that cannot become intact
again. One should be very cautious in this matter.
A proverb says, “It is better to repay the kindness of others
than to destroy one’s own life, and it is better to foster one’s moral
character than to defile one’s name.” It was for the sake of saving
living beings from suffering that the Bodhisattva once threw him­
self down to feed a starving tigress, but to cut one’s own flesh in
substitution for a dove should not be done by a sramana. We are
really not of such status as to be put on a par with the Bodhisattva.
I have merely made a rough statement about the right and
wrong of this according to the Tripitaka. The wise should care­
fully discern between good and evil. But many a man drowns in
the Ganges River every day, and beside the mountain near Gaya,
more than one man commits suicide each day. Some people starve
themselves and refuse to eat food, or climb up trees to throw them­
selves down. Such misled people were criticized by the World- hon­
ored One as heretics. Some others inflict upon themselves the
torment of castration. These actions are deeply at variance with
the texts of the Vinaya. When a man was attempting to commit
such faults, others, fearing to incur guilt upon themselves, did not
dare to dissuade him from doing so. If he lost his life in this way,

166

Fascicle Four

he lost the great object of his existence as well. For this reason,
the Buddha laid down rules disallowing such actions. Men of su­
perior wisdom will never do such things. I shall now relate in the
next chapter the traditions handed down by the virtuous ones of
ancient times.

40. Things Not Done by Virtuous
Monks of Old
As regards my teachers, my personal tutor was the Dharma mas­
ter Shanyu, and my ritual instructor, the Dhyana master Huizhi.
When I was over seven years old, I had the luck to serve them as
their pupil. Both of them were monks of great virtue, living at
Shen-tong Monastery, which was built by the Dhyana master Lang,
a sage of the Jin-yu Valley of Mount Tai. Their family ties were at
De-zhou and Bei-zhou respectively. The two virtuous monks
thought that dwelling in the mountains was good only for them­
selves; it was not the way to benefit others. Thus they went to­
gether to Ping-lin, where, close to a clean brook, they took up their
pure abode at Tu-ku Monastery, located some forty li to the west
of the capital city of Qi-zhou. They used to prepare unlimited
amounts of food to make offerings without restriction, and what­
ever alms they had received they gave away to others with plea­
sure. It may be said that their fulfillment of the four great vows
was as limitless as heaven and earth, and that they practiced the
four all-embracing virtues for the salvation of living beings as
uncountable as dust and sand. They respectfully constructed
temples and performed plenty of meritorious deeds. Now I shall
give a brief account of the seven virtues of the Dharma master,
[my teacher Shanyu,] as follows:
1.
The erudition o f the Dharma master. He studied the
Tripitaka as his major course of learning, but also took an interest
in the various schools of thought. He was well versed in both Con­
fucianism and Buddhism, and was perfect at mastering the six

167

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

232a

arts. As regards the sciences of astronomy and geography, and
the crafts of divination and calendrical calculation, he could probe
into their mysteries whenever he had the mind to do so. Great was
the sea of wisdom in him, with inexhaustible tides flowing out of
it. Brilliant was his garden of literary achievements, in which luxu­
riant flowers always bloomed without fading! His writings, his
pronouncing dictionary of the Tripitaka, as well as some word books
of his, are quite popular in the world. He often said about himself
that if he did not know a word, it was not a word at all.
2. The versatility of the Dharma master. He was an expert
calligrapher, writing Chinese characters in the smaller zhuan style
invented by Li Si and also in the greater zhuan style originated by
Shi Zhou. He was also good at writing the official style used by
Zhong You as well as the cursive script shaped by Zhang Zhi. He
had as keen an ear for music as Zhong Ziqi, who was able to dis­
cern whether Yu Boy a was depicting lofty peaks or flowing streams
with his seven-stringed zither. He could manipulate the adze as
well as the artisan Shi, who wiped away a speck of chalk, as tiny
as a fly’s wing, dotted on the tip of a man’s nose by cutting it with
his hatchet without injuring the man’s nose. This is what is said,
that a wise man is not a utensil [of one purpose],
3. The intelligence of the Dharma master. He could read
through the Nirvana Sutra in one day, but when he first recited
the text, it took him four months to complete the recitation. He
did research into the abstruse theories and cleverly probed the
mysterious teachings. In educating a little boy, he used to guide
him with the doctrines of the Hinayana and was never impatient
with him. When he instructed a man of greater intelligence, he
would impart all he knew to him as if pouring water into a perfect
vessel, with the benefit of offering treasure to his pupil. At the
end of the Sui dynasty, as the Way was on the decline [in the
region where he was living], he removed to the Prefecture of Yang.
When the local monks saw him, they all said that he was a stupid
person because he was simple and unadorned in appearance. They
asked the Dharma master to read the Nirvana Sutra, and appointed

168

Fascicle Four

two minor monks to oversee the recitation sentence by sentence.
His voice in reading the scripture was grave and cadenced. Be­
tween sunrise and sunset, he completed his reading of this text,
which was kept in three slipcases. All the people praised and
congratulated him at the time, bidding him rest and remarking
that it was a rare occasion. All people know about this event; it is
not merely my biased eulogy.
4. The liberality of the Dharma master. Whenever he pur­
chased anything in the market, he always paid the price asked by
the vendor, no matter whether it was high or low; he never bar­
gained to beat the price down. If a man came to pay off a debt to
him, he would refuse to accept the reimbursement. People of his
time considered him a man of unsurpassed generosity.
5. The loving kindness of the Dharma master. He attached
more importance to righteousness than to wealth and followed
the practice of the bodhisattva. He never refused to give anything
to one who begged for it. He would give three coins regularly
every day as alms to the poor.
Once in a cold month of winter, a guest monk named Dao’an
came from a distance in a snowstorm, and both his calves and feet
were frostbitten. While he was staying in a village for a few days,
his chilblains festered with pus. The villagers sent him to the
monastery in a cart. The Dharma master had made a new cape,
and when he had just put it on for the first time to go out of the
monastery, he came upon the guest monk at the gate and in­
stinctively wrapped the monk’s wound with his new cape. A by­
stander tried to stop him, saying, “You should use some old clothes
instead of soiling this new garment. ” But the Dharma master said,
“When trying to aid one who is suffering from bitter pain, the
matter is so urgent that no time is left for us to look for anything
else.” The people of the time who saw or heard about the event
praised him highly. Although this was not a very important mat­
ter, few people would care to do likewise.
6. The assiduity of the Dharma master. He read through each
of the eight versions of the Prajna-paramita-sutra a hundred times

169

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

and also recited the whole Tripitaka from beginning to end. He
exerted himself day and night to practice the essential deeds for
232b being reborn in the Pure Land. He kept the Buddha hall and the
monks’ abode clean in hopes of attaining the stage of imperturb­
ability. He mostly walked barefoot, lest he should accidentally in­
jure insects. He was never idle in directing his thoughts towards
the development of his mind. He swept the shrine hall clean to
make it as beautiful as the lotus flowers that unfold to give birth
to the beings of nine grades in the Land of Peace and Happiness,
and he adorned the scripture chamber as splendidly as Vulture
Peak, where four kinds of blooms rained down from heaven [when
the Buddha was preaching the Dharma], All who saw his reli­
gious acts could not but praise his merits, which he performed
without feeling tired till the end of his life. Besides reciting scrip­
tures, he also chanted the name of Amitabha Buddha. He was
always perfect in demeanor whether he was walking, standing,
sitting, or lying down, and never idled away a single moment as
short as the shadow of the sun moving one inch. The beans used
as chips to count the number of his good deeds would make two
brimful cartloads, and there was more than one way that he gave
extensive succor to others.

7.
The Dharma master’s precognition of his death. One year
prior to his death, the Dharma master collected his own writings
and other miscellaneous books on history and piled them up in a
big heap, ready to be torn into pieces to be used as mortar for
making two statues of the guardian gods in the monastery. His
disciples came up and remonstrated with him, saying, “If Your
Reverence must use paper, we venture to substitute blank paper
[for your writings].” The master said, “My indulgence in litera­
ture has led me astray for a long time. Shall I now allow it to
mislead others? If I do, it would be like asking someone to drink
poisoned wine, or leading someone onto a dangerous path. That is
not permissible. If one gives up one’s proper duties and devotes
oneself to the study of side lessons, one commits a blunder against
the Buddha’s superior instructions. One must not do to others what

170

Fascicle Four

one would not wish others to do to oneself.” Then his disciples
retired with satisfaction, but he presented them with the Analytic
Dictionary o f Characters and some other word books with the in­
struction, “When you have just acquired an outline of the classics
and history and have mastered a certain number of characters,
you should then devote yourselves to the study of the superior
scriptures, and must not attach yourselves to such worldly lore
and make it a hindrance [to your progress].”
Before his death, the master told his disciples, “I shall cer­
tainly be going in about three days, and I shall die with a broom in
my hand. My remains should be left in the wide marshland. ” Early
in the morning a few days later, he came to a clean stream. Under
a desolate white poplar he walked to and fro beside a cluster of
small green bamboos. Then he sat down in solitude and passed
away holding a broom in his hand.
When the day gradually dawned, his disciple, the Dhyana
master Huili, came to him in the morning, and was surprised to
find that the teacher was silent. He touched the teacher’s body
and felt that his head was warm while his feet and hands were
already cold. Then he wailed aloud and summoned everybody from
distant places in the four quarters. The monks wept sadly, in a
scene resembling that at Gold River with blood shed on the ground
[when the Buddha passed away near the river]. The lay disciples
wailed sorrowfully just as when the lustrous pearls broke to pieces
on Jade Mountain. They lamented over the early withering of
the tree of bodhi and sighed with regret that the boat of Dharma
should have sunk so suddenly. He died at the age of sixty-three,
and his remains were buried in the west garden of the monastery.
After his death, he left behind only his three robes, a pair of shoes,
and bedding for his daily use.
When the Dharma master died, I was twelve years old. Since
the Great Elephant had departed, I had nowhere to go to seek
refuge. So I gave up my study of worldly books and devoted myself
to the learning of sacred texts. At the age of fourteen, I was ad­
mitted to the Order. When I was eighteen I intended to travel to

171

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

232c

India, but my desire was not fulfilled till I was thirty-seven years
old. On the day of my departure, I visited the tomb of my late
teacher to pay my respects and bid farewell to him. It was in the
season when frosted trees formed a dome over the grave and pe­
rennial grasses filled the cemetery. Although the spiritual way
separated me from my teacher, I paid honor to him as if he were
present before me. Looking around at the place, I made a state­
ment of my wishes to go abroad in the hopes of acquiring merits
for the deceased and to repay the deep kindness I had received
from my benign master.
The Dhyana master (Huizhi) paid special attention to the study
of the Vinaya and concentrated his mind in meditation. He was dili­
gent in spiritual practice dining the six periods of the day and night
without feeling tired, and he guided the four groups of devotees from
morning till evening, never being fatigued. It may be said that he
was even more quiet and peaceful when he was in a boisterous and
tumultuous environment, and that he associated with monks and
laymen without showing prejudice to anyone. He recited the
Saddharma-pundarika-sutra once a day for more than sixty years,
having thus read the sutra over twenty thousand times in all. Al­
though he lived in the turbulent times at the end of the Sui dynasty,
when he had to shift from one place to another as directed by fate,
he never gave up his mind of reading the sutra. He preserved his
six sense organs in purity and maintained the four physical ele­
ments in peace and harmony, never suffering from any disease in
sixty years. Each time he recited the sutra beside a brook, a parrot
would come to stay with him, and whenever he chanted stanzas in
the hall, a pheasant inspired by his voice always came to listen to
his intonation. He was good at understanding the sentiment of
music, and was particularly adept at writing the cursive and official
styles of calligraphy. He was inexhaustible in preaching the Dharma
to guide others. Although he did not fix his mind on the study of
secular books, he was intrinsically talented in understanding them.
He composed both the Stanza on the Six Paramitds and the Liturgy
o f Making Vows by lamplight at Tu-ku Monasteiy.

172

Fascicle Four

When he had washed himself clean to copy the Saddharmapundarika-sutra with a pious mind, he selected from among the
handwriting of famous calligraphers and adopted the best style
for copying the scripture. While he was doing so, he kept an aro­
matic substance in his mouth so as to exhale fragrant breath after
having bathed himself clean. Suddenly a sarira appeared on the
scripture through his inspiration. When the copy was completed,
the title was written in gold on a label pasted on the manuscript,
which shone brilliantly together with the silvery characters o f the
scripture. It was preserved in a precious casket, which was as re­
splendent as the jade rollers of the scrolls of the handwritten scrip­
ture. When the Emperor visited Mount Tai, he came to know about
the event and had the manuscript brought to the imperial palace
as a holy object for veneration. Both teachers were successors to
the late sage, the Dhyana master Lang.
The Dhyana master Lang lived during the two Qin dynasties
and was well known as a paragon for the five groups of Buddhist
followers. Appearing at the gate of each alms-giver, he received
offerings from all quarters. Doing things to the satisfaction of the
people, he taught them all according to circumstances. For the
sake of converting those who are beyond the human world, his
temple was named Shen-tong Temple (the Temple of Miraculous
Powers). His spiritual virtues are hard for us to understand. His
deeds are recorded in detail in a separate biography.
At that time the reigning monarch paid homage [to the
Buddha], and his subjects were filled with devotion. When [Lang]
had the intention of building a temple, he went into the moun­
tains and encountered a tiger roaring at the Northern River. When
he came out of the place, he heard a horse neighing in the South­
ern Valley. The heavenly well from which water was drawn was
never drained away, while the celestial granary which provided
rice was always full. Although his divine traces have long been
buried in oblivion, his influence remains with us and has not faded
away. He, my two teachers, and the virtuous abbot, the Dhyana
master Mingde, were well versed in the Vinaya and grasped the

173

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

233a

gists of the scriptures, in which no such practices as finger burning and flesh-cauterization were taught. As instructors of their
disciples, they prohibited them from doing such things. I received
their instruction in person; it is certainly not hearsay.
We should also carefully observe the deeds of ancient sages
and listen to the admonitions of former teachers. Since the time
when the white horse [that carried Buddhist texts to China for
the first time] was unbridled, and after the blue elephant was
unsaddled, Kasyapa-matanga and Dharmaraksa illumined the
Divine Land as the sun and moon, and Kang Senghui and Faxian
served, by their example, as the ford or bridge to the Land of
Abundance. Dao’an and Huiyuan crouched like tigers south of
the Yangzi and Han rivers, and Huixiu and Fali were like eagles
hovering high north of the Yellow and Ji rivers. The disciples of
the Dharma followed one after another in succession, with the
ripples of wisdom rolling continuously in purity, while laypeople
praised and glorified the fragrance of the Dharma without cease.
We have never heard that any of them advised others to burn
their fingers, nor did we see anyone permitting the practice of
cauterizing one’s own body. The object lesson is put before our
eyes, and it is up to the wise to take it with care.
During spare time in the evening, the Dhyana master [Huizhi]
often sympathized with me in my boyhood and gave me instruc­
tions in gentle words. Sometimes he told me stories to divert me
from sad thoughts of my mother, as people use yellow leaf of the
poplar, saying it is gold, to soothe a crying baby. At other times he
spoke to me about the parable of young crows that fed their par­
ents back, advising me to repay the kindness with which I had
been brought up. He said, “You must work hard for the continu­
ance and prosperity of the triple gem so that it may be everlast­
ing. You should not indulge yourself in the study of various worldly
books and spend your lifetime in vain.” As I was then only ten
years old, I could only listen to his advice, but could not under­
stand its deep meaning. Whenever I went to pay respect to him in
his chamber at the fifth watch early in the morning, he would

174

Fascicle Four

always stroke me on my weak shoulders with kindness, just like
a loving mother fondling her child. Whenever he had any deli­
cious food, he would often not taste it but present it to me. When
I asked him for anything, he never denied my request. The
Dharma master [Shanyu] was very kind in looking after me,
though he acted as a strict father to me, while the Dhyana mas­
ter [Huizhi] showed me all the tenderness of a mother. Thus
my relationship with my teachers was so perfect that nothing
more had to be added to it.
When I reached the qualified age to receive full ordination,
the Dhyana master [Huizhi] was my upadhyaya (officiant at the
ceremony). After my ordination, one quiet night when he was
walking round an image of the Buddha, he suddenly lit incense,
shedding tears of emotion, and exhorted me, “It is a long time
since the Great Sage entered nirvana, and his teaching is now
misinterpreted. Many people take delight in accepting the pre­
cepts, but few of them actually observe them. You must be resolute
in keeping the major prohibitive rules and never violate the com­
mandments of the first section of the precepts. If you commit the
other offenses, I will go and suffer in hell in your stead. You must
not bum your fingers, nor should you incinerate your own body.
On the day when the imperial sanction was received, I was
happily admitted into the holy Order by the kindness of my teacher.
Since then I have devoted m yself with utmost effort to the
fulfillment of my ambition, not daring to infringe on any of the
disciplinary rules. Even a small offense would arouse a great fear
in me. In this manner I carefully studied the Vinaya for five years.
The Vinaya master Fali’s commentaries discussed the deep and
abstruse points, while the Vinaya master Daoxuan’s writings dealt
with the principal gists. When I was acquainted with the judg­
ment of observance and violations of the disciplinary rules, I was
asked by my teacher to give a lecture on the Vinaya. While at­
tending his sermons on the Larger Sukhavativyuha-sutra, I begged
for my food once a day and always remained sitting without lying
down to sleep. Although the monastery in the forest was distant

175

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

233b

from the village, I never gave up the practice of alms-begging.
Whenever I think of the kind instructions of my great teacher, my
tears drop down from whence I do not know.
Hence we realize that when a bodhisattva tries out of com­
passion to save suffering beings, he is willing to throw himself
into the flames of a great fire. When a householder has pity on a
poor child [as narrated in the parable mentioned in the Lotus
Sutra], he peeps in the narrow door of a small cottage. This be­
havior is certainly not erroneous. As I always attended the mas­
ter at his feet and never went to any distant place to listen to a
lecture, one day he deigned to say to me, “At present I have other
disciples to wait upon me. You should not relinquish your studies
to stay here for nothing.” Thus I traveled with my pewter staff in
hand to the region o f the House of Eastern Wei, where I devoted
myself to the study of the Abhidharma-samuccaya-sastra and the
Mahay ana-samgraha-sastra. Then, carrying my satchel with me,
I proceeded to the western capital, wherein I began to read and
con over the Abhidharma-kosa-sastra and the Vijhapti-matratasiddhi-sastra.
Just before I started my journey [to India], I returned from
the western capital to my native place to seek the advice of my
great teacher [Huizhi]. I said to him, “Venerable sir, as you are
getting advanced in age [I should not take a long journey away
from you], but I wish to travel far to see what I have never heard
before in hopes of gaining great benefits. I dare not make the deci­
sion by myself. ” My teacher exhorted me, “This is a great chance
for you, which will not come a second time. Being inspired by your
good reasons, why should I cherish personal feelings any more?
Even if my spirit is released from existence, I will still be able to
witness you transmitting the lamp of Dharma. It befits you to go
on your journey at once; you should not linger any more to look
back upon things left behind. I shall certainly share with you the
joy o f visiting and paying homage to the holy places of pilgrimage.
As this is an important matter concerning the prosperity of the
Dharma, you should make your trip flawless.”

176

Fascicle Four

Having received my teacher’s kind instruction, which I could
not disobey, I embarked at Guang-zhou in the eleventh month of
the second year of Xian-heng and sailed for the South Seas. Thus
I traveled through various countries and arrived in India with my
pewter staff. On the eighth day of the second month in the fourth
year of Xian-heng, I reached the country of Tamralipti, which is a
seaport of Eastern India, where I stayed till the fifth month, when
I resumed my journey westwards with some companions and
reached Nalanda and the Diamond Seat. After having worshiped
at all the holy places, I came to Srlbhoja before long.
It may be said that my teachers were good counselors who
were perfect in continence and chastity as taught by the Buddha,
the Tamer of Men. They were born as outstanding model men of
their generation to meet the needs of the world. It was under their
personal instruction that I was brought up to manhood. That I
luckily met these two teachers at the ford to ferry across the river
of rebirth was just like having a pilot with good eyesight on a raft
for crossing the sea. Since even good deeds and kindnesses done in
a small way are glorified with songs and music, why should I not
write eulogistic compositions in praise of the great wisdom and
benevolence of my teachers?
Here is my poem:
Virtuous are my father and mother,
Who supported me in many kalpas.
When I was in my childhood
They sent me to brilliant teachers.
They ceased loving me with the shedding of tears.
I practiced what I had learned
And depended on virtue and the preceptive rules.
Being illustrious as the two illuminators,
The virtue of my tutors is comparable to heaven and
earth.
They sharpened my sword of wisdom
And nourished my body of Dharma.

177

A Eecord of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

They guided and supported me,
Tirelessly giving me instruction
Without sleep even at midnight,
Often appeasing their hunger with a belated supper.
A man of superior virtue shows off no virtue;
That is profound beyond our perception.
They concealed their talents on Mount Tai,
Held their virtues in store in the region of Qi.
Vast was their sea of wisdom,
And exuberant their grove of meditation.
Resplendent was their literary genius,
Radiant as the morning sun were their minds in
concentration.
A real hard object may be ground but can never be
attenuated,
A truly white thing dipped in dark dye is not blackened.
Dying in sitting, my teacher showed a marvelous
manifestation,
Inspired by him, wonderfully enough, a pheasant listened
to his recitation.
When I was a youngster,
One of them passed away before the other.
I turn the merits of all my good deeds
As perfume to be offered to the deceased.
I repay the kindness of the one who has gone forever,
I requite the grace of the other who is alive but far off.
I wish to meet them at all places so as to prolong our happiness
and receive their instruction life after life in order to achieve spiri­
tual liberation. I hope to amass a mountain of well-earned wealth,
and devote myself to the practice of pure meditation as calm as a
tranquil lake, so that I may be present at the first assembly under
the dragonflower tree to listen to the profound sermons delivered
by Maitreya (the Buddha to come). While being reborn in all four
forms of birth, I should always keep in mind [the achievement of
Buddhahood] for fully three long eons.

178

Fascicle Four

For fear that my readers should think my words groundless, I
will quote here a specimen of the writings of the Dharma master
(Shanyu). Once on the fifteenth day of the second month, when
all the monks and laymen visited the holy sites of the Dhyana
master Lang on South Hill, my great teacher also went to see the
unusual celestial granary and heavenly well, and worshiped at
the marvelous holy niche and sacred temple, to which were offered
gifts brought from places a thousand li away. At that time all of
the men of letters under the rule of the Prince of Qi assembled at
that place. They were well learned and expert in writing compo­
sitions, vying with one another in showing off their literary ca­
pacity, and feeling proud of the talent they had. As they wished
to have poems written in praise o f the statue and the temple of
the late Venerable Lang, they recommended that the Dharma
master write a verse before the others. Being a competent poet,
he did not decline the offer. With an inkslab full of black ink, he
wielded his writing brush and composed a poem on the wall in a
coherent whole without a break. He wrote the poem with quick
movements of the brush in such a consummate manner that not
a single word was deleted or changed by marking it out with a
dot. The poem reads:
Glorious and radiant is the light of the virtuous sage
Whose good counsel over the vast seas spread.
He lived in an empty valley as his abode.
An imperial order is treated as a mere vanity.
Mountains and rivers last through eternity,
Human affairs change with the changes of time.
The true state of nonexistence he has attained,
We can now only see his portrait left behind.
After reading the poems composed by the Dharma master, the
scholars were ashamed of themselves, either putting down their
writing brushes on pine twigs or casting their inkslabs into a moun­
tain nook. All of them remarked that it was just as when the
belle Xishi showed her features and there was no room for the

179

A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas

234a

ugly woman Momu to unveil her face. Among a crowd of gifted
scholars, none could write a verse to rhyme with the poem. The
master’s other writings are included in a separate collection.
I, Yijing, respectfully address this letter to the venerable
monks of the great Zhou dynasty [at home], from whom I have
heard lectures on voidness, or with whom I have discussed the
meanings o f the Dharma. Some of them have been my acquain­
tances since the days of my youth, while others became my bo­
som friends in my middle age. The senior ones have become
spiritual teachers, and the junior ones are counted by the tens
o f thousands.
In the above forty chapters I have only briefly discussed the
important points. What I have recorded are the customs practiced
by the teachers of India at the present time. What I have written
is based on the holy teachings of the Buddha; nothing is out of my
personal opinion. Our life elapses as swiftly as a rapid river, and
nobody knows in the morning what will happen in the evening.
Because I fear that I may not be able to meet and speak to you in
person, I am sending you this record before my return. I hope you
will make a study of it in your spare time, so that the wish of a
man far away from you may be satisfied. All my narrations are
made according to the tradition of the Sarvastivada School and
not of any other sect.
I beg to repeat the following verse:
With respect I have discussed good decorum,
The great and comprehensive counsels.
All being made in agreement with the holy teachings,
I cannot say they are my emotional acquisitions.
For fear we may not meet face to face,
I send you this record in advance.
I hope you will not discard my humble opinions
But will accept my superficial views.
For a hundred generations I followed the sacred traces,
I will sow the seeds of goodness for a thousand years.

180

Fascicle Four

My real wish is to make Shao-shi Mountain equal to
Vulture Peak,
And to put the Divine Land on a par with the City of the
Royal House.

End of Fascicle Four

181

Glossary
arhat: A perfect saint who has freed himself from the bonds of samsara
(q.v.) by eliminating all passions. The ideal of the Hinayana.

bhiksu: A Buddhist monk.
bhiksuni: A Buddhist nun.
bodhisattva: A being who has vowed to achieve Buddhahood someday
and who actively engages in the spiritual practices of Mahayana
Buddhism to achieve that goal. The chief characteristics of the
bodhisattva are boundless compassion for all living beings and clar­
ity of comprehension.

caitya: A shrine.
chauri: A whisk to keep off flies, often used as an emblem of rank.
eightfold path: (1) Right view, (2) right thought, (3) right speech, (4) right
action, (5) right livelihood, (6) right effort, (7) right mindfulness, and
(8) right concentration. See also four noble truths.
five prohibitive precepts: The most serious sins a Buddhist can commit.
They are: (1) patricide, (2) matricide, (3) killing an arhat (q.v.), (4)
maliciously causing a Buddha to bleed, and (5) causing disharmony
in the Buddhist Order.
four nikayas: Early Buddhist scriptures, divided into four groups, corre­
sponding to four of the five Agamas of the Pali Canon: (1) Dighanikaya,
(2) Majjhimanikaya, (3) Samyuttanikaya, and (4) Anguttaranikaya.
four noble truths: (1) Life is suffering; (2) defilements are the cause of
suffering; (3) all suffering can be ended; (4) the way to end suffering
is by following the Buddha’s eightfold path (q.v.).

naga: A serpent deity, a dragon.
nirvana: The final goal of Buddhist aspiration and practice, a state in
which all passions are extinguished and the highest wisdom attained.

183

Glossary

A mental state of concentration and focusing of thought on one
object. Also called meditation.

s a m a d h i:

samsara: The world of suffering, death, and rebirth; the opposite of nir­
vana.
Sangha: In early Buddhism, the community of Buddhist monks and
nuns. Later the name was also applied to the whole community of
Buddhist devotees.
six arts (of Confucianism): Rites, music, shooting, horse-riding, writing,
and mathematics.
six p a ra m ita s: The six perfected virtues of a bodhisattva: giving, precept­
keeping, patience, effort, meditation, and wisdom.
six ways: The six ways of being considerate or sociable, i.e., being friendly
to one’s fellow practitioners in thought, word, and deed; sharing one’s
goods with them; living virtuously; and holding to the truth.
sra m a n a :

A Buddhist monk.

ten abodes: The second ten stages of the fifty-two bodhistattva stages.
ten precepts: A novice monk or nun vows to abstain from (1) killing sen­
tient beings, (2) stealing, (3) sexual intercourse, (4) lying, (5) using
intoxicants, (6) using bodily decorations or perfume, (7) singing, danc­
ing, or viewing dances and plays, (8) sleeping in a large bed, (9) eat­
ing after noon, and (10) keeping money or jewels.
ten stages: The stages of bodhisattva practice.
three divisions: The three categories of the Buddhist canon—(1) the Sutras,
the Buddha’s sermons, (2) the Vinaya (q.v.), rules of conduct for monks
and nuns, and (3) the Abhidharma, commentaries on the Buddha’s
teachings.
three realms: The rebirth cosmos, which is divided into the realm of de­
sire, the realm of form, and the realm of the formless.
three refuges: The Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha. So called be­
cause one becomes a Buddhist upon “taking refuge” in them.
three Y anas: The three paths to enlightenment, which are (1) the sra va k a
vehicle (a sra v a k a being a follower of the so-called Hinayana), (2) the
p ra tyek a b u d d h a (self-taught Buddha) vehicle, and (3) the bodhisattva
vehicle, otherwise known as the Mahayana.
tope: A Buddhist reliquary; a large hemispherical structure enshrining
Buddhist relics.

184

Glossary

Tripitaka. S ee three divisions.
triple gem: The Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha.
twelve links of the chain of causality: The twelvefold cycle of causes
{n id a n a s) and conditions that make up the human condition, namely
(1) ignorance, (2) volitional activity, (3) consciousness, (4) name and
form, (5) the six senses, (6) contact, (7) perception, (8) love, (9) at­
tachment, (10) existence, (11) rebirth, and (12) decay and death.
twelve n id an as. S ee twelve links of the chain of causality.
Vinaya: Rules of conduct for monks and nuns.

185

Bibliography
Hazra, Kanai Lai. Buddhism in India as Described by the Chinese Pil­
grims, A.D. 399-689. New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal Pubs., 1983.
I-ching [Yijing], Memoire compose à l’epoque de la grande dynastie Tang

sur les religieux eminents qui allèrent chercher la loi dans les pays
d’ Occident, par I-tsing. Translated into French by Edouard
Chavannes. Paris: E. Leroux, 1894.
I-ching [Yijing], A Record of the Buddhist Religion as Practised in India
and the Malay Archipelago (A.D. 671-695). Translated by J.
Takakusu. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1896. Reprint, Delhi: Munshiram
Manoharlal Pubs., 1966.
Sen, Surendra Nath. India through Chinese Eyes. Sir William Meyer
Endowment Lectures. Madras: University of Madras, 1956.

187

Index

A

B

Abhidharma 156

Balaha Monastery 63
Banan 13
Bandhana Monastery 37
Bao-fu Monastery 90
bath(s), bathing 43, 44, 66, 79, 88,
93, 102, 103, 104, 122, 127,
135, 137, 138, 158, 173
bed(s), bedding 62, 105, 106, 118,
156, 158, 160, 161, 171
Bei-zhou 167
Bhartrhari 150, 151
Bhartrhari-sastra 150
Bhavaviveka 152
bhiksu{s) (see also monk) 14, 21,
36, 59, 61, 62, 66, 79, 80, 101,
105, 108, 116, 145, 157, 159,
160, 161, 164
bhiksuni(s) (see also nun) 75
Bhojapura Island 12
Bianque 120
Bi-jing 13
Bimbisara, King 14
Bing-zhou 146

Abhidharma-kosa-sastra 149, 176
Abhidharma-samuccaya-sâstra
155, 176
93, 94, 100, 110
acupuncture 119, 120, 125, 126
Agamas 156
Ajnâta-Kaundinya 9
A la m b a n a -p a rlk sâ -sâ stra 156
aims 40, 47, 59, 63, 70, 84, 85, 95,
101, 115, 156, 159, 162, 164,
167, 169
-begging 12, 144, 162, 176
bowl 28, 32, 54, 72, 77, 78, 93,
94, 96, 101, 111, 116
-givers 161, 162, 173
-giving 40, 44, 46, 47, 82, 164
Amitabha Buddha 143, 170
â câ rya

Analytic Dictionary of Characters
171
Ananda 10
Anathapindada 159
Anitya-sütra 79

antarvâsa. See under robe
arhat(s) 10, 70, 91, 101
Aryadesa. See India
Aryamahâsâmghika-nikâya. See
Mahâsâmghika
Àryamülasarvâstivâda-nikàya. See
Mülasarvâstivâda
Âryasâmmitîya-nikâya. See
Sâmmitiya
Aryasthavira-nikâya. See Sthavira
Asahga 141, 152, 154, 155
A-shan Island 12
Asoka, King 14, 71
Astadhâtu 147, 148
Asvaghosa 139, 144, 152
Avalokitesvara 124, 143

Biographies of Eminent Monks
Who Went to the Western
Regions in Search of the
Dharma 2
Biographies of the Ten Virtuous
Monks of India 152
bodhi 51, 171
Bodhidharma 68
bodhisattva(s) 14, 15, 50, 153, 165,
169, 176
bodhi tree 29, 68, 107

bodhyanga (see also saptabodhyahga) 164
Book of Changes 149, 150
Book of the Three Khilas 147
Book on Dhatu 147

189

Index

Book of Filial Piety 143
boots (see also shoes) 22, 75
Brahmajâla-sütra 3
Brahmans 153, 164
branding the scalp (see also
burning of the body or fingers;
self-immolation) 2
Buddhacarita-kâvya 144
Buddha-dharma 50, 153
Buddhahood 92,108, 178
burning of the body or fingers (see
also branding the scalp; selfimmolation) 3, 163, 164, 165,
166, 174, 175

c
caitya (see also stupa) 16, 29, 48,
84, 103, 108, 113, 114, 137,
138
caitya-vandana (see also circumam­
bulation) 111, 113, 138
Calcutta 1
call of nature 26, 88
Candragomin 144, 153
castration 165, 166
ceremony(ies) 25, 35, 41, 46, 47, 48,
80, 82, 83, 85, 94, 95, 96, 99,
100, 115, 136, 138, 139, 140,
175
chain of causality 8, 51, 143
twelve links of 78
Champa. See Lin-yi
chant, chanting 16, 38,
138-140, 144, 170, 172
China 2, 3, 13, 14, 22, 23, 25, 26,
30, 34, 37, 38, 40, 42, 46, 48,
49, 54, 63, 65, 66, 68, 71, 73,
75, 77, 81, 82, 83, 84, 86, 89,
95, 97, 98, 99, 100, 102, 106,
108, 115, 117, 119,120,121,
124, 125, 126, 131,133,136,
140,142, 143,145, 146, 147,
149,150, 152, 162, 174
chopsticks 28, 86, 96, 130
circumambulation 130
civara. See under robe
clepsydras 131, 132, 133

190

clothes, clothing (see also garment)
22, 49, 51, 53, 54, 55, 57, 58,
61, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 75, 77,
79, 158, 161, 162, 169
colds, treatment of 125, 126, 128
Composite Panegyric 142
confession 50, 83, 84, 85, 86, 115
Confucius 25, 149, 150
cremation 79, 113
Curni 150

D
Da-da Island 12

dahara. See monk, junior
Dajin 2

daksinagatha 47
danagatha 42, 44, 46, 47
danapati (see also donor) 47
Dao’an 169, 174
Daoxuan 175

Dasasvadhyaya-vinaya (see also
Vinaya of Ten Readings) 19
Deer Park 2, 9, 29, 107, 142
Deva 152
Devaputra. See China
De-zhou 167
Dharmagupta 13, 19, 54
Dharmakirti 152
Dharmapala 151, 152, 153
Dharmaraksa 153, 174
Dharma-sangani 156
dhuta 48, 64
dhutaguna 145
dhyana (see also meditation) 152
Diamond Seat 108, 177
Dinnaga 142, 152, 154, 155
director of duties 82, 132, 133, 135
disease(s) (see also illness) 33, 34,
46, 104, 106, 107, 118, 119,
121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126,
127, 172
Divakaramitra 154
Divine Land (see also China) 15,
16, 125, 146, 174, 181
donor(s) 34, 35, 36, 40, 41, 42, 44,
45, 46, 47, 48, 58, 84, 85, 101,
105

Index

Dragon River 9, 154
drug(s) (see also medicine) 124,
125, 127
Duke of Zhou 79
dung, as cleanser/purifier 22, 26,
35, 45, 79, 105
dung, as medicine. See under
medicine
Dvarapati 12, 120

E
eightfold path 64,143, 156, 165
eight precepts. See under precepts
Emperor (of China) 16, 68, 155,
173
existence (see also nonexistence)
77, 145, 154, 165, 167, 176,
179
five forms of 8

F
Fali 174, 175
fast(s), fasting 26, 78, 85, 93, 102,
105, 106, 115,116, 118, 121,
122, 123, 124,125, 126
four fast days 61, 156
fault(s) (see also offense) 9, 10, 13,
14, 16, 17, 22, 25, 27, 32, 33, 35,
50, 61, 63, 66, 72, 78, 81, 84, 85,
86, 87, 89, 96, 106, 109, 111,
113,130,133,155,160, 163,
165,166
Faxian 174
feast(s) 34, 35, 36, 39, 40, 41, 46
Feng Xiao-quan 1
Fen-zhou 90
filter (see also strainer) 48, 54
Five Classics 147
five precepts. See under precepts
Five Ranges 122
flower(s) 41, 42, 44, 46, 47, 48, 78,
84, 96, 102, 106, 108, 135, 136,
137, 138, 140, 168, 170, 178
food 10, 11, 23, 24, 25, 28, 35, 36,
37, 38, 39, 43, 45, 46, 47, 48,
49, 50, 51, 53, 57, 59, 60, 62,

66, 69, 76, 77, 80, 81, 86, 89,
94, 101, 104, 106, 107, 118,
120, 122, 123, 126, 130, 131,
156, 158, 161, 162, 163, 166,
167, 175
five kinds of 42
impure 24, 26
pure 24, 25, 26
sacrificial 25, 37
“untimely” 118
four nikayas. See four schools
four noble truths 14, 135, 143
four schools 11, 13, 14, 56, 57, 64,
81, 86, 104, 130
Fourteen Classics 153
Fragrant Mountain 152
funeral(s) 75, 79, 113

G
Gandhanadanas 125
Ganges River 51, 166
Gao-zhong, Emperor 1
garment(s) 54, 55, 56, 58, 64, 65,
66, 67, 68, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77,
79, 88, 93, 94, 117, 128, 141,
145, 151, 156, 158, 159, 163,
169
gatha 47
Gaya 166
ghanda (see also sandalwood) 74
ghanta 63, 132, 135
Gold River 171
Great Black Mountain 12
Guang-zhou 1, 13, 177
guest(s) (see also visitor) 37, 62,
116, 117
Gunamati 152
Gunaprabha 152

H
Han River 174
Hariti 36-37
He-ling Island 12
herb(s) (see also medicinal herbs)
123, 125, 136
Hetu-mukha-sastra 156

191

Index

Himalayas 125
Hinayana 12, 14, 50, 142, 165, 168
Hiranyavati River 10
House of Eastern Wei 176
Hu 25,41,48,66,67, 111
Huai River 38, 40, 90
Huan-zhou 13, 65
Huili 171
Huisi 123
Huixiu 174
Huiyuan 174
Huizhi 167, 172,174, 175, 176

Hymn of Four Hundred Verses
140, 141

Hymn of One Hundred and fifty
Verses 140, 141,144

illness 34, 37, 56, 67, 86, 107, 108,
118, 119,120, 121, 122, 124,
126, 127, 142
image(s), holy, sacred (see also
image of the Buddha) 3, 36, 37,
38, 41, 44, 45, 106, 107, 109,
119,135, 136, 137, 138, 141,
159, 160
image of the Buddha 41, 44, 45, 47,
48, 67, 71, 72, 84, 106, 107,
109, 114, 127, 135, 136, 144145,175
bathing of 44, 48, 106, 135-138
jambunada-prabha 159
incense 37, 41, 44, 46, 78, 84, 96,
106, 135, 138, 140, 175
India 1, 2, 3, 4, 11, 14, 16, 17, 18,
19, 22, 23, 24, 25, 28, 29, 31,
34, 35, 36, 37, 39, 41, 42, 43,
45, 46, 49, 54, 57, 58, 63, 64,
65, 66, 71, 73, 74, 76, 77, 81,
85, 86, 89, 91, 93, 98, 99, 100,
101, 102, 104, 105, 106, 107,
109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114,
115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120,
124, 125, 126, 128, 129, 130,
131, 133, 135, 137, 138, 139,
140, 141, 143, 144, 145, 146,

192

147, 149, 150, 153, 154, 155,
157, 159, 161, 162, 172, 176,
177, 180
Indra 9, 124, 145
insect(s) 9, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 35,
60, 61, 103, 110, 113, 131, 170
Island of the Lion 12
Islands of the Naked. See Nicobar
Islands

J
Jade Mountain 171
Jambudvipa 13, 14, 65, 125, 131,
152
Jambu River 159
Jàtakamàla 143, 149
Jayàditya 149
Jeta Grove 102
Jetaka. See Satavahana, King
Jiao-zhou 13
Jimutavahana 144
Jinaprabha 152
Jin dynasty 23
Jing-zhou 90
Jin-ma 149
Jin-yu Valley 167
Ji River 174
Jivaka 123
Jnànacandra 154

K
Kaccha 1

kambala 13, 65, 66
Kang Senghui 174

karmacdrya 96, 100
karmadana. See director of duties
Karma-siddhi-prakarana-sàstra
155

kàsàya. See under robe
Kasmira 65, 66
Kàsyapa-màtanga 153, 174
Kasyapiya 19
kathina. See under robe

Knowledge of Words. See Sabdavidyà

Index

Korea 17
Kucha 19
Kukkutapada Mountain 2, 29
kulapati. See layman
Ku-lun 132, 146
Ku-lun Island 12, 13
Kumarajlva 154
kundika (see also water bottle) 36,
158
Kun-lun 3, 13, 120
Kusinagara 2, 132
Kustana 19
kusulaka. See under robe

L
laity (see also lay) 143, 164
Lang 167, 173, 179
Lankasu 12

Larger Sukhavativyuha-sutra 175
Lata 11, 126
lay
devotee 93, 94, 151
disciple 48, 84, 171
family 78
follower 9, 44
-man, -men 25, 56, 60, 61, 63,
65, 68, 71, 72, 74, 76, 82, 101,
107, 137, 138, 144, 145, 152,
155, 162, 164,172
-people 24, 43, 44, 65, 86, 126,
174
scholars 58, 120
-woman, -women 75, 77
Liang dynasty 3
life-preserving vessel 30, 31
Ling-yan Monastery 23, 90, 160
Lingyu 79
Lin-yi 12, 13, 65
lion seat 139, 160, 161
Li Si 168
Liturgy of Making Vows 172
livelihood 59, 60, 61, 63, 77, 78,
145, 162, 163, 179
Long-men 150

Lotus Sutra (see also Saddharmapundarika-sutra) 176

Luo-yang 79, 123, 153

M
Madhyadesa. See India
Mädhyamika 14

Madhyäntavibhäga-sästra 155
Magadha 11, 43
Mahäbodhi Monastery 2, 38, 65,
132
Mahäkäla 37
Mahämucilinda 38

Mahäparinirväna-sütra (see also
Nirvana Sutra) 37
Maharaja Monastery 29
Mahäsämghika 11, 12, 13, 64, 161
Mahäsamghika-vinaya 161
Mahayana 3, 12, 14, 50, 89, 142,
165
Mahâyânadîpa 60
Mahäyanä-samgraha-sästra 155

Mahäyanä-süträlankära-sästra
155
Mahesvara 37, 141, 147
Mahisäsaka 19
Maitreya 165, 178
Maitribala, King 164
Malaya 1
Malayu Island. See Sribhoja
Manjusri 125, 146
Mär a 10
massage 113, 116
Mätrceta 141
matricide 93
mattress(es) 55, 59, 105, 163
meal(s) 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 31,
36, 39, 40, 41, 42, 45, 46, 47,
48, 70, 76, 84, 87, 97, 98, 101,
104, 106, 110, 111, 115, 118,
120, 130, 163
mealtime(s) 22, 23, 26, 37, 70
medicinal herbs 119, 120, 126, 128
medicine 55, 56, 87, 104, 113, 118,
119, 120, 121, 123, 125, 126,
127, 128, 152, 158, 160
“dragon-decoction” 127, 128
dung as 127, 128

193

Index

feces as 127, 128
“putrid-discharged” 127,129
urine as 127, 128
meditation(s) 17, 18, 77, 120, 123,
135, 152, 154, 156, 162, 165,
172,178
four 156

Memoirs of Eminent Monks Who
Visited the Western Regions in
Search of the Law during the
Tang Dynasty, The 17-18

community of (see also Sangha)
21, 59, 80, 84, 85, 98, 101, 106,
132, 158, 160, 163
guest 62, 169
junior 22, 61, 99, 100, 108-109,
112, 116, 180
senior 67, 108-109,112, 116,
160, 180
six requisites of 31, 54, 65, 96,
161
Mount Dai 90
Mount Heng 128
Mount Tai 167, 173, 178
moxibustion 120
Mulasarvastivada 11,12, 18, 19,
80, 93

merit(s) 10, 24, 44, 51, 82, 139,
150, 155, 157, 170, 178
Middle Way 142
Mingde 173
Mixed Composite Panegyric 142
Mo-he-xin Island 12
Mulasarvastivada-nikaya-ekasataMo-jia-man Island 12
karman 80, 93
Momu 179
Munda 148
monastery(ies) 2, 3, 16, 22, 31, 36,
N
37, 38, 44, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63,
71, 72, 74, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83,
ndga(s) 38, 47, 64, 152
84, 89, 90, 95, 101, 103, 104,
Nagarjuna
33, 142, 144, 152, 154
107, 115, 116, 131, 132, 133,
Nairanjana
River 101
135, 136,138, 139,140,151,
Nalanda Monastery 1, 2,12, 29,
161.162.163.169.170.171,
34, 43, 63, 67, 83, 98, 103,132,
175
139, 149, 154, 177
monk(s) 2, 3, 4, 9, 10,11,12, 13,
14,17, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, Nicobar Islands 1
28, 29, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, Nine Classics 152
38, 39, 40, 41, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, nirvana 9, 10, 14, 15, 37, 53, 60,
94, 96, 113, 135, 156, 157, 175
48, 49, 50, 51, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58,
59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, Nirvana Sutra (see also
Mahaparinirvana-sutra) 34,
68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 74, 75, 76, 78,
168
79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87,
nonexistence 145, 154, 179
89, 90, 93, 95, 96, 98, 99, 100,
Northern River 173
101,102,103,105,106,107,
nun(s) 2, 25, 61, 64, 75, 76, 77, 78,
108,109,110, 111, 112,114,
84
115,116,125,127, 129,131,
Nyaya-dvara-tarka-sastra
149
132,136,137,138, 139,140,
Nyaya-mukha-sastra
156
141,142,144,145,151, 152,
155,156,157,158, 159,160,
161,162,163,164, 166,168,
169.170.171,
172,179
offense(es) 9,13, 14, 16, 18, 21, 23,
assembly of 38, 39, 44, 71, 80,
50, 51, 53, 57, 76, 81, 85, 87,
81, 82, 83, 84, 93, 115,127,
94, 99, 129, 175
138, 139, 140, 153, 159
parajika 166

o

194

Index

sthulatyaya 166
offering(s) 24, 25, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40,
41, 42, 43, 44, 47, 48, 82, 94, 99,
136, 137, 138,140, 164,165,
167,168, 173
One Thousand Character Composi­
tion 143
Order 166, 171, 175
ordination 2, 21, 54, 93, 94, 95, 96,
98, 99, 100, 108, 111, 112,115,
155, 175

P
Pânini 147, 150
Paramârtha 154
pârâmitâs 141
Patanjali 150
patricide 93
Pen-pen Island 12
Persian 1, 65, 66
pillow(s) 106
Ping-lin 167
Po-li Island 12
Po-lu-si Island 12
Prajnâgupta 152

Prajnâ-pâramitâ-sütra 169
Pramâna-samuccaya-sâstra 156
Prasenajit, King 39

Prâtimoksa 156
Pratïtyasamutpâda-vyâkhyâ-sâstra
155

Pravârana 83
precept(s) 9, 12, 69, 77, 78, 99, 102,
131, 142, 151, 157, 165, 166,
175
eight 156, 157
five 9, 36, 93, 95, 142, 155,156
five prohibitive 9
ten 94, 95, 142, 155
Prince of Qi. See Qi, Prince of
Priyadarsana 164
pupil(s) 9,15, 91, 101, 109, 110,
111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116,
117, 137, 149, 151, 167, 168
Pure Land 143, 170
pure meat, three kinds of 45, 57

Q
Qi 178
Prince of 179
Qin dynasties 173,
Qi-zhou 1, 167
Que-li 150

R
Rahulamitra 62
Rajagrha 2, 9, 29, 36, 68, 91, 102,
107
Ratnakuta-sutra 62
Ratnasimha 2, 154

Record of the Inner Law Sent Home
from the South Seas, A (see
also Record of the South Seas)
17, 18

Record of the South Seas 13
rest, resting (see also sleep) 35, 62,
93, 94, 105, 116, 118, 121, 125,
169
robe(s) 10, 21, 28, 35, 36, 45, 48,
53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60,
64, 65, 66, 68, 70, 71, 72, 73,
75, 76, 77, 78, 81, 82, 84, 87,
89, 94, 96, 101, 105, 109, 111,
113, 114, 115, 145, 146, 151,
155, 158, 159, 162, 171
antarvasa 54, 55, 75
civara 45, 54
kasaya 29, 45, 54, 71, 72, 76
kathina 82
kusulaka 76, 77
samghati 54, 55, 75
samkaksika 55, 64, 73, 75, 76,
93
uttarasahga 54, 55, 75
Rsisvara, King 164

s
Sabda-vidya 145, 147
Saddharma-pundarika-sutra 172,
173
Sakyadeva 142
Sakyakirti 154

195

Index

tree(s) 10, 29, 91, 144
saliva 26, 33, 48, 87, 121, 122, 123
salutation(s) 32, 87, 89, 96, 104,
108, 109, 111, 112, 114, 117
sa m a d h i (see a lso meditation) 120
sa la

S a m a n ya la k sa n a -p a rik sa -sa stra

156
Samghabhadra 152, 154
sa m gh a ti. S ee u n d er robe
sa m k a k sik d . S ee u n d er robe
Samkhya 8
66
Sammitiya 11, 12, 13, 64, 129
sandals (see a lso shoes) 75
sandalwood 45, 136
Sangha 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 91,
94, 96, 100, 101, 106, 161
Sanskrit 1, 2, 3, 4, 32, 34, 38, 42, 45,
47, 56, 67, 73, 75, 76, 85, 86,
110, 117, 127,129, 130, 135,
145, 146,148, 159
grammar 145-147, 152
sa p ta -b od h ya h g a 154
Sariputra 89
Sarvastivada 2, 10, 11, 13, 19, 64,
73, 74, 129, 180
S a m k sip ta -sa sa n a -v in a ya -su tra

S d stra on th e G ate o f the P s e u d o ­
ca u se 156

Satavahana, King 142
S crip tu re on P r o p e r T im es an d
Im p r o p e r T im es 130
self-immolation (see a lso branding

the scalp; burning of the body
or fingers; suicide) 2 -3 , 163165, 174
sense organs 172
Shanyu 167, 175, 179
Shao-shi Mountain 68, 181
Shen-tong Monastery 167, 173
Shi 168
Shi-qu-ge 121, 149
Shi Zhou 168
shoes 21, 22, 75, 158, 171
Si-chuan 12
Si-chan Monastery 23
S id d h a v a stu 147
S id d h irastu . S ee S id d h a va stu

196

94, 85
Silabhadra 152
Siladitya, King 143, 144
silk 30, 31, 32, 56, 57, 58, 59, 70,
72, 73, 76, 90, 136, 137
Simhacandra 152
Simhala 65
Sindhu 11, 111
sitting cloth 55, 104-105, 106
S ix P a d a s 156
six requisites of a monk. S ee u n d er
monk
sleep, sleeping 58, 78, 105-107,
133, 149, 175, 178
snakebite 124, 128
Southern Valley 173
South Seas 1, 2,11, 12, 13, 14,16,
21, 34, 35, 43, 48, 65, 76, 98,
100,105, 106, 107,120, 126,
132, 144,154, 155,177
spoon(s) 33, 38, 42, 86, 133
S p rin g a n d A u tu m n A n n a ls 150
sra m a n a 137, 166
sra m a n era 94, 95
Sribhoja 1, 2, 12, 131, 154, 155,
177
Sriksetra 12
S ta n za on th e S ix P a ra m ita s 172
sth a v ira 100
Sthavira 11, 12, 64
Sthiramati 152
strainer (see a lso filter) 30, 31, 32,
93, 99
stupa(s) (see a lso ca itya ) 79, 113-,
127, 137, 138, 161
Subhadra 9
Sudana, Prince 144
S u h rllek h a 142
suicide (see a lso self-immolation) 3,
165, 166
Sui dynasty 168, 172
Suli 3, 48, 66, 72, 111, 146
Sumatra. See Sribhoja
summer retreat(s) 1, 21, 62, 82, 83,
85, 94, 98, 100, 112
sundial(s) 108, 130, 131
S u tra 147, 148, 149, 150
Siksam ana

Index

Sutralahkara-sastra 144
Sutra on Avalokitesvara 143
Sutra on Medical Prescriptions 121
Sutra on the Parable of the Crow
and the Moon 29
syllogism(s) 57, 58, 150, 151

T
Tajiks 65
tala trees 103
Tamralipti 1, 2, 39, 60, 63, 139,
155, 177
Tang dynasty 1, 72
Tanluan 123
Tathagatagarbha 154
teeth 24, 26, 32, 33, 43, 44, 48, 66,
79, 88, 93, 102, 103, 104, 106,
122, 127
ten precepts. See under precepts
ten stages 70, 79
Text of the Disciplinary Rules 99
thirteen necessities 54,55-56,64,
65
three honored ones 91, 135,139,
142, 149, 156,164
three realms 8, 165
three Yanas. See Yanas
Tibet, Tibetans 12, 66
Tiladhaka Monastery 154
toilet jar, set 44, 88, 89
Tong Yu 149
tooth-cleaning twig (see also tooth
wood) 27
tooth wood 32, 33, 34, 40, 48, 49,
87, 101, 109, 110, 111
Trikala-pariksd-sastra 155
Tripitaka 9, 10, 11, 18, 50, 51, 62,
72, 112, 120, 154, 166, 167,
168, 170
triple gem 12, 25, 37, 89, 145, 150,
155, 174
Tukhara 48
Tu-ku Monastery 167, 172
Turks 66
twelve ascetic practices 56
twelve nidanas. See chain of
causality, twelve links of

u
Udana 158
Udyana 19
umbrella 29, 71, 72
Unadi 148
undergarment(s) 10, 55, 64, 93,
103
Upadayaprajhapti-prakarana-

sastra 156
upadhyaya 99, 100, 110, 111, 112,
175
upasaka 93
upasika 36
uttarasahga. See under robe

V
Vaisali 2, 10
Vaisesika School 8

Vakyapadiya. See Vakya-sastra
Vakya-sastra 151
Valabhi 149
Vasubandhu 141, 152, 155
Vedas 62, 153
velacakra. See sundial
Vijhapti-matrata-siddhi-sastra 176
Vijhapti-matratd-siddhi-trirnsika-

kdrika 155
Vijhapti-mdtrata-siddhi-vimsatikd-

karika 155
Vimalakirti 2
Vinaya 3, 9, 10, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17,
18, 22, 24, 26, 30, 35, 39, 40,
42, 45, 49, 50, 53, 54, 56, 57,
58, 59, 60, 63, 69, 70, 71, 74,
75, 77, 78, 79, 81, 82, 83, 84,
85, 86, 87, 89, 90, 94, 95, 98,
99, 102, 103, 109, 111, 112,
115, 116, 117, 118, 128, 130,
131, 145, 152, 157, 159, 160,
162, 164, 165, 166, 172, 173,
175

Vinaya-dvavimsati-prasannartha-

sastra 129
Vinaya of Four Divisions 13
Vinaya of Ten Readings (see also
Dasasvadhyaya-vinaya) 13

197

Index

Vinaya-pitaka (Collection of Books
on Monastic Discipline) 99,

Y

155, 164
visitor(s) 72, 116-117
Visvantara, Prince 144
Vital(-vrtta) 151
voidness 49, 50, 53, 89, 154, 156,
180
twofold 150-151, 156
Vrtti-sutra 149, 150
Vulture Peak 2, 29, 40, 68, 101,
107, 154, 170, 181

yaksa 164
yaksi 36
Yanas 16

w
water 7, 9, 16, 17, 25, 26, 27, 28,
29, 30, 31, 33, 35, 39, 40, 42,
43, 44, 46, 48, 61, 69, 74, 78, 87,
88, 89, 90, 91, 93, 103, 104, 109,
110, 111, 113, 117, 121, 122,
124, 125,131, 132,133,135,
136,137, 138, 152, 158, 168,
173
impure 27
pure 27, 28, 40, 46, 68
“timely” 27, 31
water bottle(s), jar(s), pot(s) 26, 27,
28, 29, 30, 31, 35, 72, 90, 91,
116
water clocks. See clepsydras
Western Land 11, 12, 15
Western Paradise 51
White Pagoda Monastery 90
Wild Goose Pagoda 4
willow twig 24, 26, 34, 66
wisdom of no rebirth 53
Wu, Emperor 3
Wuxing 43

X
Xi’an 4
Xiang-yang 35
Xi-fang-shi (A Record of the West)
48
Xishi 179
Xuanzang 4,72,154

198

Yang, Prefecture of 168
Yang-zhou 1, 90
Yangzi River 13, 38, 40, 82, 83, 90,
122, 174
YanHui 25
Yellow River 68, 174
Yijing 1-4, 10,12,14, 17, 33, 41,
45, 47, 73, 76, 79, 85, 94, 96, 97,
98, 101, 108,110, 124, 127,135,
141, 143, 145, 146, 147, 152,
153,154, 155, 156, 157, 159,
160, 180
Yogacara 14, 15, 154, 155
Yogacara-sdstra 155
Yu Boya 168
Yu-quan Monastery 90

z
Zhang Zhi 168
Zhong You 168
Zhong Ziqi 168
Zhou dynasty 180

A L ist o f the Volum es of
the BDK E n g lish T ripitaka
(First Series)

Abbreviations
Ch
S kt.:
J p ■■
Engr.
T.\

Title

Vol. No.

1,2

Chinese
Sanskrit
Japanese
Published title
Taishö Tripitaka

Ch.

Ch‘ang-a-han-ching ( -JiPoll'll)

T.

No.

1

Skt. Dirghagama
3 -8

Ch.

Chung-a-han-ching ( 'h K 'a 'fi)

26

Skt. Madhyamagama
9-1

9-II

Ch.

Ta-ch‘eng-pen-sheng-hsin-ti-kuan-ching
(
)

159

Ch.

Fo-so-hsing-tsan ( fflpJrfrWt)

192

Skt. Buddhacarita
10-1

Ch.
E n g.

10-11

Ch.
E ng.

Tsa-pao-ts‘ang-ching ( J tiitS )
The Storehouse of Sundry Valuables

203

Fa-chu-p‘i-yii-ching ( ffihj Bifff)
The Scriptural Text: Verses of the Doctrine,
with Parables

211

11-1

Hsiao-p‘in-pan-jo-po-lo-mi-ching
(
)
Skt. Astasahasrika-prajiiaparamita-sutra

11-11

Ch.

Ch.

Chin-kang-pan-jo-po-lo-mi-ching

Skt. Vajracchedika-prajnaparamita-sutra

227

235

BDK English Tripitaka

Vol. No.

ll-III

Title

Ch.

T. No.

Jen-wang-pan-jo-po-lo-mi-ching

245

(
)
Skt. Karunikaraja-prajnaparamita-sutra (?)
11-

IV Ch.

Skt.
12-

12-11

Pan-jo-po-lo-mi-to-hsing-ching (
Prajnaparamitahrdaya-sutra

)

251

1 Ch.

Ta-lo-chin-kang-pu-k‘ung-chen-shih-san-moyeh-ching (
)
Skt. Adhyardhasatika-prajnaparamita-sutra

243

Ch. Wu-liang-shou-ching (
Skt. Sukhavativyuha

360

E ng.

)

The Larger Sutra on Amitayus (In The Three Pure
Land Sutras)

12-III

Ch.
Skt.

Kuan-wu-liang-shou-fo-ching ( U S d liP ffifi)
Amitayurdhyana-sutra
E n g. The Sutra on Contemplation of Amitayus
(In The Three Pure Land Sutras)

365

12-IV

Ch. A-mi-t‘o-ching ( H U SK S)
Skt. Sukhavativyuha

366

E n g.

The Smaller Sutra on Amitayus (In The Three Pure
Land Sutras)

12-V

Ch.
Skt.

Ti-ts‘ang-p‘u-sa-pen-yiian-ching (
Ksitigarbhapranidhana-sutra (?)

12-VI

Ch.

Yao-shih-liu-li-kuang-ju-lai-pen-yiian-kungte-ching (
)
Skt. Bhaisajyaguruvaiduryaprabhasapurvapranidhanavisesavistara

450

12-VII

Ch.
Skt.

454

12-

VIII
Ch.

Skt.
13-

)

Mi-le-hsia-sheng-ch‘eng-fo-ching (
Maitreyavyakarana (?)
Wen-shu-shih-li-wen-ching (
Manjusripariprccha (?)

1 Ch.

Miao-fa-lien-hua-ching (
Saddharmapundarlka-sutra
E n g . The Lotus Sutra

)

)

)

412

468

262

Skt.

13-11

Ch.

Wu-liang-i-ching (

)

276

BDK English Tripitaka

13-III

Ch.
Ch.

277

Kuan-p‘u-hsien-p‘u-sa-hsing-fa-ching
(

14-19

T. No.

Title

Vol. No.

)

278

Ta-fang-kuang-fo-hua-yen-ching

Skt. Avatamsaka-sutra
20-1

Ch.

Sheng-man-shih-tzu-hou-i-ch‘eng-ta-fang-pienfang-kuang-ching

353

Skt. Srimaladevisimhanada-sutra
20-11

Ch.

Chin-kuang-ming-tsui-sheng-wang-ching

665

Skt. Suvarnaprabhasa-sutra
374

21-24

Ch. Ta-pan-nieh-p‘an-ching (
Skt. Mahaparinirvana-sutra

25-1

Ch.

25-11

418
Ch. Pan-chou-san-mei-ching (
)
Skt. Pratyutpannabuddhasammukhavasthitasamadhi-

)

Fo-ch‘ui-pan-nieh-p‘an-liao-shuo-chiao-chiehching

389

sutra

Eng. The Pratyutpanna Samadhi Sutra
642

25-III

Ch. Shou-leng-yen-san-mei-ching (
Skt. Surangamasamadhi-sutra
Eng. The Surangama Samadhi Sutra

25-IV

Ch. Chieh-shen-mi-ching (
Skt. Samdhinirmocana-sutra

25-V

Ch. Yii-lan-p‘en-ching ( S M S :® )
Skt. Ullambana-sutra (?)

25-VI

Ch.

26-1

Ch. Wei-mo-chieh-so-shuo-ching ( ®l|£'!p/Sfra5'd® )
Skt. Vimalaklrtinirdesa-sutra

475

26-11

Ch. Yiieh-shang-nu-ching ( M _ h it S )
Skt. Candrottaradarikapariprccha

480

26-III

Ch.

614

676

)

Ssu-shih-erh-chang-ching ( t

Tso-ch‘an-san-mei-ching (

)

685

f f l )

)

784

BDK English Tripitaka

Vol. No.

Title

T. N o .

26-IV

Ch. Ta-mo-to-lo-ch‘an-ching (
Skt. Yogacarabhumi-sutra (?)

27

Ch. Yueh-teng-san-mei-ching (
Skt. Samadhirajacandrapradipa-sutra

28

Ch. Ju-leng-ch‘ieh-ching ( A W D mM )
Skt. Lankavatara-sutra

671

29-1

Ch.

842

)

618

)

Ta-fang-kuang-yilan-chio-hsiu-to-lo-liao-i-ching

(

639

)

29-11

Ch. Su-hsi-ti-chieh-lo-ching (
)
Skt. Susiddhikaramahatantrasadhanopayika-patala

29-III

Ch. Mo-teng-ch‘ieh-ching (
Skt. Matangl-sutra (?)

30-1

Ch.

Ta-p‘i-lu-che-na-cheng-fo-shen-pien-chia-ch‘ihching (
)
Skt. Mahavairocanabhisambodhivikurvitadhisthanavaipulyasutrendraraja-nama-dharmaparyaya

848

30-11

Ch.

865

)

Ching-kang-ting-i-ch‘ieh-ju-lai-chen-shih-sheta-ch‘eng-hsien-cheng-ta-chiao-wang-ching

893

1300

Skt. Sarvatathagatatattvasamgrahamahayanabhisamayamahakalparaj a
31-35

Ch. Mo-ho-seng-ch‘i-lu (
)
Skt. Mahasamghika-vinaya (?)

1425

36-42

Ch. Ssu-fen-lti (
)
Skt. Dharmaguptaka-vinaya (?)

1428

43, 44

Ch. Shan-chien-lu-p‘i-p‘o-sha (
Pali Samantapasadika

45-1

Ch. Fan-wang-ching (
)
Skt. Brahmajala-sutra (?)

1484

45-11

Ch. Yu-p‘o-sai-chieh-ching ( f f iH S lS S )
Skt. Upasakasila-sutra (?)
Eng. The Sutra on Upasaka Precepts

1488

)

1462

BDK English Tripitaka

Title

Voi. No.
46-1

Ch.

T.

Miao-fa-lien-hua-ching-yu-po-t‘i-she

No.

1519

Skt. Saddharmapundarika-upadesa
46-11

Ch. Fo-ti-ching-lun (
)
Skt. Buddhabhumisutra-sastra (?)

1530

46-III

Ch. She-ta-ch'eng-lun (
)
Skt. Mahayanasamgraha
Eng. The Summary of the Great Vehicle

1593

47

Ch. Shih-chu-p‘i-p‘o-sha-lun (
Skt. Dasabhumika-vibhasa (?)

48, 49

Ch. A-p‘i-ta-mo-chu-she-lun (
Skt. Abhidharmakosa-bhasya

50-59

Ch. Yii-ch'ieh-shih-ti-lun (
Skt. Yogacarabhumi

60-1

Ch. Ch‘eng-wei-shih-lun ( /SUf imllra )
Eng. Demonstration of Consciousness Only

1521

)

)

1558

1579

)

1585

(In Three Texts on Consciousness Only)
60-11

Ch. Wei-shih-san-shih-lun-sung ( tifiislH Nmif))
Skt. Trimsika
Eng. The Thirty Verses on Consciousness Only

1586

(In Three Texts on Consciousness Only)
60-III

Ch. Wei-shih-erh-shih-lun ( tiaS C + lm )
1590
Skt. Vimsatika
Eng. The Treatise in Twenty Verses on Consciousness Only
(In Three Texts on Consciousness Only)

61-1

Ch. Chung-lun (
)
Skt. Madhyamaka-sSstra

1564

61-11

Ch. Pien-chung-pien-lun (^ 'p jS fm )
Skt. Madhyantavibhaga

1600

61-III

Ch. Ta-ch‘eng-ch‘èng-yeh-lun (
Skt. Karmasiddhiprakarana

61-IV

Ch. Yin-ming-ju-chèng-li-lun (
Skt. Nyayapravesa

)

1609

)

1630

BDK English Tripitaka

Voi. No.

Title

T. No.

61-V

Ch.
Skt.

Chin-kang-chên-lun ( ÂPülâfjÉ )
Vajrasücï

1642

61-VI

Ch.

Chang-so-ehih-lun

1645

62

Ch.
Skt.

Ta-ch‘eng-chuang-yen-ching-lun (
Mahäyänasüträlamkära

) 1604

63-1

Ch.

Chiu-ching-i-ch‘eng-pao-hsing-lun

1611

Skt.

Ratnagotravibhägamahäyänottaratantra-sästra

63-11

Ch.
Skt.

P‘u-t‘i-hsing-ching ( UüüfrM )
Bodhicaryävatära

1662

63-III

Ch.

Chin-kang-ting-yü-ch‘ieh-chung-fa-a-nou-tolo-san-miao-san-p‘u-t‘i-hsin-lun

1665

63-IV

Ch.
Skt.

Ta-ch‘eng-ch‘i-hsin-lun (
Mahäyänasraddhotpäda-sästra (?)

)

1666

63-V

Ch.
P a li

Na-hsien-pi-ch‘iu-ching (
Milindapanhä

)

1670

64

Ch.
Skt.

Ta-ch‘eng-chi-p‘u-sa-hsüeh-lun (
Siksäsamuccaya

65

Ch.

Shih-mo-ho-yen-lun (

66-1

Ch.

Pan-jo-po-lo-mi-to-hsin-ching-yu-tsan

1710

66-11

Ch.

Kuan-wu-liang-shou-fo-ching-shu
(
)

1753

66-III

Ch.

San-lun-hsüan-i (

1852

66-IV

Ch.

Chao-lun ( Htm )

1858

67, 68

Ch.

Miao-fa-lien-hua-ching-hsüan-i

1716

69

Ch.

Ta-ch‘eng-hsüan-lun ( -kM&sm )

1853

M

) 1636

)

)

1688

BDK English Tripitaka

70-1

T. No.

Title

Vol. No.
Ch.

Hua-yen-i-ch‘eng-chiao-i-fen-ch‘i-chang

(

1866

)

70-11

Ch.

Yiian-jen-lun ( IS AHm )

1886

70-III

Ch.

Hsiu-hsi-chih-kuan-tso-ch‘an-fa-yao

1915

(

)

70-IV

Ch.

T‘ien-t‘ai-ssu-chiao-i ( ^ n H i l )

1931

71, 72

Ch.

Mo-ho-chih-kuan (J¥M ihll)

1911

73-1

Ch.

Kuo-ch‘ing-pai-lu ( H ’/ b W ® )

1934

73-11

Ch.

Liu-tsu-ta-shih-fa-pao-t‘an-ching

2008

( AtlAWSs’Bfilfg )
73-III

Ch.

Huang-po-shan-tuan-chi-ch‘an-shih-ch‘uanhsin-fa-yao (
)
Yung-chia-cheng-tao-ko (

)

73-

IV Ch.

74-

1 Ch. Chen-chou-lin-chi-hui-chao-ch‘an-shih-wu-lu

(

2012A

2014
1985

)

E n g.

The Recorded Sayings of Linji
(In Three Chan Classics)

74-11

Ch.
E n g.

Wu-men-kuan (feHUS)
Wumen’s Gate (In Three Chan Classics)

74-III

Ch.
E ng.

Hsin-hsin-ming ( -ftf
)
2010
The Faith-Mind Maxim (In Three Chan Classics)

74-IV

Ch.

75

2005

Ch‘ih-hsiu-pai-chang-ch‘ing-kuei

2025

Ch.

Fo-kuo-yuan-wu-ch‘an-shih-pi-yen-lu

2003

E ng.

The Blue Cliff Record

76-1

Ch.
Skt.

I-pu-tsung-lun-lun (Mn|S^?l^fm)
Samayabhedoparacanacakra

2031

76-11

Ch.
Skt.
E ng.

A-yii-wang-ching ( ISJflfU S )
Asokaraja-sutra (?)
The Biographical Scripture of King Asoka

2043

(mimxmm)

BDK English Tripitaka

Vol. No.

Title

T. No.

76-III

Ch.

Ma-ming-p‘u-sa-ch‘uan (ISH lUH l#)

2046

76-IV

Ch.

Lung-shu-p‘u-sa-ch‘uan ( flls flflil# )

2047

76-V

Ch.

P‘o-sou-p‘an-tou-fa-shih-ch‘uan

2049

76-VI

Ch.

Pi-ch‘iu-ni-ch‘uan ( tt& J E W )

2063

76-VII

Ch.

Kao-sêng-fa-hsien-ch‘uan ( ïHlüÊüîl# )

2085

76-VIII

Ch.

Yu-fang-chi-ch’ao: T‘ang-ta-ho-shang-tungchêng-ch'uan (
)

2089-(7)

77

Ta-t‘ang-ta-tz‘ü-ên-ssü-san-ts‘ang-fa-shih2053
ch‘uan (
)
E n g. A Biography of the Tripitaka Master of the
Great Ci’en Monastery of the Great Tang Dynasty

78

Ch.

Kao-sêng-ch‘uan ( [ a l ii # )

79

Ch.
E ng.

Ta-t‘ang-hsi-yii-chi (
)
2087
The Great Tang Dynasty Record of the Western Regions

80

Ch.

Hung-ming-chi ( ‘JABfi% )

81-92

Ch.

Fa-yüan-chu-lin (

93-1

Ch.

Nan-hai-chi-kuei-nei-fa-ch‘uan

Ch.

(

2059

2102
)

2122
2125

If ft&l# )

E n g.

Buddhist Monastic Traditions of Southern Asia

93-11

Ch.

Fan-yü-tsa-ming (

94-1

Jp.

Shô-man-gyô-gi-sho ( KSiffUBft )

2185

94-11

Jp.

Yui-ma-kyô-gi-sho (

2186

95

Jp.

Hok-ke-gi-sho (jÈIMIiSÈ)

96-1

Jp.

Han-nya-shin-gyo-hi-ken (

96-11

Jp.

Dai-jo-hos-sô-ken-jin-sho (

96-III

Jp.

Kan-jin-kaku-mu-sho ( W L folk W ® )

2135

)

)

2187
)

2203
)

2309
2312

BDK English Tripitaka

T. No.

Title

Vol. No.

97-1

Jp.
E n g.

Ris-shu-ko-yo (
)
The Essentials of the Vinaya Tradition

97-11

Jp.
E n g.

Ten-dai-hok-ke-shu-gi-shu (
)
2366
The Collected Teachings of the Tendai Lotus School

97-III

Jp.

Ken-kai-ron (Rritlfe)

97-IV

Jp.

San-ge-gaku-sho-shiki ( ill

98-1

Jp.

Hi-zo-ho-yaku (

98-11

Jp.

Ben-ken-mitsu-ni-kyo-ron (

)

2427

98-III

Jp.

Soku-shin-jo-butsu-gi ( BP

)

2428

98-IV

Jp.

sho-ji-jis-so-gi

2429

98-V

Jp.

Un-ji-gi (

2430

98-VI

Jp.

Go-rin-ku-ji-myo-hi-mitsu-shaku

98-VII

Jp.

2376
it)

2377
2426

)

)

c

2348

2514

)

Mitsu-gon-in-hotsu-ro-san-ge-mon

2527

(tfJR& Sftt* 1 6 * )
98-VIII

Jp.

Ko-zen-go-koku-ron (K P K H fm )

2543

98-IX

Jp.

Fu-kan-za-zen-gi (

2580

99-103

Jp.

Sho-bo-gen-zo ( jEffiBSS)

2582

104-1

Jp.

Za-zen-yo-jin-ki (

2586

104-11

Jp.

Sen-chaku-hon-gan-nen-butsu-shu

E ng.

Senchaku Hongan Nembutsu Shu

104-III

Jp.

Ris-sho-an-koku-ron (iLlESIH l«)

2688

104-IV

Jp.

Kai-moku-sho ( pH@ j'P )

2689

104-V

Jp.

Kan-jin-hon-zon-sho (

104-VI

Ch.

Fu-mu-en-chung-ching (

)

-ibfE,)

2608

2692

)
)

2887

BDK English Tripitaka

Vol. No.

Title

T.

No.

105-1

Jp.

Ken-jô-do-shin-jitsu-kyô-gyô-shô-mon-rui

105-11

Jp.
E ng.

Tan-ni-shô ( IfeU# )
2661
Tannisho: Passages Deploring Deviations of Faith

106-1

Jp.
E ng.

Ren-nyo-sho-nin-o-fumi (
)
Rennyo Shônin Ofumi: The Letters of Rennyo

2668

106-11

Jp.

O-jô-yô-shü (

2682

107-1

Jp.
E ng.

Has-shü-kô-yô ( A f f i l e )
The Essentials of the Eight Traditions

**

107-11

Jp.

San-go-shi-ki ( =.PjLieiw )

**

107-III

Jp.
E ng.

Map-pô-tô-myô-ki (
)
The Candle of the Latter Dharma

107-IV

Jp.

Jü-shichi-jô-ken-pô (

)

)

2646

