THE COLLECTION FOR THE PROPAGATION
AND CLARIFICATION OF BUDDHISM
VOLUME II

dBET PDF Version
© 2017
All Rights Reserved

BDK English Tripiṭaka Series

THE COLLECTION FOR THE
PROPAGATION AND CLARIFICATION
OF BUDDHISM
VOLUME II
(Taishō Volume 52, Number 2102)

Translated from the Chinese
by

Harumi Hirano Ziegler

BDK America, Inc.
2017

Copyright © 2017 by Bukkyō Dendō Kyōkai and
BDK America, Inc.

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored
in a retrieval system, or transcribed in any form or by any means
—electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise—
without the prior written permission of the publisher.
First Printing, 2017
ISBN: 978-1-886439-63-4
Library of Congress Control Number: 2014957879
Published by
BDK America, Inc.
1675 School Street
Moraga, California 94556

Printed in the United States of America

A Message on the Publication of the
English Tripiṭaka
The Buddhist canon is said to contain eighty-four thousand different teachings.
I believe that this is because the Buddha’s basic approach was to prescribe a
different treatment for every spiritual ailment, much as a doctor prescribes a
different medicine for every medical ailment. Thus his teachings were always
appropriate for the particular suffering individual and for the time at which the
teaching was given, and over the ages not one of his prescriptions has failed to
relieve the suffering to which it was addressed.
Ever since the Buddha’s Great Demise over twenty-ﬁve hundred years ago,
his message of wisdom and compassion has spread throughout the world. Yet
no one has ever attempted to translate the entire Buddhist canon into English
throughout the history of Japan. It is my greatest wish to see this done and to
make the translations available to the many English-speaking people who have
never had the opportunity to learn about the Buddha’s teachings.
Of course, it would be impossible to translate all of the Buddha’s eighty-four
thousand teachings in a few years. I have, therefore, had one hundred thirty-nine
of the scriptural texts in the prodigious Taishō edition of the Chinese Buddhist
canon selected for inclusion in the First Series of this translation project.
It is in the nature of this undertaking that the results are bound to be criticized.
Nonetheless, I am convinced that unless someone takes it upon himself or herself
to initiate this project, it will never be done. At the same time, I hope that an
improved, revised edition will appear in the future.
It is most gratifying that, thanks to the efforts of more than a hundred Buddhist
scholars from the East and the West, this monumental project has ﬁnally gotten
off the ground. May the rays of the Wisdom of the Compassionate One reach
each and every person in the world.
NUMATA Yehan
Founder of the English
Tripiṭaka Project

August 7, 1991
v

Editorial Foreword
In the long history of Buddhist transmission throughout East Asia, translations
of Buddhist texts were often carried out as national projects supported and
funded by emperors and political leaders. The BDK English Tripiṭaka project,
on the other hand, began as a result of the dream and commitment of one man.
In January 1982 Dr. NUMATA Yehan, founder of Bukkyō Dendō Kyōkai (Society
for the Promotion of Buddhism), initiated the monumental task of translating
the complete Taishō shinshū daizōkyō edition of the Chinese Tripiṭaka (Buddhist
canon) into the English language. Under his leadership, a special preparatory
committee was organized in April 1982. By July of the same year the Translation
Committee of the English Tripiṭaka was officially convened.
The initial Committee included the following members: (late) HANAYAMA
Shōyū (Chairperson), (late) BANDŌ Shōjun, ISHIGAMI Zennō, (late) KAMATA
Shigeo, (late) KANAOKA Shūyū, MAYEDA Sengaku, NARA Yasuaki, (late)
SAYEKI Shinkō, (late) SHIOIRI Ryōtatsu, TAMARU Noriyoshi, (late) TAMURA
Kwansei, (late) URYŪZU Ryūshin, and YUYAMA Akira. Assistant members of
the Committee were as follows: KANAZAWA Atsushi, WATANABE Shōgo, Rolf
Giebel of New Zealand, and Rudy Smet of Belgium.
After holding planning meetings on a monthly basis, the Committee selected
one hundred and thirty-nine texts for the First Series of the project, estimated
to be one hundred printed volumes in all. The texts selected were not limited to
those originally written in India but also included works composed in China
and Japan. While the publication of the First Series proceeds, the texts for the
Second Series will be selected from among the remaining works; this process
will continue until all the texts, in Japanese as well as in Chinese, have been
published. Given the huge scope of this project, accomplishing the English translations of all the Chinese and Japanese texts in the Taishō canon may take as
long as one hundred years or more. Nevertheless, as Dr. NUMATA wished, it is
the sincere hope of the Committee that this project will continue until completion,
even after all the present members have passed away.

vii

Editorial Foreword

Dr. NUMATA passed away on May 5, 1994, at the age of ninety-seven, having
entrusted his son, Mr. NUMATA Toshihide, with the continuation and completion
of the English Tripiṭaka project. The Committee lost its able and devoted Chairperson, Professor HANAYAMA Shōyū, on June 16, 1995, at the age of sixtythree. In October 1995 the Committee elected Professor MAYEDA Sengaku
(then Vice President of Musashino Women’s College) as Chairperson, and
renewed its determination to carry out the noble ideals of Dr. NUMATA under
the leadership of Mr. NUMATA Toshihide. Present members of the Committee
are Kenneth Tanaka (Chairperson), MAYEDA Sengaku, ICHISHIMA Shōshin,
ISHIGAMI Zennō, KATSURA Shōryū, NARA Yasuaki, SAITŌ Akira, SHIMODA
Masahiro, WATANABE Shōgo, and YONEZAWA Yoshiyasu.
The Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research was established
in November 1984, in Berkeley, California, U.S.A., to assist in the publication
of the translated texts. The Publication Committee was organized at the Numata
Center in December 1991. In 2010, the Numata Center’s operations were merged
with Bukkyō Dendō Kyōkai America, Inc. (BDK America), and BDK America
continues to oversee the publication side of the English Tripiṭaka project in close
cooperation with the Editorial Committee in Tokyo.
At the time of this writing, February 10, 2017, the project has completed
about sixty percent of the seven thousand one hundred and eighty-five Taishō
pages of texts selected for the First Series. Much work still lies ahead of us but
we are committed to the completion of the remaining texts in order to realize
Dr. Numata’s vision of the Buddhist canon to become readily accessible to the
English-speaking world.
Kenneth K.Tanaka

Chairperson
Editorial Committee of
the BDK English Tripiṭaka

viii

Publisher’s Foreword
On behalf of the members of the Publication Committee, I am happy to present
this volume as the latest contribution to the BDK English Tripiṭaka Series. The
Publication Committee members have worked to ensure that this volume, as all
other volumes in the series, has gone through a rigorous process of editorial efforts.
The initial translation and editing of the Buddhist scriptures found in this
and other BDK English Tripiṭaka volumes are performed under the direction of
the Editorial Committee in Tokyo, Japan. Both the Editorial Committee in Tokyo
and the Publication Committee, headquartered in Moraga, California, are dedicated to the production of accurate and readable English translations of the
Buddhist canon. In doing so, the members of both committees and associated
staff work to honor the deep faith, spirit, and concern of the late Reverend Dr.
Yehan Numata, who founded the BDK English Tripiṭaka Series in order to disseminate the Buddhist teachings throughout the world.
The long-term goal of our project is the translation and publication of the
texts in the one hundred-volume Taishō edition of the Chinese Buddhist canon,
along with a number of influential extracanonical Japanese Buddhist texts. The
list of texts selected for the First Series of this translation project may be found
at the end of each volume in the series.
As Chair of the Publication Committee, I am deeply honored to serve as the
fifth person in a post previously held by leading figures in the field of Buddhist
studies, most recently by my predecessor, John R. McRae.
In conclusion, I wish to thank the members of the Publication Committee for
their dedicated and expert work undertaken in the course of preparing this volume
for publication: Managing Editor Marianne Dresser, Dr. Hudaya Kandahjaya, Dr.
Carl Bielefeldt, Dr. Robert Sharf, and Rev. Brian Kensho Nagata, Director of the
BDK English Tripiṭaka Project.
A. Charles Muller

Chairperson
Publication Committee

ix

Contents
A Message on the Publication of the English Tripiṭaka
NUMATA Yehan

v

Editorial Foreword

Kenneth K. Tanaka

vii

Translator’s Introduction

Harumi Hirano Ziegler

xix

A. Charles Muller

Publisher’s Foreword

ix

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II
Fascicle Eight
The Discourse on Debating to Remove Hindrances (Bianhuo lun)
and the Preface by Shi Xuanguang
The Discourse on Extinguishing Delusions (Miehuo lun) by Liu Xie,
Record Keeper at Dongguan County
Response to the Discourse on the Triple Destruction, which Daoists
Postulate is Zhang Rong’s Composition (in Nineteen Articles),
by Shi Sengshun

Fascicle Nine
The Record that the Emperor of the Great Liang Dynasty Sets Forth
the Right Logic for the Spiritual Intelligence and the Attainment
of Buddhahood, together with the Preface and Annotation Composed
by Shen Ji of Wuxing
Criticism of the Discourse on the Extinction of the Spirit (Shenmie lun)
Preface by Xiao Chen
The Discourse on the Extinction of the Spirit
Criticism of Secretariat Fan’s Discourse on the Extinction of the Spirit
by Cao Siwen
Response to Ofﬁce Manager Cao’s Criticism of the Discourse on the
Extinction of the Spirit [by Fan Zhen]
Imperial Response

xi

3
13
27

41
48
49
65
68
73

Contents

The Second Criticism of Secretariat Fan’s Discourse on the Extinction
of the Spirit [by Cao Siwen]
74

Fascicle Ten
The Emperor of the Great Liang Dynasty’s Imperial Response to
His Subjects: [The Examination of] the Discourse on the Extinction
of the Spirit
Letter Given by Dharma Teacher Fayun at Zhuangyan Temple to
Lords, Kings, and the Noble Courtiers, and their Responses
[Letter Given to Dharma Teacher Fayun (467–529)]
The Answer of the King of Linchuan
The Answer of the King of Jian’an
The Answer of the King of Changsha
The Answer of Shen Yue (441–513), Director of the Imperial
Secretariat
The Answer of Fan Xiu (460–514), Grand Master for Splendid
Happiness and Current Commandant of the Right Guard
of the Crown Prince
The Answer of Wang Ying, Governor of Danyang
The Answer of Wang Zhi (460–513), Secretariat Director
The Answer of Yuan Ang (461–540), Right Chief Administrator
The Answer of Xiao Bing, Chamberlain of the Court for the
Palace Garrison
The Answer of Xu Mian (466–535), Imperial Secretary of the
Ministry of Personnel
The Answer of Lu Gao (459–532), Palace Cadet of the Crown Prince
The Answer of Xiao Chen (476–512), Cavalier Attendant-in-Ordinary
The Answer of Wang Bin and Wang Jian, Attendants-in-Ordinary
The Answer of Lu Xu, Secretariat Drafter of the Heir Apparent
The Answer of Xu Gun, Gentleman of the Palace Gate
The Answer of Wang Jian (477–523), Palace Attendant
The Answer of Liu Yun (465–517), Palace Attendant
The Answer of Liu Cheng (d. 513), Attendant-in-Ordinary
The Answer of Wang Mao, Supervisor of the Household of the
Heir Apparent
The Answer of Yu Yong, Chamberlain for Ceremonials
xii

79
80
80
80
81
81
81
82
82
83
83
84
84
85
86
87
87
88
88
89
90
90
91

Contents

The Answer of Xiao Ang (483–535), Acting King of Yuzhang
The Answer of Yu Tanlong, Superior Grand Master of the Palace
The Answer of Xiao Mi, Frontrider of the Heir Apparent
The Answer of Wang Sengru (465–522), Palace Aide to the
Censor-in-Chief
The Answer of Wang Yi, Gentleman Attendant at the Palace Gate
The Answer of Wang Tai, Gentleman Attendant of the Ministry
of Personnel
The Answer of Cai Zun (467–523), Palace Attendant
The Answer of Wang Zhongxin, Director of Jiankang
The Answer of Shen Ji, Adjutant of Outer Troops of the King
of Jian’an
The Answer of Sima Yun, Gentleman Attendant of the Ministry
of Sacriﬁces
The Answer of Shen Gun, Adjutant of the Personnel Evaluation
Section of the King of Yuzhang
The Answer of Wang Qi, Ofﬁcer of the Personnel Evaluation
Section of the King of Jian’an
The Answer of Wei Rui (440–520), Right Guard General
The Answer of Xie Chuo, Chief Minister for Law Enforcement
The Answer of Fan Xiaocai, Libationer of the Minister of Education
The Answer of Wang Lin, Attendant-in-Ordinary
The Answer of He Jiong, Gentleman of the Bureau of Provisions
The Answer of Wang Yun (481–549), Recorder of the King of
Yuzhang
The Answer of Sun Yi, Gentleman of the Granaries Section
The Answer of Xiao Misu, Aide to [the Magistrate of] Danyang
The Answer of Fu Jing (462–520), Secretariat Gentleman
The Answer of He Yang, Erudite of the Five Classics
The Answer of Liu Qia, Secretary of the Heir Apparent
The Answer of Yan Zhizhi (457–508), Erudite of the Five Classics
The Answer of Cao Siwen, Houseman of the Eastern Palace
The Answer of Xie Ju, Vice Director of the Palace Library
The Answer of Ma Yuanhe, Chamberlain for the National Treasury
The Answer of Wang Jing, Court Gentleman for Evaluations

92
93
93
94
94
95
96
96
97
98
99
100
101
101
102
103
103
104
105
106
108
108
109
110
111
111
112
113

xiii

Contents

The Answer of Lu Ren, Gentleman Cavalier Attendant, and
Lu Chui (470–526), Secretariat Drafter of the Heir Apparent
The Answer of Wang Shengshu, Vice Commandant
The Answer of Ming Shanbin (443–527), Erudite of the Five Classics
The Answer of Yu Qianlou, Court Gentleman for Comprehensive
Duty
The Answer of Yin Jun (484–532), Household Provisioner of the
Heir Apparent
The Answer of Zhang Mian (490–531), Assistant in the Palace
Library
The Answer of Lu Lian, Erudite of the Five Classics
The Answer of Zhang Fan, Mounted Escort of Yangzhou
The Answer of Wang Zhenguo (d. 515), Commandant of the Left
of the Heir Apparent
The Answer of Cao Jingzong (457–508), General of the Palace
Guard
The Answer of Yan Shan, Chamberlain for Attendants
The Answer of Shen Hong, Erudite of the Five Classics
The Answer of Sima Jiong (d. 518), Arbiter of Jiankang
The Answer of Qiu Zhongfu, Assistant Director of the Left

Fascicle Eleven
Director He Shangzhi’s Case to Glorify Buddhism, Responding to
Emperor Wen of the Song Dynasty
The Responses of Two Dharma Masters, [Dao]gao and [Fa]ming, to
Li Miao of Jiaozhou, Who Criticized the Matter that the Buddha
Does Not Manifest Himself, and Li [Miao]’s Letters
[Li Miao’s Criticism]
[Daogao’s Response]
[Li Miao’s Response]
[Daogao’s Second Response]
[Li Miao’s Second Response]
[Faming’s Response to Li Miao]
The Letter of King Wenxuan Given to Kong Zhigui, Palace Aide to
the Censor-in-Chief, in Order to Dispel Doubts, together with the
Answer
xiv

115
116
117
119
122
122
124
125
126
126
127
128
129
130
131
137
137
138
139
141
143
144
149

Contents

Kong Zhigui’s Letters, together with [Prince Xiao’s] Answer
[Kong Zhigui’s (447–501) Letter]
[Kong Zhigui’s Second Letter]
[Kong Zhigui’s Third Letter]
[Prince Xiao’s Answer]
The Letters of Two Dharma Teachers, Daoheng and Daobiao,
Responding to Yao [Xing Zi]lüe, the Usurper Ruler of the Later Qin
Dynasty, Who Exhorts Them to Give up the [Buddhist] Way, together
with the Letters of the Ruler Yao
The Ruler Yao’s Letter Given to Two Eminent Monks,
[Dao]heng and [Dao]biao
[The Letter of Daoheng and Daobiao Responding to Yao]
[The Ruler Yao’s Response]
[The Second Letter of Daoheng and Daobiao]
[The Ruler Yao’s Second Response]
[The Third Letter of Daoheng and Daobiao]
Report to the Throne by the Three Dharma Teachers Senglüe,
Sengqian, and Kumārajīva, in Response to the Letters of the Ruler
Yao, Who Tried to Suspend [the Monkhood of Dao]heng and
[Dao]biao, together with the Ruler Yao’s Letters
The Ruler Yao’s Letter Given to Kumārajīva
The Ruler Yao’s Letter Given to Sengqian and Others
Report to the Throne by Senglüe, Sengqian, Kumārajīva, and Others
Requesting [the Ruler Yao] to Cease Removing [Dao]heng and
[Dao]biao from the [Buddhist] Way
The Letter of Dharma Teacher Huiyuan of Mount Lu in Response
to Huan Xuan, Who Urges that [Huiyuan] be Removed from the
[Buddhist Way], together with Huan Xuan’s Letter
Huan Xuan’s (369–404) Letter
Dharma Teacher [Hui]yuan’s Response
The Letters of Dharma Teacher Sengyan to Decline the Provincial
Governor of Qingzhou Liu Shanming’s Recommendation for the
Ofﬁcial Appointment of the Cultivated Talent (Xiucai), together
with Liu Shanming’s Responses
The Letter of Dharma Teacher Sengyan

154
154
156
158
158

158
158
159
160
161
161
161

162
162
163
164
166
166
167

168
168

xv

Running head

[Liu Shanming’s] Response to Buddhist Monk Sengyan
Sengyan’s Second Letter in Response [to Liu Shanming]
[Liu Shanming’s] Second Response
Sengyan’s Third Letter
[Liu Shanming’s] Third Response

Fascicle Twelve
Letter Given to Shi Daoan by Xi Zaochi
The Letter of the King of [Nan]qiao to Discuss Confucius and
Śākyamuni
Zhang Xin’an’s Response
Letter Given to Meditation Master [Huiyi] to Discuss the Manner
of Eating While Squatting with Raised Heels by Zheng Daozi
Letter Given to Minister of Education and Cultural Affairs Wang
[Hong] and All Others in Order to Discuss Buddhist Monks’ Manner
of Eating While Squatting with Raised Heels by Fan Bolun
Shi Huiyi’s Letter in Response to Fan Bolun
[Fan Bolun’s] Response to Eminent [Hui]yi
Fan Bolun’s Letter Given to the Two Dharma Teachers [Zhu
Dao]sheng and [Hui]guan
Petitions Presented to the Throne to Discuss the Manner of Eating
While Squatting with Raised Heels by Fan Bolun
[First Petition]
[Second Petition]
[Imperial Decree in Response to Fan Bolun]
[Third Petition]
Report to the Throne Regarding the Issue that Śramaṇas Should Not
Bow [to the King] by Director of the Imperial Secretariat He Chong
[Preface]
[Report to the Throne]
The Imperial Decree on Behalf of Emperor Cheng of the Jin Dynasty
Composed by Yu Bing, Who Admonishes the Purport [of the Report]
Again and Thinks that Śramaṇas Should Bow to the King
Second Report to the Throne by Director of the Imperial Secretariat
He Chong and Ofﬁcials such as Chu She, Zhuge Hui, Feng Huai,
and Xie Guang
xvi

169
170
171
172
173
176
178
179
180
182
184
186
187
188
188
190
191
191
193
193
193
194
195

Contents

Emperor Cheng’s Second Imperial Decree
Third Report to the Throne Regarding the Issue that [Śramaṇas]
Should Not Bow [to the King] by Ofﬁcials such as Director of the
Imperial Secretariat He Chong and [Left] Supervisor Chu She
[Epilogue]
Letter Given to the Eight Executives to Discuss Buddhist Monks’
Bowing [to the King] by Huan Xuan
The Eight Executives’ Response
Letter Given to Secretariat Director Wang [Mi] to Discuss the Issue
that Buddhist Monks Should Bow to the King by Huan Xuan
Letter in Response to Huan [Xuan] by Secretariat Director Wang [Mi]
Criticism [to Wang Mi] by Huan [Xuan]
Second Response by Lord [Wang Mi]
Second Criticism by Huan [Xuan]
Third Response by Lord [Wang Mi]
Fourth Letter by Huan [Xuan]
Additional Criticism by [Huan Xuan]
Fourth Response by Lord [Wang Mi]
Letter in Response to Huan Xuan Regarding the Issue that
Śramaṇas Should Not Bow to the King by Dharma Teacher Huiyuan
of Mount Lu, together with Huan Xuan’s Two Letters
Letter Given to Dharma Teacher [Hui]yuan by Huan Xuan
Response [to Huan Xuan] by Dharma Teacher [Hui]yuan
Response [to Huiyuan] by Defender-in-Chief Huan [Xuan], together
with the Decree to Stop Śramaṇas from Bowing [to the King]
Imperial Decree to Allow Buddhist Monks Not to Bow [to the King]
by Huan [Xuan, Former King of] Chu
[Response to Huan Xuan’s Decree by Bian Sizhi and Yuan Kezhi]
[Decree by Huan Xuan]
[Response to Huan Xuan’s Decree by Ma Fan and Bian Sizhi]
[Decree by Huan Xuan]
[Response to Huan Xuan’s Decree by Bian Sizhi]
[Decree by Huan Xuan]
[Response to Huan Xuan’s Decree by Bian Sizhi]

197
198
199
199
200
201
202
203
205
209
211
214
215
216
217
217
218
222
223
223
224
224
225
225
226
226

xvii

Contents

Letter Given to Huan Xuan to Discuss the Evaluation of Śramaṇas
by Huiyuan of Mount Lu, together with Huan Xuan’s Decree
Decree Given to the Staff to Intend to Select Buddhist Monks
by Regent Huan Xuan
Letter Given to Defender-in-Chief Huan [Xuan] to Discuss the
Evaluation of Śramaṇas by Dharma Teacher [Hui]yuan
Letter Given to Huan Xuan to Discuss that the Provincial Ofﬁce
Requests to Register Śramaṇas by Dharma Teacher Zhi Daolin
Report to Emperor Wu of the Qi Dynasty to Discuss the Issue of the
Inspection and Examination of Buddhist Monks by Shi Daosheng
of Tianbao Temple

Fascicle Thirteen
Essentials for Believing in the Dharma by Palace Secretary Chi [Chao]
The Family Code: Clariﬁcation of Two Issues by Chamberlain for
the Attendants Yan Yanzhi
[Issue One]
[Issue Two]
Sunshine by Wang Gai

227
227
228
230
232
235
253
254
254
255

Fascicle Fourteen
Written Appeal to Mount Tai by Zhu Daoshuang
Written Appeal to the Demon by Shi Zhijing
Written Appeal to Destroy Demons Composed by Shi Baolin
Afterword to the Discourse for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of
Buddhism by Shi Sengyou

289

Glossary

329

Notes

267
273
281
299

Bibliography

339

A List of the Volumes of the BDK English Tripiṭaka (First Series)

371

Index

xviii

341

Translator’s Introduction
The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism (Taishō
shinshū daizōkyō, volume 52, number 2102, 1a3–96b3) is a compilation by Shi
Sengyou (445–518), a Vinaya master of the Liang dynasty (502–557) consisting
mainly of discourses, critical responses to anti-Buddhist discourses, correspondence, reports to the emperor, family codes, and written appeals by Buddhist
laypeople and monks, mostly from the Eastern Jin dynasty (317–420) through
the second decade of the sixth century of the Liang dynasty. These writings
were intended to protect the Buddhist Dharma from interference by those who
valued the teachings based on Confucianism and Daoism, and by the political
powers of the time, as well as in order to promulgate Buddhism.
Sengyou was deeply concerned about delusions and misinformation held by
anti-Buddhists, which he saw as a major cause of negative views toward
Buddhism. In his Afterword (pp. 289–298 in this volume) Sengyou lists six
kinds of secular scholars’ doubts about Buddhism: (1) what the Buddhist scriptures expound is preposterous and unveriﬁable; (2) since one’s spirit perishes
when one dies, it is hardly possible that the spirit will transmigrate in the three
periods of existence; (3) no one has never seen the real Buddha and his teaching
has no beneﬁt to state governance; (4) the Dharma teaching did not exist in
ancient times and emerged only recently during the Han period; (5) the Buddhist
teaching should exist only in the region of western tribes and its ediﬁcation is
not for Chinese people; and (6) the Dharma was rarely practiced in the Han and
Wei periods and began ﬂourishing only during the Jin period.
Sengyou believed that “The Way is propagated by people, and the teaching
is clariﬁed by literature.” By collecting literary works from distinctive scholars
of former ages that were intended to dispel wrong views toward Buddhism,
which included expressions to protect Buddhism and were advantageous in protecting the Three Treasures, he hoped to disperse these doubts.

xix

Translator’s Introduction

Historical Background

Buddhist teachings transmitted to China before the Common Era were initially
practiced only among non-Chinese groups. During the Han dynasty, the Buddhist
clergy consisted of śramaṇas from India or Central Asia, and there was not a
large number of Chinese followers. Around the middle of the third century we
see the remarkable activities of a Chinese Buddhist group led by Zhu Shixing
(or Zixing). More conspicuous activities of Chinese monks can be seen during
the time of the Eastern Jin dynasty. Thanks to eminent Chinese monks such
as Zhi Dun (314–366), Daoan (312–385), and Huiyuan (334–416), who
expended great effort to spread Buddhist teachings, the number of Chinese
monks notably increased. Intellectuals who were well versed in the Chinese
classics, such as the Zhuangzi and the Laozi Dao de jing and who enjoyed
the “pure talks” (qingtan), became increasingly devoted to Buddhism. By
the early sixth century, when Sengyou compiled The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Buddhism had come to ﬂourish in
both north and south China.
The growth of Buddhism consequently caused serious conﬂicts between
Buddhists and non-Buddhists in political and social arenas and thought.
People became more aware that the Buddhist teachings differed signiﬁcantly
from Confucianism and Daoism in many ways. Moreover, lay Buddhists’
enthusiasm resulted in the construction of many Buddhist temples and pagodas, which caused ﬁnancial burden on civil administration and society, and
the increasing number of monks who engaged in secular life and business
contributed to the deterioration of the sangha. In the north, where non-Chinese
groups had ruled continuously since the collapse of the Western Jin dynasty
(316), government reaction to the ascendancy of Buddhism resulted in
Emperor Wu’s persecution of Buddhists between 446 and 452 during the
Northern Wei dynasty. In the south, where the Chinese established political
power successively, there was no such large-scale Buddhist persecution, but
there were longstanding serious conﬂicts between Buddhists and nonBuddhists. Accordingly, Buddhist groups became the target of criticism from
anti-Buddhist groups and were compelled to explain their positions and
protect Buddhism at the same time.

xx

Translator’s Introduction

Characteristics and
Significance

The Collection is widely known as an invaluable source to examine the early
development of Chinese Buddhism. It offers much insight into how Buddhism,
a foreign religion, was accepted in Chinese society, mainly by intellectuals
of the southern dynasties, and how these early adopters understood the
Buddhist tenets in relation to their abundant knowledge of the Chinese classics.
In fact, we ﬁnd various issues encountered by Buddhists to be deeply rooted
in Chinese society and belief: whether or not the spirit perishes after death;
the causality of reward and retribution in the three periods of existence; the
differing viewpoints of the sovereign and of monks; Chinese monks’ beliefs
and Chinese customs and thought on such notions as ﬁlial piety, taking the
tonsure, and styles of personal deportment (such as manners of sitting, eating,
and dress); lay Buddhists’ religious practices; a ruler’s attempt to recruit
monks for his brain trust; and criticism of Daoism.
A notable aspect of this work is that Buddhist tenets are explained using
Confucian and Daoist terminology. It is widely known that geyi, a way to
interpret Buddhist scriptures by means of the philosophy asserted in the Laozi
Dao de jing and the Zhuangzi, was popular during the Eastern Jin period. It
began with Zhu Faya and Kang Falang who studied with Daoan under Fotudeng. Even though Daoan criticized geyi, it is known that Daoan allowed
only Huiyuan, his eminent disciple, to explain Buddhist doctrines using nonBuddhist texts. We see many examples of this tendency in this work.
In addition to geyi, throughout the Hongmingji authors quote from the
Chinese classics and historical records to support their arguments. Wherever
possible I have tried to indicate in the notes the sources of these quotations
together with available English translations.
Moreover, The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of
Buddhism is a valuable source to examine the early stage of Daoism in the
south, particularly the Daoist school called the Way of the Five Pecks of
Grain (Wudoumijiao) or the Way of the Celestial Master (Tianshidao). For
instance, in Fascicle Eight (pp. 3–39 in this volume), through Shi Xuanguang’s
criticism of Daoism, Daoist practices and rituals such as the “unity of the
yin-yang vapors” (heqi) and the “Mud and Ash Fête” (tutanzhai) are described.

xxi

Translator’s Introduction

In addition, we ﬁnd the titles of each position of the organization together
with their derivations. A scarcity of clearly dated Daoist sources for studies
of early Daoism is a crucial problem in current scholarship. Although the
Collection is a Buddhist work from chieﬂy the fourth and ﬁfth centuries, it
also serves well as a primary source for contemporary Daoism.
Finally, it should be noted that this text served as inspiration for Daoxuan
(596–667), who took Sengyou’s compilation as his model in compiling his
own Extensive Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism
(Guang Hongmingji) in 664.

Questions on the
Compilation

The text of The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism
currently circulated consists of fourteen fascicles, with ﬁfty-eight headings.
Sengyou, however, lists this work as consisting of ten fascicles together with
a table of contents, with thirty-three headings, in his compilation Collection
of Records Derived from the Tripiṭaka (Chusanzang jiji), completed around
515 in the last years of his life. The Buddhist catalogue Zhongjing mulu compiled by Fajing in 593 lists this text as being comprised of ten fascicles as
well, but Fei Changfang’s catalogue Lidai sanbaoji completed in 597 records
the Collection as consisting of fourteen fascicles. Questions about the completion of the fourteen-fascicle text are still controversial and require further
research.

Note on the Translation

Citations from the Taishō shinshū daizōkyō are listed in this form: Taishō
serial number; volume number; page; register (a, b, or c); line number(s).
For example, Taizi ruiying benqi jing, T.185.3:472c1–483a13.
Transliterations of Chinese language follow the Pinyin system. Japanese
Romanization follows the modiﬁed Hepburn system as employed in Kenkyūsha’s New Japanese-English Dictionary (third and later editions).

xxii

THE COLLECTION FOR THE PROPAGATION
AND CLARIFICATION OF BUDDHISM
VOLUME II
Compiled by Shi Sengyou at Jianchu Temple in Yangdu
during the Liang Dynasty

Fascicle Eight
The Discourse on Debating to Remove
Hindrances (Bianhuo lun)
and the Preface by
Shi Xuanguang

The trichiliocosm is remote and myriad transformations are limitless. People
temporarily ﬁnd their enjoyment in the dreamland, infected and misled by
worldly fame. If the perception of objects (Skt. pratyaya-lakṣaṇa) increases,
like mist, how can they discern the brilliant right [way]? The weakening of
simple and sincere customs causes all the devils to compete with each other
in confusion. When one seeks glory by means of falsehood and deception,
he will assuredly commit the ﬁve rebellious acts. When he leads ignorant
people by force, he must apply the six atrocious methods. Then he is ﬁlled
with the pestilent force like dust in a dust storm and brings various troubles
upon himself.
I remember that the eastern Wu region suffered from hardships caused by
the Water Transcendents [led by Sun En (d. 402 C.E.)]; in the western tribal
land [Zhang Lu] gave the title “spiritual soldier” (guizu) [to his followers];
in the groves of the Minyue region the obscene ways of seed people (zhongmin) remain;1 and in the time of the Han dynasty the people were moved by
the mourning song for the son (sizi).2 Loyal, wise men sigh in disappointment.
The government has been maltreated and is about to come to an end. Even
if we were to pick up [grains of] sand and grasses from the ground, how
could we count the sins we have committed? People of insigniﬁcant and
superﬁcial learning do not know the foundation of the teaching. The erroneous
words of the worldly teaching defy and conceal the Three Treasures (i.e.,
Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha). The streets are full of resentment of our dear
spiritual people (guimin; i.e., followers of the Way of the Five Pecks of
Grain). All of this is none other than the ashes of Mount Yan and the dregs
of the Yellow and Luo Rivers, and is together submerged in dangerous difﬁculty. I am very sorrowful about it. I will try to explain what happened in

3

48a6

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

the past, in the hope of mirroring the future. I will illuminate the profound
native land for children who are confused [in foreign lands and who do not
know the way to go home], expose the subtle purport beyond this world,
secretly spread a happy breeze, and judge situations of [the dualism of] self
and other. Is this something that can be presented and copied in words?

48b

To Ban [the Circulation of] Scriptures and to Raise their Price—
The First Rebellious Act
The profound scriptures (i.e., Buddhist scriptures) unfold like clouds and
pierce through the beautiful world of emptiness and existence. What among
the sages’ achievements would not have derived from these [scriptures]?
[The scriptures] are really the deep sea for those who learn [Buddhism] and
the sun and moon for sentient beings. Therefore, Sadāprarudita Bodhisattva
illuminates [sentient beings] equally with benevolence, makes a ﬂash of
lightning in the nether world, puts an end to devils in a dangerous marsh,
sets a divine boat aﬂoat with the winds of faith, and delivers [beings of] this
ﬂeeting world from the sea of suffering.
I have heard that when Daoist scriptures are composed worldly ideas are
blended into them. Since the traces of the [Daoist] teaching are perverse and
sinister, [the scriptures] have not been transmitted [to the public]. It is strange
that the ediﬁcation of Daoism is futilely banned and yet we see today that
those who study [Daoism] ignore the strict rules and give the scriptures in
order to obtain gold and silk fabric. If a poor man comes to the Daoists they
will not see him even if he dies. They are greedy for proﬁt and have no mercy.
No one goes against [reason] more than this.
Moreover, their art is obscene and evil; it is not clean. They consider the
grinding of teeth to be a heavenly drum, swallowed spit to be [like water
from] a sweet spring, horse excrement to be numinous ﬁrewood, and old
mice to be the raw material for a transcendent elixir. Even if one avails himself
of this [teaching] to seek the Way, how could he attain it?
Formerly, the First Emperor of the Qin dynasty and Emperor Wu of the
Han dynasty (141–187 B.C.E.) could not lighten their bodies [to become a
transcendent]. [The First Emperor of the Qin dynasty] sent Xu Fu and
[Emperor Wu of the Han dynasty] sent Gongsun [Qing] to a very distant
place, beyond the clouds and waves, and [both emperors] ordered them to
offer a prayer and a greeting to communicate with transcendents, but there
4

Fascicle Eight

was no result [in either case]. When we tranquilize our minds and remove
desire, [we see that] facts and the Way are next to each other. Would it then
be necessary to make efforts to run around, swallow spit, or grind one’s teeth?

To Recklessly Claim the True Way—The Second Rebellious Act
Those who try to reach the pale red-colored clouds [in order to become
a transcendent] talk of the merits of alchemy and elixirs. Those who try to
open and clarify the pure intelligence count on the energy of a marvelous
herb called danghua.3 Although [Daoists] maintain these [practices] and consider them to be true, they have not been able to avoid the ﬁnal consequence
(i.e., death). Furthermore Zhang Ling absurdly called himself the Heavenly
Master, but since he insulted people as well as spirits, he received retribution
while still alive; at the end of the Xingping era (195 C.E.) of the Han dynasty
he was swallowed by a python. His son Heng ran about looking for his body
but could not locate it. [Heng] was afraid that [his father’s] pure talk would
be besmirched by [his death]. So he set up a false expedient: in order to show
the trace of [Zhang Ling’s] mysterious transformation, he bound [the legs
of] a live crane and placed the animal on a precipice. After the scheme was
complete, he set a date to make it public. In the ﬁrst year of the Jian’an era
(196 C.E.) he sent messengers [to the parishes] to announce that the Heavenly
Master would ascend to the Mysterious Capital [where divine transcendents
dwell] on the seventh day of the ﬁrst month. The followers of the Way of the
Five Pecks of Grain and those who make a living by hunting in the mountains
gathered like ants outside the door [of the temple]. The parishioners of Mount
Yuntai (in present-day Jiangsu province) bowed their heads to the ground
twice and said, “We have humbly heard that the sage (i.e., Zhang Ling) will
travel to the Mysterious Capital. We followers will be separated from his
blessing and salvation forever. Corpus spirits (shijin) will surely enjoy themselves4 and [the world] will precisely be as dark as the Nine Murks (i.e., the
bottom of the earth).
Heng entered [the temple] and after a while came out. He lied to the people,
telling them that [Zhang Ling] had said, “I will turn the carriage toward
Chenhua. Each of you, return to your parish, purify your mind, sustain the
practice, keep the Master in mind, and think of the Way.” Heng then surreptitiously untied [the crane] and the crane ﬂew straight up into the air. The
followers, including those who make a living by hunting [in the mountains],
5

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

were ignorant and foolish, and all said that [Zhang Ling] had ascended to
[the realm of] immortals. [This example shows how] the living take advantage
of the dead for proﬁt and cheat Heaven and Earth.

48c

To Explain Sins by Means of the Union of the Yin and Yang Energies
(i.e., Sexual Practices)—The Third Rebellious Act
When one clears his mind of all feelings and removes desire, his aspiration
for the Way becomes bright and true. A group of nameless, ignoble people
recklessly composed the Yellow Books.5 They bow down and lightly reproach
those who deliver an evil, unprovoked magic formula.
(The magic formula says, “The Way of Heaven comes to an end. After ﬁfteen days have passed, the sun and moon are bright. As they come out, it is
tranquil and deep; as they go in, it is dark and profound. When energy comes
in, the true energy is opened. When the spiritual energy spreads out, the energy
of the Way is exercised. All vicious spirits vanish. He who sees me will become
blind and he who hears me will become deaf. He who dares to impose upon
me will receive disaster instead. I am fortunate and he is unfortunate.”)
In the year of Jiazi there was an imperial decree, and in response a religious
register was created. Men and women became intimate with each other (i.e.,
engaged in sexual behavior), and there was no distinction between high and
low. Lu Xiujing (406–477 C.E.) of the Wu region frequently practiced this
[incantation].
Then they open the gate of destiny (mingmen) [where the foundation of
life resides], hold a baby of the perfected, and adopt postures like the “winding
dragon” and the “playing tiger.” Through taking postures like these, they
[claim that they can] prevent calamities and disperse misfortune. Is this true?
Is it possible to do so? Yi Jun of the Han period practiced this [incantation]
as the Way; he greatly misled the people and plunged them into disaster, and
was exiled to Dunhuang. Later, as for Sun En [of the Eastern Jin dynasty],
his teaching was much more dissolute; [relations between] men and women
became disordered and wild, no different from those between male and female
birds and beasts.
[People] are easily drawn by visual objects, form and color, and it is
difﬁcult to eliminate deﬁlements, not to mention those who mix the [yin and
yang] energies at the cinnabar ﬁeld (dantian; i.e., the abdomen), who attempt
to prolong life at the transcendent cave, who give full swing to a weapon
6

Fascicle Eight

and pass through the prohibition of the jade gate (i.e., the vulva), and who
go to the extremity of adopting abnormal postures like the “winding dragon”
and the “playing tiger.” When alive they have no principles of loyalty, and
after death they suffer in the blue court (i.e., a euphemism for hell, located
on the east side of Mount Tai). I sincerely wish that the bright Heaven will
investigate and reveal these fellows; all things, including myself, will be
upright and clean and will not go against the instructions of the unseen world.

To Presume Upon the Way and to Rise in Revolt—The Fourth
Rebellious Act
It is difﬁcult to understand the ultimate truth and easy to be deluded by the
glory of fame. Relations [in the secular world] are more signiﬁcant than deep
waters or high mountains, and virtue is less important than wind and dew.
People just like the rebels of the Yellow Turbans hoped [to soar just as] a
hawk does [and usurp the power of] the Han royal family, but on the contrary
they despised bright Heaven. For this sin they were all executed. Subsequently,
there was [Zhang] Zi Lu, who also set forth the Way of Spiritual Beings
(guidao). Yet the gods did not help him and he was gored by an elk. After
that, Sun En also claimed the Purple Way (zidao). He did not care about his
lowly status and inferior position and intended to attain the nobility of the
emperor, [a dream as intangible as] a cloud or a sound in a dark cave; he issued
absurd ideas in empty profundity. The Water Transcendent (i.e., Sun En) confused others and killed sinless people regardless of their age. He ruined the
country and destroyed the people. Isn’t this cruel and inhuman? Therefore
Emperor Wu of the [Liu-]Song dynasty thought of this and sighed with deep
feelings. Then he ﬂew a thousand li like a dragon and crossed over the three
large rivers like a tiger. He mounted a surprise attack and vanquished the
witchcraft group without any special effort in twelve days. Sentient beings
were pleased and the grasses and trees enjoyed the spring light.

Making Petitions Harms Virtue—The Fifth Rebellious Act
The highest ediﬁcation, even a very minor aspect of it, cannot be falsely
accused and cannot be concealed. If one confers a posthumous title to the
spirit of the dead or strives to follow the illustrious virtue, if there is no true
essence in the Way, he just recklessly chases after unreality. Then [people]
say that [the spirit of a dead person] has gone to the east, they get drunk and

7

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

bring [the deceased’s] sins to an end. Isn't such a bigoted and obscure thing
vile and unusual?
Moreover, regarding the issue that the merit one makes can be transferred
to his ancestors of seven generations [through the Yellow Register Fête (a
memorial service)], the purport of this passage is shallow and superﬁcial.
[Some people] ask to escape from [the physical labor of] carrying sandstones
and become spiritual [soldiers] (i.e., followers) of Daoism for a long time.
The intelligence of sages thoroughly investigates the subtle [reason]; if
there is a thought, this is illuminated. Why is it necessary to bother the libationary (jijiu; i.e., clergy of the Way of the Five Pecks of Grain), or to waste
paper and ink unreasonably [in order to make a petition to the heavenly ofﬁce]?
If one must submit a petition and later a judgment is given, we know for the
ﬁrst time that the Lord of the Way has no ability to profoundly examine things,
and the heavenly administrative staff does not possess the function of the
heavenly eyes. [The spiritual ofﬁcials of] the Three Ofﬁces (san’guan, the
ofﬁces of Heaven, Earth, and Water) tire of attending to legal cases and spiritual
ofﬁcers are exhausted by arresting [sinners]. To hear a petition is originally
intended for those who are suddenly taken ill, but if one submits a petition
on the day of wuchen it never reaches [the Most High Lord Lao]. Since the
petition does not reach him, the petitioner will be wronged and driven to death.
Alas, it is sad! This is truly the ﬁfth rebellious act.

49a

To Be Afraid of Evil Spirits and Wear Talismans is the Atrocity
of Lawlessness—The First
For those who follow the correct Way sincerely, even recalcitrant evil
spirits reform their [harmful] force. For this reason, sages of the superlative
degree and people of lofty wisdom are devoid of emotions through myriad
changes. Therefore they can profoundly enjoy music played with instruments
made of metal or stone and sleep in mists and rosy clouds (i.e., nature). This
is because their pure sincerity touches [Heaven] and is understood [by
Heaven]. How can wearing [talismans] make [sages and wise people experience] this? The words of the [Daoist] scriptures falsely exaggerate the harm
caused by spirits. [The scripture] says:
If one carries the talisman of the Grand Terminus (Taijizhang) on the
left and the iron sword of Kunwu on the right, when he points to the

8

Fascicle Eight

sun, the sun stops shining, and when he imitates a spiritual being, he
can cover an area even a thousand li away with blood.

If one receives the Yellow Book and the Red Writing (Chizhang, a talisman
register written in red ink), [Daoists] say that he is a numinous transcendent.
They put on shoes made of stone and enter the oratory ( jingshi), yet they
cannot have an audience with the Most High [Lord Lao]. Regarding the
matter of using a talisman to protect one against evil spirits on the six jia
days and bowing one’s head to ground in a toilet, (just as Guo Jingchun said
that those of the Daoist school go into a toilet to exorcise evil spirits but in
the end they are unsuccessful), they are senseless and confused. How could
this be the way for those who know rules and [have] integrity? I have heard
about wearing talismans. In former days, as a group symbol, there were the
yellow signs used by Zhang Jiao’s [group], the dark red-colored signs worn
by [Zhang] Zi Lu’s [group], the purple marks [used by] by Lu Song’s [group],
and the tactics called guxu (“solitary void”) [used] by Sun En’s [group]. They
all powerfully confused the emperor’s troops, but in the end their people and
spiritual beings were all exterminated.

To Institute Imposing a Tax or Donation on the People is the Atrocity
of Skillful Deception—The Second
The teaching of the [Way of the] Five Pecks of Grain was founded by the
Heavenly Master (i.e., Zhang Ling). Later it became vicious and corrupt. In
addition, his group established [the system to collect grain as a tax from] the
followers. People of the world loathed and feared [the group]. Therefore,
[the Daoists] Zi Ming and Du [Zi]gong were both worried about [being swallowed] by an evil python [just as Zhang Ling had been].
Moreover, as for the Mud and Ash Fête (Tutanzhai), the ritual was begun
by Zhang Lu. Since it was difﬁcult to edify the Di and Yi tribespeople, he
established this ritual in which the practitioners tumble about in mud like a
donkey, put yellow alkaline mud on their faces, bump their heads against a
pillar and hang down, beating their bodies, just as clay is fashioned. This rite
is designated to the borderland; it should not be performed in China.
At the beginning of the Yixi era (405 C.E.), there was Wang Gongqi, who
was greedy for treasures. He avoided ascetic practices and excluded beating
[his body] in private [from the practice]. Lu Xiujing (406–477 C.E.) of the

9

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

Wu area was quite aware that the ritual was originally abnormal, but still he
smeared mud on his forehead and hung down with his hands bound behind
his back. This is the extremity of idiotic and abnormal practices. I would be
happy if you do not speak of this.

To Open a Kitchen at the Gate of a Tomb is the Atrocity of Not Being
Benevolent—The Third
To open the city gate and give great alms to the people is understood to
be virtuous.6 In the lingering vapor of the heterodox path (i.e., the Way of
the Five Pecks of Grain) they open a kitchen at the gate of a tomb and give
food to pitiful people, which becomes a disorderly situation. Formerly Zhang
Zi Lu inaugurated a meritorious event in Guanzhong (present-day Shaanxi
province) and gathered a large crowd of libationers and spiritual soldiers.
(Spiritual soldiers [guizu], spiritual people [guimin], spiritual ofﬁcers
[guili], and the Way of Spiritual Beings [Guidao] were created by [Zhang]
Zi Lu, who looked down upon the Di and Yi tribes. Furthermore, the titles
Heavenly Master [Tianshi], Succeeding Master [Xishi], Heir Master [sishi],
and Master of Three Daughters [Sannüshi] were eulogistic titles created by
Zhang Lu for himself. Moreover, the Woman of the Way [Daogu], the Man
of the Way [Daonan], the Capped Female Ofﬁcials [Guannüguan], the Father
of the Way [Daofu], the Mother of the Way [Daomu], the Spiritual Lord
(Shenjun), and the [True Lord’s] Seed People [(Zhenjun) zhongmin] are
names given to followers after they perform the ritual sexual practices of the
union of the yin and yang energies. In addition, the People of Grain [Mimin],
the Family of Grain [Mixing], the Supervisor of Merit [Dugong], and the
Libationer [Jijiu] are titles given in order to placate followers in hard times.
Again, the Deﬁcient of the Way [Pindao; i.e., the humble self-reference of
a Daoist priest] and the Dharma Master of the Three Grottoes [Sandong fashi]
are titles created by Senghui of Chang’an. Moveover, the Learned Elder
[Xiansheng], the People of the Way [Daomin], and the King of the Transcendent Lord [Xiangongwang] were created by Wang Lingqi, a man of Moling
county. Furthermore, [the titles] Daoist Priest [Daoshi], Bandit of Ants [Yize],
Controller of Wine [Zhiijiu], and Bandit of Grain [Mize] are named by what
the people consider. Moreover, regarding the Dharma Master [Fashi], the
Dharma Preacher [Dujiang], and the Attendant of Scriptures [Shijing], Lu

10

Fascicle Eight

Xiujing established these names relying on Buddhism and following the
world. The Lord of Heaven [Tiangong], the Lord of Earth [Digong], and the
Vassal [Chen] or Concubine [Qie] are also designated. The Way of Great
Peace [Taipingdao], the Way of the Five Pecks of Grain, the Great Way
[Dadao], the Purple Way [Zidao], and the Teacher of Spiritual Beings [Guishen
shijun] were false prestigious titles created during the rebellious times. In
addition, Luan Da of the Jiaodong region (present-day Shandong province)
was appointed to the post of General of Five Proﬁts [Wuli jiangjun]. Even
though he was installed as a feudal lord he had none of the principles of a
high-ranking ofﬁcial. By the end of the reign of Emperor Wu of the Han
dynasty, this title was no longer used.)
[Zhang Zi Lu] drank [wine] excessively and consequently fell into a
drunken frenzy. His disgrace spread far and wide, and eventually reached
the far-distant Min region [of the Ba Shu area (present-day Sichuan province)].
Liu Zhang, [a prince of the Ba Shu area,] admonished [Zhang Zi Lu], “Even
the numinous transcendent refrains from taking pine nuts and the mist of
clouds in order to preserve his life, yet you lead a luxurious life and relish
good food and drink. How can you respect the Way?” When [Zhang] Zi Lu
heard this, he was deeply resentful but felt ashamed in his mind. He punished
himself and cleared roads. He imparted [this practice] to Daoists in the world.
Later, in an assembly, he submitted a written form in order to prevent such
difﬁculties. Concurrently, he established the rules of kitchen in which [the
consumption of] wine is limited to three sheng.7 From the end of the Han
dynasty onward, he was called the Controller of Wine.
At the time of Wang Lingqi the category of the sin was removed. The
Learned Elders and the People of the Way were bestowed with [wine]. This
is similar to [the case where] although [Luan Da] had the nobility of the
[General of] Five Proﬁts, [his name] became the name of a monster.

To Deliver Living Creatures from Distress and Suffering is the
Atrocity of Wild Imagination—The Fourth
The physical body is more fragile than the calyx of ripe fruit in fall and
life is more transitory than ice in spring. The wind of karma blows widely
and vigorously in the transitory realm. Therefore, Lord Jing [of Qi state] left
[his life] in conditioned fate,8 and Sunzi recorded that [Lord Jing] was a

11

49b

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

walking corpse. Deluded people and those of shallow learning are not aware
of the Great Law (i.e., Dharma). When they have an illness, fall into decline,
or experience disaster, they are much more deluded and [thus] deepen the
cause [of their misfortune] under the inﬂuence of evil spirits; they consider
that a spiritual myna bird is the cause of disaster and try to turn their disasters
over to the distant Milky Way; [they think it is inauspicious] to see a ﬁshing
star (diaoxing; i.e., a night-traveling prostitute) at the place where water falls
in drops. [Therefore, when they see such a case] they wash the talisman
written in red ink (i.e., the Red Writing) in clean water of Mount Hua. Then
they frown and revile the spirits of the unseen world, saying, “The messengers
of the Three [Spiritual] Ofﬁces have already sent [the spirit of] the dead.”
One who is going to die will naturally die. To vainly mourn [in this way] is
nothing other than throwing away money. This is really only the libationer’s
scheme to proﬁt from [donations of] clothes and food, and they exploit people
just as a silk worm consumes mulberry leaves. It is loss for both the public
and private sectors. It results in startling the highest sage by a burning house
and manipulating people’s emotion with an elegy.

To Commit a Sin in a Dream is the Atrocity of Ignorance—The Fifth
Human beings originate with the function of consciousness as the foundation. The amount of grass and trees is not greater than the number of times
they have abandoned their lives. In this case, even the great earth, hills, and
mountains are all my former traces. A broad, blue river is all my tears and
blood. Observing from this point of view, who would not be my close friend?
[Nevertheless,] if someone sees in a dream someone who has passed away,
then people say that it is a ghost or an apparition. Even though human beings
differ from spiritual beings, both are assuredly the same in arising and extinction. Their feelings of kindness and affection sometimes inﬂuence each other.
All evil spirits are ill-mannered and do not understand the law of submission
and opposition. [Daoists] summon and feed spiritual ofﬁcers and soldiers,
and report to [the Lord of Heaven] in written form in order to judge them
(i.e., the evil spirits). They can cut off disembodied spirits, but who can illuminate their minds? I hope that in future you will not uphold superstitious
words. Then it causes [the departed spirits of your ancestors] to have no
thought of stopping a meal before ﬁnishing in Heaven and [hell beings] to
calm the voice of disastrous thoughts in the icy river [of hell].
12

Fascicle Eight

To Hastily Make Cold and Hot is the Atrocity of Ferocity and
Hypocrisy—The Sixth
To profoundly calm the mind and keep silence is the true virtue among
myriad acts. Generally, sentient beings in this world have no mercy. Those
who are ﬁerce, cruel, evil, and vicious vie with one another in making talismans.
They hang [the talisman] on a gate or attach it to a door and deceive ignorant
people. Lofty, wise people and intellectuals are still not content with this.
[Daoists] make the Yellow God (huangshen) and the transgressed talismans
(yuezhang),9 and with them they kill [evil] spirits. Furthermore, they set up
the Red Writing, which is used to kill people. Their interest is only to please
human nature without taking disastrous sin into account. Regarding [the results
of] making conspiracies and harboring jealousy, old patterns are found in
[Buddhist] scriptures. [Such people] will go to the great hell of pincers after
death and will be reborn as an owl or a shrike, or they will be dumb [upon
their rebirth]. Their spirits and skeletons will decay in confusion and drown
and perish [in sins] eternally. Who is aware of this?
For our dear spiritual people of Daoism, the characteristics of the Way are
not so. The issues must be questioned. Although severe admonition is bitter,
wise people should submissively listen to it. Therefore, I have brieﬂy conveyed
my best regards. I hope you will try to think about them repeatedly. If you can
correct your conduct and change your plan, you will be in the same practice
of the great ediﬁcation (i.e., Buddhism). If you cannot adequately reform yourself, please wait for a person of the highest virtue [to appear] and prepare
yourself to be illuminated by the melody of his song (i.e., his teaching) in order
to understand the long night [of spiritual darkness]. Is this (i.e., the teaching)
something that I can explain with my weak words today?

The Discourse on Extinguishing
Delusions (Miehuo lun) by
Liu Xie, Record Keeper
at Dongguan County

A person composed the Discourse on the Triple Destruction (Sanpo lun).10
Its purpose and testimonies are vulgar and its literary style is philistine. Even
though people of profound knowledge ascertain the highest principles, people
of shallow ideas are confused by groundless statements. The vulgar views

13

49c

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

of townspeople [such as those found in the Discourse on the Triple Destruction] are truly not worthy of argument, but on second thought I am afraid
that if ordinary people hear [this discourse] they may think it is true. For the
time being I will take up what can be adopted from [the Discourse on the
Triple Destruction] and brieﬂy give my correct account.
The Discourse on the Triple Destruction says, “The excellent point of the
Daoist teaching lies in putting all one’s thought in the attainment of the One
and becoming a sage without death. On the other hand, the wonderful point
of the Buddhist teaching lies in samādhi, in which one attains supernatural
powers and is able to wish for no rebirth. Death is named nirvana. I have
never seen a person who learns about death and yet does not die.”
The Discourse on Extinguishing Delusions says, “The true and the false
of these two teachings (i.e., Buddhism and Daoism) are evident and easily
argued. In the Buddhist teaching one trains the mind, while in the Daoist
teaching one exercises the body. The body that must die is conﬁned within
a time period and a place. The spirit is boundless and can go around the circumference of the world twice [in a single moment]. Bright people avail
themselves of boundlessness and teach others with distinctive wisdom. Dark
people feel a persistent attachment to [their bodies] that must die, and deceive
others with [the ﬁction of becoming] a ﬂying transcendent. The heart of the
art of the transcendent is food and medicine. [Buddhist] conduct based on
wisdom begins with meditation. Since meditation trains the true consciousness,
it is exquisite and delicate, and nirvana can be wished for. Medicine, on the
other hand, detains the impermanent body [temporally in this world], and
consequently even if one puts all his thought [toward attainment of the One],
he will be thrown into disorder endlessly. If one abandons the wonderful
treasury (i.e., Buddhism), loses his wisdom, and nourishes his body, when
we prove it on the basis of principles we can know [his course] is false. If
his body ﬂies into boundless space and his spirit, which remains in the dark,
ﬂies up to Heaven like a hawk, how could he escape from being a bird? In
the wonderful fruition of nirvana, the Way is simply eternal. How could the
assertion of ‘learning about death’ be about analyzing principles?”
The Discourse on the Triple Destruction says, “If it is said that a prince
is the founder of the [Buddhist] teaching, then he did not take the tonsure
yet he causes others to shave their heads; he did not give up his wife, yet he

14

Fascicle Eight

causes others to cut off their posterity (i.e., to stay unmarried and childless);
this is really laughable. We clearly know that Buddhism is precisely the art
to exterminate evils. I have humbly learned that, regarding the virtue of gentlemen, our bodies, down to each hair and every bit of skin, are received from
our parents and therefore we must not presume to damage them; this is the
beginning of ﬁlial piety.”11
The Discourse on Extinguishing Delusions says, “The prince gave up his
wife and took the tonsure. This matter is evidenced in Buddhist scriptures.
Isn’t it deceptive to call white black? What Buddhist ﬁlial piety covers is
probably more extensive. Reason is due to the mind, and has nothing to do
with one’s hair. If a person has a persistent attachment to his or her hair and
disregards their mind, what can he or she take hold of for ﬁlial piety? Formerly,
[the two brothers] Taibo and Yuzhong cut their hair short and tattooed their
bodies [in order to abdicate the throne for their younger brother Jili].12 The
Master (i.e., Confucius) praised them both for their highest virtue and their
timely conduct.13 Wise people in the secular world should practice worldly
decorum, but [the two brothers’ conduct,] cutting their hair to abdicate the
throne, [has been transmitted] as the praiseworthy anecdote of sages and
saints, not to mention the teaching of prajñā. Conduct [based on this] is more
clearly well-timed; the fruition of highest wisdom (i.e., enlightenment) is
more wonderful than abdication in reason. Since [enlightenment] is more
wonderful than abdication in reason, [Buddhist monks] shave their heads
and follow the Way. Since the conduct based on [the teaching of prajñā] is
more clearly well-timed, they abandon worldly conduct and seek the mind.
Judging from the two wise men (i.e., Taibo and Yuzhong), [Buddhist monks]
have no deﬁciency in ﬁlial piety. When you examine it with a sacred state
of mind, of what are you doubtful?”
As for the ﬁrst kind of destruction, [the Discourse on the Triple Destruction] says, “[Buddhism] is something that entered our country and destroys
it. [Buddhist monks] talk nonsense with falsehoods, build [temples] regardless
of the expense, exploit people, empty the National [Treasury], and put people
in distress. Since they do not help the country, the population decreases. If
we see a case where people do not conduct sericulture and yet wear [silk
clothes] or where they do not cultivate land but have food, the country will
go to ruin and the people will become extinct. Because of this, [Buddhism]

15

50a

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

is a failure; [Buddhist monks cause] losses and waste things in daily use.
There is no beneﬁt at all; even the suffering from the ﬁve kinds of disasters
is no worse than that caused by them.”14
The Discourse on Extinguishing Delusions says, “The teaching of Mahayana Buddhism is completely perfect; it probes into the very root of truth and
is the most subtle. Therefore, [this teaching] clariﬁes the twofold truth [of
absolute and relative reality] in order to drive existence away, and speaks of
the three levels of apprehension of emptiness (sankong) in order to put a mark
on nonexistence. The four immeasurable minds (Skt. catur-apramāṇa) promote
people’s distinctive minds. The six pāramitās save people from karmic suffering. Even though you slander them by saying ‘[Buddhist monks] talk nonsense,’ how could you damage the sun and moon (i.e., Buddhism)? They build
Buddhist temples in order to expound and propagate the wonderful teaching.
While the construction work is momentary the teaching lasts a thousand years.
“In former times, when [Sage King] Yu gathered all the lords, many states
presented gems and silk to him. Later, in the epoch of the Warring States
(403–221 B.C.E.), only seven lords (i.e., those of the states of Qin, Chu,
Yan, Qi, Han, Zhao, and Wei) survived. During the Taishi era (96–93 B.C.E.)
[of Emperor Wu of the Han dynasty], the government ﬂourished and every
household was prosperous, too. [Nevertheless,] the disturbance of the Red
Eyebrows caused the land within a thousand li [from the capital city,
Chang’an,] to have no human habitation.15 ‘The country will go to ruin and
the people will become extinct.’ Why is this due to [Buddhism]? In the reign
periods of Hai (i.e., Hu Hai, the second emperor of the Qin dynasty, 209–
207 B.C.E.) and Ying (the third emperor, 207 B.C.E.) one dan of grain cost
a hundred thousand qian. During the reign periods of Emperor Jing (157–
141 B.C.E.) and Emperor Wu [of the Former Han dynasty] the stored grain
became red and rotted. There were few Buddhist monks at the end of the
Qin dynasty, and at the beginning of the Han dynasty there was the Buddhist
teaching. If we analyze [events that happened in] the past and accord [their
causes] to present conditions, how can it be said that [Buddhism] has been
harmful to state affairs?”
As for the second kind of destruction, [the Discourse on the Triple Destruction] says, “[Buddhism] comes into a family and ruins it. [Buddhism] causes

16

Fascicle Eight

a father and his sons to differ from each other in their behavior, brothers to
differ from each other in following rules, [children] to desert their parents, and
the Way of ﬁlial piety ceases, [family members] separate from each other on
sad or pleasant occasions or do not sing or weep together, enmity arises between
kinsmen, a relative in mourning is eternally abandoned, [family members] go
against what they have been taught and violate the right order, and [children]
do not repay [the kindness of their parents, who are as lofty as] Heaven. Nothing
among the ﬁve rebellious acts and impious conduct is worse than these.”
The Discourse on Extinguishing Delusions says, “The principle of ﬁlial
piety is supreme and runs through Buddhist clergy as well as laypeople equally.
Although the Buddhist teaching differs from the non-Buddhist teaching (i.e.,
Confucianism) in conduct, the function of mind is the same in principle. If
my fate falls in the secular realms, I will basically cultivate myself according
to the decorum of Confucianism. When my fate receives the fruition of the
Buddhist Way, I assuredly propagate ﬁlial piety in the pure conduct [of
Buddhism]. Hence, the Lotus Sutra clariﬁes the meaning of conferring with
one’s parents [about becoming a Buddhist monk].16 The Vimalakīrtinirdeśasūtra is an example for learning after hearing.17 How could [Buddhist monks]
forget the foundation?
“There are reasons they do so. They all realize the principles of the mind
and examine and illuminate the human world. [The metaphor of] passing
horses exceeds proverbs.18 A stream aggrieves the superb sage’s heart.19
Therefore, we know that even if we attend our parents with devotion throughout our life, which is as short as the blinking of an eye, there is no salvation
for the disembodied spirit. If we learn the [Buddhist] Way and take our parents
out [of the realm of suffering], then the suffering of the netherworld will
vanish eternally. [Buddhist monks] ascertain that there is no failure in
[Buddha’s] subtle response to us and discern that it is certainly possible to
attain the wonderful fruition.
“Consequently the gravity of matters is weighed; that (i.e., the less important matter) is rejected and this (i.e., the more important matter) is adopted.
Issues such as the rules of mourning [and the funeral] system are executed
in order to commemorate remote ancestors. Even though rites are based on
the mind, they still follow secular customs.

17

50b

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

“In former days when the Three Augusts governed well, they were adored
by [the sage kings] Yao and Shun. When one died, [his corpse] was covered
with pieces of wood and laid in an open ﬁeld, without raising a mound over
it or planting trees around it.20 There is no historical record about a mourner’s
staff (juzhang) or a mourning dress (zhanshuai). How could it be said that
the Three Augusts instructed [the people] to reject ﬁlial piety?
“At the time of the Five Thearchs the mourning [and funeral] system was
brilliantly established, [but] it has not been heard that Yao and Shun performed
a rite and blamed the Three Augusts belatedly [for not having a mourning
and funeral system]. The Three Augusts have never been blamed [for such,
either]. Why is the Buddha alone doubted? The reason the Buddha has no
rule for mourning [and the funeral] system is because his aim is to get rid of
suffering. Why the Three Augusts abolished the mourning practices is because
they followed the sincere and simple customs [of their time]. [Following]
sincere and simple customs is not doubted, yet getting rid of suffering is
reproached. This is what is called one who is inconsistent (chaosan musi)
and who mixes up joy and anger.21 [From this] it is clearly known that the
teachings of the sages are perfectly understood, complying with what people
feel. The Three Augusts did not have the system of mourning practices
because they [followed] the sincere and simple customs [of their time]; the
Five Thearchs formulated the mourning [and funeral] system according to
people’s feelings. Since Śākyamuni [intended to] get rid of suffering, he
abandoned secular customs and returned to the truth. When the traces [of
these sages] are inspected, [we know] there are different paths, but their profound ediﬁcations result in the same point.”
As for the third kind of destruction, [the Discourse on the Triple Destruction] says, “[Buddhism] enters one’s body and destroys it. In the body born
as a human being, there is ﬁrst of all the suffering of injury; second, the pain
of punishment of shaving off the hair; third, the rebellious sin of being impious
to one’s parents; fourth, the sin of extinguishing [one’s family line by not
having] offspring; and ﬁfth, [the sin of] damaging the body, [all because of]
following the Buddhist precepts and learning only impiety. Why do I say
this? The precepts cause [Buddhist monks] to not bow to their parents. They
vie with one another in following them. If a boy becomes a novice (Skt. śrāmaṇera) ﬁrst and later his mother becomes a nun, she must bow down to her

18

Fascicle One

own son. The teaching of discourtesy should be terminated in China. How
could we follow it?”
The Discourse on Extinguishing Delusions says, “The body in which one
dwells and the mind he receives are determined, in reason, by conduct performed in a previous life. Whether someone enters the [Buddhist] Way or
stays in the secular life is, in truth, linked with the causality [of his circumstances]. For this reason, Śākyamuni appeared in the world and his ediﬁcation
diffuses throughout Heaven and the human world. The trace of the [Buddhist]
Way is testiﬁed to both in governing a country and ruling a family. I have
never heard that all the people of the world renounce the world at the same
time, because [each person] varies in giving rise to faith. Therefore there are
two noble teachings (i.e., Buddhism and Confucianism). This is why the ofﬁcial class is different from that of śramaṇas.
“When we ﬁrst begin to free ourselves from the secular world, we must
depend on the precepts and meditation in reason. A wife is a nuisance of affection, and having hair is merely an adornment of one’s appearance. The nuisance
of affection damages the mind and [being concerned with] the adornment of
one’s appearance goes against the [Buddhist] Way. Therefore, [Buddhist
monks] purify their minds and exterminate affection, and attending to the
[Buddhist] Way they give up adornment. When principles go beyond the ordinary level, the teaching must reverse the secular way. If one does not bow to
his parents, it is because the [Buddhist] Way is esteemed. If the parents bow
to [their monk son], it is because they respect the [Buddhist] Way. The [Yi]li
(Ceremonies for Courtesy) states that when a son who newly wears the cap
[that marks his attainment of manhood] sees his mother, the mother bows to
him. She is delighted with her son who is possessed of virtue. Therefore she
condescends and bows to her inferior (i.e., her son). When a man in armor
meets the ruler, he does not bow. Since it is valued that he holds weapons in
his hands, to honor [the ruler by bowing] does not apply to [this man].
“The cap made of black fabric is used for minor ceremonies; originally
it had no signiﬁcance in the Way of the Spirit. A helmet and armor are instruments of evil omen and have no highest virtue. Nevertheless, in the case
where respect is to be paid, a mother bows to her son. In the proper circumstances to suspend paying one’s respects, vassals do not kneel down and bow
to the ruler. The provisions of decorum are [part of] the worldly teaching

19

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

50c

established by the Duke of Zhou and Confucius. Speaking of its ﬂexibility,
it is not only from one pattern, not to mention the dignity of the Buddhist
Way that reveals beyond the three realms of existence, which is the subtle
foundation of the marvelous teaching and the profound origin of a great number of principles. If this [teaching] is given to a person, he really is more
respectable than those who wear caps or armor. If those who wear caps or
armor go against decorum, no one of any age will doubt them. Regarding
the dignity that is given to the Buddhist Way, why are you surprised by it?”
The Discourse on the Triple Destruction says, “Fo (the Chinese term for
“buddha”) is indicated as futu (“to slaughter as a punishment”) in old Buddhist
scriptures. Kumārajīva changed it to fotu (“a follower of Buddhism”) since
he knew the derivation of the term futu (“to slaughter as a punishment”) is
evil. The word futu was used because barbarians are atrocious. Laozi said,
‘I will educate [a person] at a fundamental level and I do not intend to injure
his body.’22 Therefore, the punishment of shaving [a criminal’s] head was
called futu (“to slaughter as a punishment”), which was compared with tuge
(“to slaughter and sever”). Later Senghui changed it to fotu (“great plan”).
Originally, in old Buddhist scriptures [Buddhist monks] are called sangmen
(“gate of the dead”). The term sangmen derives from the gate of annihilation.
Since it is said that the [Buddhist] Dharma is the teaching about nonarising
(or nonbirth), [Buddhist monks] are called sangmen. Again, Kumārajīva
changed it to sangmen (“gate of mulberry trees”). Senghui changed it once
again to shamen (“gate of sorting”). The term shamen derives from the law
of careful selection. Buddhist monks are not worthy of being called [shamen].”
The Discourse on Extinguishing Delusions says, “Buddhist scriptures
were transmitted [to China] for the ﬁrst time during Emperor Ming’s reign
(57–75 C.E.) of the Later Han dynasty. Therefore, the sounds and the Chinese
characters used for the transliteration [of foreign words] were not correct.
The sound of fu (“ﬂoating”) is similar to that of fo (“buddha”) and the sound
of sang (“mulberry tree”) is like that of sha (“sorting”). These [examples]
show the slippage of pronunciations. To take tu (“plan”) as tu (“to slaughter”)
is a divergence from the Chinese characters. Kumārajīva was well versed in
Chinese and foreign languages; he knew both the sounds and their meanings.
It is indeed appropriate for him to correct such errors.

20

Fascicle Eight

“The Five Classics are traditional Chinese books. Studies of them are not
based on translation, but in both Ma [Ron]’s and Zheng [Xuan]’s annotations
on them, the sounds and Chinese characters are interchanged. Hence, in a
sentence [of the annotation,] ‘How deep and recordable are they (yu mubuji)!’
there is an error between the original text and the annotation in the hymns
of Zhou [in the Book of Odes],23 and in the section ‘He is truly blocked up
and peaceful (yunse anan),’ the interpretation [of the annotation] contradicts
the sage’s virtue in the Yao dian [in the Book of History].24 Why is it regarded
that the profundity of the highest teaching exists only within these two words
(i.e., “highest” and “teaching”)? Zhuangzi understood to forget the words
after apprehending the ideas [conveyed through the words].25 Mencius
ridiculed the harm done to one’s ideas by written language.26 You have not
traced back to the great principles and only pursue words. Could the people’s
lack in versatility in Song state [during the Warring States period] have been
any worse than this?”27
The Discourse on the Triple Destruction says, “The teaching to destroy
the three entities (i.e., one’s country, one’s family, and oneself) is not applicable
in China. Originally it was intended to correct [the tribespeople of] the western
region. Why do we meddle in it? Tribespeople are matchless in being
indomitable and uncivil. They do not differ much from beasts, and they do
not believe in absolute vacancy (xuwu). After Laozi entered [the western
region] through [Hangu] Pass, he intentionally established the teaching [to
worship] the images [of buddhas and bodhisattvas] and ediﬁed them.”
Furthermore [the Discourse on the Triple Destruction] says, “Tribespeople
are ﬁerce and rude. [Laozi] intended to cut off their evil seeds. Consequently
he ordered the men not to take a woman in marriage and the women not to
get married to a man. If all the nations submit themselves to this teaching,
evil seeds will naturally be extinguished.”
The Discourse on Extinguishing Delusions says, “[Śākyamuni] obscured
his trace under the twin [śāla] trees and then his images took his place. There
is no doubt that [the Buddha’s] truth has been exquisite from the ancient time
of nonbeginning, and the [Buddhist] Way will cover the endless [future].
Examining the event when Elder Li (i.e., Laozi) went over [Hangu] Pass,
the time period falls in the last years of the Zhou dynasty. Since the world

21

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

51a

was in isolation and wise people lived in reclusion, he departed and forgot
to come back. Even when Jie Yu withdrew from worldly affairs28 he wiped
out his trace, not to mention [Laozi who] went to the foreign land. Who could
catch sight of his footprints? Thereafter, a cunning and wicked libationer
(i.e., Wang Fu) composed the Scripture on the Conversion of the Barbarians
[by Laozi] (Laozi huahu jing). The doctrine [of this scripture] is clumsy and
its expressions are vulgar. [The scripture] has been transmitted by petty
people. When I examine it, [I realize that] the western tribespeople are weak
and cowardly, while the northern tribespeople are evil and vigorous. If Laozi
gave up virtue and employed punishment in order to destroy evil, why did
he love the evil northern tribe, contrarily conquer the weak western tribe,
and then cause the Xianyun tribe (i.e., the Huns) to run wild and their poison
to ﬂow all over the world?
‘“[Ravenous and cruel beasts, such as] jackals and wolves, are on the
road, and [they] kill foxes and raccoon dogs. Dragging each other to total
ruin, [ravenous and cruel beasts] commit cruelties. Nothing [about the kindness
of] Heaven and Earth is conveyed. Even the [harsh] law made by Shang Yang
[of the Qin dynasty] is not as cruel as this. How could the way of Boyang
(i.e., Laozi) be like this? Moreover, it is useless if images of the founder of
the teaching are provided before people [know and] follow [the teaching].
If people faithfully follow the teaching, massacres can be prevented. If only
those who already follow [the teaching] are given the death penalty, this
means that a single word can cause morality to be lost and numerous falsehoods to be visible. What reason could be seen in the sayings of an uncultivated person of the east [of Qi state]?”29
The Discourse on the Triple Destruction says, “Now I wonder by what
means people such as the Three Augusts, the Five Thearchs, and the Three
Kings learned the Way. They all received responses from [Heaven], but we
have not heard about [their association with] Buddhism. Is it because the Nine
August Ones ( jiuhuang) disregarded it,30 or because Buddhism had not yet
been established? If [you say that] it is because Buddhism had not yet been
established, this is vicious and false. I will not say anything more about this.”
The Discourse on Extinguishing Delusions says, “Regarding supernatural
powers and transformations, the substance of [the Buddha’s] teaching is not
one. Receiving mysterious responses appears and disappears endlessly. If a

22

Fascicle Eight

condition exists in the subtle ediﬁcation, bodhisattvas propagate the teaching,
and if the ediﬁcation exists in a coarse condition, sage rulers exercise their
virtue. Sage rulers and bodhisattvas reveal their responses in accordance
with what they receive. Different teachings are united. There is originally
no [teaching] that is not of the Buddha. It is certainly known that after the
time of the Three Augusts what [these sages] received was extinguished and
what was distinguished was hidden, but in the teaching during Emperor
Ming’s reign (57–75 C.E.) of the Later Han dynasty, the condition responded
to [the world] and the [Buddha] image appeared. Such things as the Three
Augusts’ inﬂuence by means of virtue and the Five Thearchs’ education with
benevolence are called the Way, but this seems not to be the highest [teaching].
We have not heard that when [Fu]xi and [Shen] Nong conducted their administrations there were written reports to them. Yao and Shun continued their
administrations. How could they have approved of talismans? King Tang
and King Wu eased the violent conditions. Would they have ever taken elixirs?
The Five Classics do not mention the Heavenly Master, yet [the Discourse
on the Triple Destruction] seeks instructions from these sage rulers. Isn’t
this sad?”
The Discourse on the Triple Destruction says, “In Daoism material force
(qi) is considered to be the foundation, and the achievement is attainment of
the One. When I examine the people of the Central Plains (i.e., the downstream
regions of the Yellow River), there is no one who does not believe in Daoism.
Those now in China who believe in Buddhism must be from a tribal background. If they say they are not, why then do they believe in Buddhism?”
The Discourse on Extinguishing Delusions says, “The ultimate of the
highest Way results in the One in reason. The true state of the subtle Dharma
is originally nondual. The highest [achievement] of the Buddha is empty,
profound, and formless, but he responds to all aspects of natural phenomena.
[The Buddha] entered the state of tranquility and extinction (i.e., nirvana)
and he has no thought in his mind, yet his profound wisdom shines more and
more. Our invisible fate secretly encounters [the providence of the Buddha],
yet no one sees its culmination. We employ the deep merit [of the Buddha]
daily, yet we are not aware that we are doing so. Once all aspects of natural
phenomena have been produced, we consequently create tentative names
and simply say bodhi in Sanskrit and ‘the Way’ in Chinese.

23

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

51b

“When [the Buddha] reveals his trace, he shows his sacredness with his
golden form. When he responded to the secular world, he was born [as a
prince] in a royal palace. In order to get rid of ignorance, the four-stage meditation (Skt. caturdhyāna) is considered to be the beginning. In order to
develop wisdom, the ten [bodhisattva] stages (Skt. daśabhūmi) are considered
to be the way leading to the goal. All dragons and spirits are equally guided,
and even insects are equally loved.
“The expedient teaching has no set rules. There is no contradiction between
[Buddhist] clergy and laypeople in [the Buddha’s] response. The subtle ediﬁcation is very extensive. Could there be any difference between Chinese
people and foreigners in his mind? Therefore, when [the Buddha] expounds
the Dharma in one language, people who speak a different language from
each other all understand it together. When [the teaching of] the One Vehicle
is expounded, [people who have learned] different scriptures are led to the
same [awakening]. Since Buddhist scriptures follow expedients, although
the teaching of Confucius is different from that of Śākyamuni, [both teachings]
tally with the Way. Since understanding similarly follows the subtle teaching,
although the foreign language differs from Chinese, the ediﬁcation is comprehended in both [foreign lands and in China].
“There are, however, exquisiteness and coarseness in [people’s] perception.
Therefore, the teaching is divided into two; one for the clergy and the other
for laypeople. Because there are [the directions of] east and west on earth,
a country ﬁxes its boundary between its interior and its exterior. In extensively
administrating the marvelous ediﬁcation and educating and molding sentient
beings, there is no distinction. Assuredly [Buddhism] can save [all sentient
beings] in the six realms of existence and completely regulate the trichiliocosm. The Way is simply the highest, and the Dharma is merely the most
honored. Nevertheless, even though the highest Way is one, delusions arise
at the crossroads. The ninety-six non-Buddhist teachings all claim to be the
Way. When we hear their names, we cannot tell whether they are evil or virtuous, but when we verify their teachings, their truth or falsehood is spontaneously proven.
“According to the Daoist system, there are three classes. Laozi is marked
as the highest, the divine transcendent follows him, and Zhang Ling comes
last. The Most High [Lord Lao] is the main body to worship. Considering the

24

Fascicle Eight

Archivist’s (i.e., Laozi’s) great escape [to the western region], he is really a
great, virtuous man; he wrote a book; he treated of the Way; he valued nonaction; he attributed reason to being still and uniform (jingyi);31 and his teaching is based on voidness and suppleness. Nevertheless, he did not record
about the three periods [of existence], and the conduct based on wisdom was
not transmitted by him. This means that [his writing] is a good guidebook
for secular people, but it is not a wonderful scripture beyond the mundane
world. The petty way, like that of the Divine Transcendent, is called the Five
Directions (wutong). Their highest happiness is to be reborn in Heaven; the
best of one’s physical ability is to soar up [into the sky]; one attains supernatural powers and yet cannot escape from having deﬁlements; one has a
long life and yet cannot avoid death. Merits are not expected from food and
medicine. Virtue follows practice and cultivation. Thereupon, ignorant and
crafty Daoists give rise to false pretexts; Zhang Ling, a grain thief, was
recorded to have ascended to Heaven; and Ge Xuan, a rustic, was made
known as Lord Transcendent (xian’gong) in his biography. Ignorant people
are deluded in this way. Can intelligent people be deceived?
“Today when we speak of [Daoism] based on the way of Venerable Sir
Li (i.e., Laozi), the shortcoming of the [Daoist] teaching is like this. When
we clarify [the art of] the divine transcendent following [the way of Laozi],
its essence is of low quality like this. The ﬁrst and second points [mentioned
above] are excellent, but they are still matters of no importance.
“Moreover, imitating [Zhang] Ling and [Zhang] Lu, [Daoists] perform
religious services and make petitions and talismans. They established the
teaching of [the Way of] the Five Pecks [of Grain] and intend to save [sentient
beings] in the three realms of existence. It is as if a mosquito were to try to
carry a mountain on its back. How could they be competent enough [for such
a task]? They hold up the name of the Great Way, but their teaching is below
the level of secular [teaching]. They put up the designation Most High [Lord
Lao], but their law is extremely idiotic. How do I know this?
“To wish greedily for a long life and to fear an early death are common
feelings of sentient beings. Therefore, with the transcendent elixirs called
rouzhi and shihua [Daoists] deceive people in order to throw them into disorder. To be amorous and touch one’s heart is something of which all people
of the world are unanimously fond. Therefore, with the Yellow Book they

25

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

51c

control women, and falsely call themselves the earthly transcendent. The
body that is ﬁrst vigorous and later weak is loved by all sentient beings.
Hence, they value tears and saliva [as highly as] treasures in order to pour
them onto the numinous root (i.e., a physical body). To avoid disaster, suffering, and disease is the constant concern of the people. Therefore, [Daoists]
kill or bind evil spirits in order to make the people’s foolish minds feel happy.
To rely on power and depend on military force is the traditional custom of
the secular world. Therefore, with civil ofﬁcers, soldiers, and armed horsemen
they stir up people’s shallow thoughts. Regarding the dissolute method to
prevent calamities and the debauched way to control people by charms, the
principles are vile and the words are disgraceful. I cannot convey them
through writing. [Nevertheless,] since these issues ﬁt [the needs of] the populace, every household takes refuge in them and believes in them.
“Accordingly, Zhang Jiao and Li Hong exerted a harmful inﬂuence on
society at the end of the Han dynasty. Rebellions led by Lu Song and Sun
En ﬁlled the last years of the Jin dynasty. They have truly numerous followers
wherever the aftermath extends. They are not lords in the ranks of the nobility,
yet they imprudently established a register system of their followers. They
have neither the tiger-shaped [copper tally to dispatch troops] nor the bamboo
[tally to collect taxes] as a sign of their authority and rank, yet they recklessly
collect taxes from [their followers]. They waste people’s property and ruin
and delude men and women. When the vicissitudes [of the world] become
a difﬁcult situation, they damage the country. When the world is peaceful,
they gnaw at people. They destroy the government and foment rebellions.
How could they be regarded to be the same as the Buddha?
“Moreover, how could the Mahāparinirvāṇa-sūtra and the Mahāprajñāpāramitā-sūtra be compared with the Inner Section of the Mysterious and
Sublime (Xuanmiao Neipan) and scriptures of the Shangqing (“Supreme
Purity”) school? Why would [the Buddha of] the golden form with the [thirtytwo] excellent marks envy the [Daoist] room for spiritual beings (guishi)
and the [Daoist] house of emptiness (kongwu; i.e., a place for cultivation,
far away from towns and villages)? He who subjugated the devil king of
Paranirmitavaśavartin Heaven does not admire deceptive and vicious tricks.
How could the pure cultivation and observance of the precepts be the same
as the disgracefulness of [Daoist] tallies? To collect great vows in the mind

26

Fascicle Eight

is better than to store up [a hundred and twenty spirits called] the Palace
General (gongjiang) in the cinnabar ﬁeld (i.e., the abdomen). Is producing
a clean and pure sound from a large bell similar to beating a heavenly drum
with one’s lips and teeth (i.e., grinding the teeth)? If we compare [Buddhism
with Daoism] in their forms and traces, their exquisiteness and coarseness
are already far apart from each other. When we examine them with the ultimate
principle, how could the truth and falsehood be hidden? If [Daoists] laugh
at exquisiteness through its coarseness and slander truth with falsehood, this
is precisely the same as the case of the blind man who says to Li Zhu, [who
has very good eyesight,] ‘I can see clearly.’”

Response to the Discourse on the Triple
Destruction, which Daoists Postulate
is Zhang Rong’s Composition
(in Nineteen Articles)
by Shi Sengshun

The Discourse [on the Triple Destruction] says, “Nirvana is precisely death.
I have never seen a person who has learned about death and attained a long
life.32 This is a teaching to extinguish the species.”
My explanation is, “Excessive endeavours to perpetuate life result in no
life (i.e., death).33 People like Zhang Yi and Shan Bao are good examples of
this.34 Accordingly, Confucianists say, ‘Everyone accounts death [as] a boon,
and life [as] an evil.’35 Laozi says, ‘If I did not have a body, what great
calamity could come to me?’36 Zhuangzi became ill and suffered from pain
in his body. These three men are in a group of sages and virtuous men. They
consider life to be trouble. If we want to seek no life, nothing is equal to nirvana;
it is the sublime appellation of wuwei (nonaction). When the trace [of the
Buddha] is spoken, there is a written record that [Śākyamuni was born in] a
royal palace and [passed away under] twin [śāla] trees. When the reality [of
the Buddha] is discussed, there is the doctrine, ‘eternality and everlasting bliss
(changzhu changle).’ You, [however,] are now only transmigrating in the ﬁve
realms of existence. How could you hear of the essential points of nirvana?
There were once three blind men who handled an elephant; the one who
touched the elephant’s ear insisted that an elephant is just like a winnower;
another who touched the elephant’s nose disputed this and said that an elephant

27

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

52a

is like a pestle.37 Each one could know a part of the elephant, but they could
not completely apprehend the actuality [or entirety] of the elephant after all.
You say that nirvana is precisely death. You are truly like a blind man who
touches only a part of an elephant.”
The Discourse [on the Triple Destruction] says, “The prince did not give
up his wife and yet he causes others to cut off their posterity (i.e., remain
unmarried and childless).”
My explanation is, “The sacredness [of the Buddha] is truly tranquil, but
he manifested the traces. The prince took a consort as an heir [of the royal
family] probably because he wanted to show the people that after he had fulﬁlled the way of human ethics, he was then simply able to abandon this great
treasure (i.e., the throne) and forget his kindness and affection [for his family].
With regard to the facts: all the gods sent blessings from Heaven in the
evening [when he was born]38 and he jumped over the castle [gate] astride
a white horse [when he renounced the world];39 the reason for the ten epithets
[for the Buddha] exists in these [events].
“Why should a wife and children be necessary? Moreover, children are
the heaviest burden in the world. When one suffers from cold and hunger,
he turns to thievery to make a living. When he has more than enough food
and clothes, he becomes arrogant and extravagant. Therefore, when a leper
woman delivers a baby at night, she hurriedly looks for a light to shine upon
[the baby], anxious that the baby may, like herself, be a leper.40 A group of
ordinary people is similar to a leper who delivers [a baby at night]. The
[Nirvana] Sutra (Niepan jing) says, ‘All sentient beings have buddha-nature.’41
When we respectfully seek its purport, this refers exactly to those who have
the seed of buddhahood. They give up their family, follow the [Buddhist]
Way, reject evil, and take refuge in the Buddha. This is [the highest] bliss
and beneﬁt. What else could be added to this? You are confused by the tenor
of the secular world and stagnate in serious delusion. You are dreaming.
How can you understand it?”
The Discourse [on the Triple Destruction] says, “The prince did not take
the tonsure and yet he causes others to shave their heads.”
My explanation is, “Those who live with their family have their parents’
affection, while Buddhist monks have the valuable [instructions] of their
strict teacher. Speaking of [parents’] love, one’s hair and skin are important.

28

Fascicle Eight

Speaking of the strict [teacher], shaving the head is a difﬁcult task. Therefore,
for [Buddhist monks] who are pleased to take the tonsure, who take long
leave of their parents, and who wish to leave behind the deﬁlements of this
world and approach the wuwei (i.e., nirvana) of that [world], it is still possible
to give up their attachment to hair and skin. Why would they value highly
things outside of themselves? If they do not think little of hair and skin, how
could they respect the [Buddhist] Way? If they do not leave behind the relations appointed by Heaven (i.e., familial relations), how could they follow
their strict teacher?
“This can be compared to the mourning system: when one leaves [the
family in which he was born] and becomes the head of his clan, he shortens
[the mourning period] for his real parents and lengthens it for his adoptive
parents. [This system] requires this person to assume the heavy responsibility
of [maintaining] the ancestral temple of his adoptive family and cut off his
love and care to [his real parents]. The fact that he is [in mourning] for his
real parents for only one year is not because his gratitude [to his real parents]
is weak. That [the mourning period] for his adoptive parents is extended to
three years indicates the weight of his obligation indeed. The Book of Rites
states: ‘The reason why one who leaves his original family must shorten [the
mourning period for his real parents] is because what he receives [from his
adoptive family] is greater.’42 This is an example of it. Sutras say that all
heavenly beings offer swords and ascend to Heaven holding [Śākyamuni’s]
hair.43 What do you mean by saying ‘[The prince] did not take the tonsure’?
You are merely fearless in probing a matter to the bottom yet cowardly in
seeking the purport. This is deplorable!”
The Discourse [on the Triple Destruction] says, “If a boy renounces the
world ﬁrst and later his mother becomes a nun, she must bow down to her
own son. This is extreme discourtesy.”
My explanation is, “Those who have renounced the world revere their
teacher, value the Dharma, give up secular life, and follow the [Buddhist]
Way. How could they be asked to act in the same way [as people in the secular
world do]? Moreover, when the prince engaged in the learning, his father, the
king, paid his respects to him. Gaozu, the founder of the Han dynasty, accepted
the advice of the Household Prefect of his father, and considered his father
to be his own subject.44 Lord Gaogui Xiang (i.e., Cao Mao, 241–260 C.E.),

29

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

52b

[the crown prince of] the Wei kingdom, revered the King of Qi [who had
been dethroned] in his private chamber.45 Empress Dowager Chu of the Jin
dynasty treated her father as a vassal in the Court.46 If we judge from these
incidents, it is not strange [for a mother to pay her respects to her monk son].”
The Discourse [on the Triple Destruction] says, “Those who take the tonsure are of futu (“ﬂoating diagram,” the Chinese transliteration of Buddhism).”
My explanation is, “Sutras say that the term futu means ‘sacred auspiciousness’ or ‘numinous diagram.’ Since it ﬂoated upon the sea and reached
[China], it is called futu. The stone buddha image of the Wuzhong area had
ﬂoated in the sea and suddenly came to [China].47 This historical fact is an
example of this. At present, you drop the Chinese character tu (“diagram”
or “drawing”) in the word tuxiang (“icon”) and replace it with the Chinese
character tu (“to butcher”) in the word xingtu (“death penalty”). That is to
say, Taibo [who left for Wu state in order to abdicate the throne for his brother,
Jili] put on a ceremonial robe and cultivated the ceremonies [of the Zhou
dynasty]. Consequently he had nothing of which to be ashamed in being
defective in morality. [His younger brother,] Zhongyong, followed the customs
[of Wu] by cutting off his hair and tattooing his body, and he educated [the
natives].48 If they met you today, they would certainly fall under your disastrous barking at sounds.
“Among things, there are things that look the same and yet are not alike,
and things that do not look alike and yet are alike. Non-Buddhist scriptures
take Zhongni (i.e., Confucius) to be a sage, but the Chinese character ni [in
Zhongni] is used to refer to a nun in Buddhist scriptures. If someone says
Zhongni is a nun, would you believe it? This can be compared to the fact that
the Chinese character tu (“butchering”) is a homophone for the Chinese character tu (“diagram” or “drawing”). How are they different from each other?”
The Discourse [on the Triple Destruction] says, “The term sangmen (“gate
of extinction,” i.e., a śramaṇa) refers to the gate of annihilation.”
My explanation is, “‘Gate’ means the origin, the entrance and exit of clear
principles. Going in and out arises from the origin. There are the Dharma
gate of nonduality (buer famen) in Buddhism and the gate of all that is subtle
and wonderful (zhongmiao zhi men) in Laozi’s [teaching].49 [The Zuozhuan]
says that there is no gate for fortune and misfortune.50 These are all the rich
growth of gathering and going [of clear principles] and the profound house

30

Fascicle Eight

of the subtle functions [of reason]. Buddhist monks understand the signiﬁcance
of this.
“The Chinese character sang [in the term sangmen] means extinction. To
extinguish deﬁlements and lead to spiritual relief are precisely what the term
sangmen (“gate of extinction”) means. The Chinese character sang (“mulberry”) [in the term sangmen (“gate of mulberry trees,” i.e., a śramaṇa)]
should [instead] be the Chinese character sheng (“carriage”); this is simply
the case of an incorrect character. The term shengmen (“gate of a carriage”)
refers to the gate of Mahayana Buddhism. After extinguishing deﬁlements,
[Buddhist monks] carry all the people they have encountered by this [over
to the yonder shore]. Therefore, it was formerly called miemen (“gate of
extinction”) and shengmen later. Furthermore, [in Buddhism] all eighty-four
thousand [gates] are called the Dharma gate. Why would there be only the
two gates called sangmen?”
The Discourse [on the Triple Destruction] says, “Barbarians do not believe
in absolute vacancy (xuwu). After Laozi entered [the western region] through
[Hangu] Pass, he intentionally established the teaching [to worship] the
images [of buddhas and bodhisattvas] and ediﬁed them.”
My explanation is, “When we make inquiry into the origins of the establishment [of worshiping] images, [we ﬁnd] that is not the original intention
of the teaching; it is simply because after [Śākyamuni] passed away, [his disciples’] attachment to and affection for him did not cease. It is also clear in
the descriptions in the Buddhist scripture that they made an image [of him]
from a fragrant tree, [gośīrṣa] candana.51 Furthermore, after Confucius passed
away, his three thousand disciples remembered him forever and gave rise to
deep attachment to him. Since Youruo’s (i.e., Youzi’s) facial appearance bears
the strongest resemblance to that of Confucius, [the disciples] asked him to
take the seat of honor in the lecture hall and deliver a talk. The adherents
inquired and respected [Youzi] in the same manner they had formerly done
[for Confucius]. Zeng Shen (i.e., Zengzi) was displeased about this and said,
‘You, stand up! This is not a seat for you.’ Inferring from this, we know that
[disciples] think about and adore [their deceased teachers].
“Dharma teacher Kumārajīva was born in a foreign land. He was sharp
and intelligent. He had profound and extensive knowledge. He was good at
talking about the characteristics of all phenomenal things. He [came to China]

31

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

52c

carrying Buddhist scriptures on his back and circulated them in Guangzhong
(present-day Shaanxi province) and the Sanfu area [near the capital Chang’an].
He explained the twofold designation of absolute and relative reality, and
veriﬁed that both objects and the intelligence to discern them are tranquil.
He aroused the lofty education of wuwei and urged the profound stream [of
the teaching] to those who had not been awakened. This, as they say, is to
drive away [deﬁlements] until there is nothing to drive away.52 You said ‘Barbarians do not believe in absolute vacancy.’ This is really not a serious discussion. Gentlemen [of the world] emphasize that there is superiority and
inferiority in principles and they are not concerned with the existence of
images, yet you talk about images. Isn’t this applying yourself to paganism?”
The Discourse [on the Triple Destruction] says, “[The purpose of] the
tonsure is originally not to seek the Buddhist teaching but to subjugate evil
barbarians. Today Chinese people do not teach themselves by [following]
good gods but adopt the teaching of ignorant barbarians.”
My explanation is, “The six groups of barbarians to the west, the ﬁve
groups of barbarians to the north, the four groups of barbarians in the east,
and the eight groups of barbarians in the south do not know the inﬂuence of
the monarch. Those who do not hear the Buddhist Dharma are compared to
animals; their circumstances are alike the eight difﬁculties (ba’nan) in reality.
The current sage [emperor] conducts more lofty state affairs than did the
Three Augusts and the Five Thearchs. He clariﬁes the Dharma of the One
Vehicle. Heavenly and human beings rejoice equally. All beings of the world
are delighted. [Insects, creatures] that crawl around, and [birds] that take
breath through a beak all rely on him. It is said that even insects that pant
and wriggle are rightly placed. If you say this and that without ﬁrm thought,
you should immediately shut your mouth. Why do I have to make effort to
suggest this to you?”
The Discourse [on the Triple Destruction] says, “The term shamen (śramaṇa) means ‘careful selection’ (shatai).”
My explanation is, “Those who concentrate their minds on one object and
reach the origin are called śramaṇas. That is to say, to train one’s mind, to
wash away ﬁlth, to go upstream, and to return to purity is the meaning of
‘careful selection.’ You intend to defame [śramaṇas], but their signiﬁcance

32

Fascicle Eight

only increases. Truly, the more [Buddhism] is revered, the loftier it can
become, and the more it is penetrated, the ﬁrmer it is.”53
The Discourse [on the Triple Destruction] says, “[Buddhism] entered our
country and destroys it.”
My explanation is, “The Sage (i.e., the Buddha) assuredly follows the
affections in the minds of [sentient beings] and responds to them everywhere.
From remote antiquity, when people kept records by knotting ropes, the people
became faithless and their customs insincere. In the ediﬁcation of monarchs
of latter generations, Yao and Confucius were exalted. As to places beneﬁted
by the subtle Dharma, [Buddhism] certainly helps [a monarch of] the secular
world and ediﬁes [the people]. [As a result,] the people spontaneously become
sincere without being killed as a penalty, and they adopt the right Way without
suffering from being whipped. The rulers of the Shi royal family (i.e., Shi Le
and Shi Hu of the Later Zhao dynasty) had Fotudeng as their teacher and
brought prosperity to their country. King [Rāmadatta] of ancient times consulted
Bo in order to help the [Buddhist] Way ﬂourish.54 On what basis do you use
the expression ‘[Buddhism] destroys our country’?”
The Discourse [on the Triple Destruction] says, “[Buddhism] comes into
a family and ruins it.”
My explanation is, “Śākyamuni’s teaching completely has the virtue of
the six kinds of cordiality; a father loves [his children]; sons are ﬁlial [to
their parents]; elder brothers are kind [to their younger brothers]; younger
brothers are respectful [to their elder brothers]; a husband is courteous [to
his wife], and a wife is gentle [to her husband]. What point do you think is
the unwholesomeness that can destroy a family? I hear only that Daoist
monks of insigniﬁcant learning make the Red Writing in order to curse [others].
They disclose others’ personal secrets, go around the altar with disheveled
hair, call out to Heaven, [kneel and] touch their foreheads to the ground, and
scheme to get rid of each other and kill each other regardless of their relative
degree of intimacy. This is precisely the way to destroy a family.”
The Discourse [on the Triple Destruction] says, “[Buddhism] enters one’s
body and destroys it.”
My explanation is, “The body is a worse nuisance than shackles. Laozi
considers the body to be dung and earth.55 Śākyamuni considers the three

33

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

53a

realms of existence to be [like] a house on ﬁre. Therefore, those who have
renounced the world must leave behind luxury, give up fame and wealth,
realize the difﬁculties of staying in [this world that is like] an inn (i.e., a temporary abode), and wish always for the bliss of complete extinction. Those
who follow popular customs, on the contrary, seek the way to escape from
death. It is exactly as [Zhuangzi] says: ‘What destroys life does not die, and
what produces life is not produced.’56
“Recently a Daoist monk, who is fond of fame, said [with self-conﬁdence]
that he surpasses others in the Way of the Divine Transcendents. He tried to
ascend to [the realm of] immortals on a certain day and soar skyward in daylight. [Nevertheless,] before he reached several zhang in height, he fell violently to the ground. When I went near him and examined him, [I found that
he had used] none other than two wings of a large bird. He is truly the socalled one who cannot spread his wings and ﬂy away!57
“Analyzing the doomed fate of [Daoist monks] based on their present
affairs, they will come to ruin [in a very short time]; they will be punished
before they turn back. Zhang Ling of the Han dynasty falsely accused people
and collected a high-rate tax from them. [His group] was called the Grain
Thieves (mize). They were also wiped out. Regarding [your statement,] ‘entering one’s body and destroying it,’ isn’t this something like the poem ‘The
Bow Adorned with Horn (Jiaogong)’ [in the Book of Odes, which was composed as a satire of domestic discord]?”58
The Discourse [on the Triple Destruction] says, “[Buddhism causes family
members] to not join together in singing or weeping.”
My explanation is, “To weep when others weep is the ignorant behavior
of common people. To be able to sing a song in the face of someone’s death
indicates the calm and peaceful feelings of Buddhist monks. When Yuan
Rang lost his parent he climbed a tree and sang a song. Confucius, who was
passing by, did not blame him.59 This is also one aspect of the teaching on
morality and ethics (i.e., Confucianism).”
The Discourse [on the Triple Destruction] says, “[Buddhist monks] do
not go to the court [to be received in audience by the emperor].”
My explanation is, “Confucius said, ‘The scholar sometimes will not take
the high ofﬁce of a minister of the son of Heaven, nor the lower ofﬁce of

34

Fascicle Eight

serving the prince of a state.’60 Confucian scholars are a group of philistines,
but they can still be like this. Needless to say, śramaṇas are people who are
beyond this world. Formerly Bocheng and Zigao [in Yao’s time] and Zizhou
and Zhibo [in Shun’s time] simply longed for profundity and adored the
Way.61 Because of this they did not get involved in human affairs.”
The Discourse [on the Triple Destruction] says, “Those who take the tonsure commit the sin of damaging their body.”
My explanation is, “My view regarding the hair and skin was completely
explained in my previous answer. I will further brieﬂy speak of it. Generally
speaking, regarding the issue, ‘not to dare to damage [one’s body],’ this is precisely in order to prevent people from doing evil, offending the judicial constitution, being punished with the ﬁve penalties, and having an incomplete body.
“Today śramaṇas keep the teaching of the Sage (i.e., Śākyamuni) in mind
and stick to it. They seek the ten [bodhisattva] stages [toward enlightenment]
in the distance. They shave their beards and hair and put on the Dharma robe.
They do not go against [ﬁlial piety by] establishing themselves and becoming
famous.62 When they attain the [Buddhist] Way they liberate their relatives
as well. What is the negative point by which you place śramaṇas’ [tonsure]
under the sin of ‘damaging [the body]’?
“Those who stick to written language simply do not understand the purpose
beyond what is written. Even the wheelwright Bian did not pass on his skill
to his son [through teaching him with words].63 I have nothing more to say
about this.”
The Discourse [on the Triple Destruction] says, “Among those who have
renounced the world I have not seen a gentleman. This is because [the renunciants] are all escapees from corvée labor.”
My explanation is, “Alas! Why are you having such difﬁculty in making
things clear? The Zuozhuan says, ‘Words are an embellishment of the person.’64 Zhuangzi says, ‘If words are not extensive, it is insufﬁcient to clarify
the Way.’65 Although I would prefer not speaking, how would it be possible?
“All those who have renounced the world have the stable root of the spirit
from their previous existences, a very deep capacity for virtue, and profound
intelligence. They have ﬁrm [faith] that cannot be uprooted. Therefore, their
spirits are concentrated and their minds are led [to enlightenment]. Since

35

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

53b

they rise above the world, cherishing lofty thoughts, even the universe cannot
examine what they have in their minds. Since they are tranquil and have
nothing to commit, how could dust and dirt disturb their minds?
“They are removed from the valuable favor of their kind parents, give up
the joy and love of their families; they empty the room in order to produce
bright light (i.e., empty the mind in order to produce happiness),66 and they
practice meditation, abiding by the profound [Way]. Some of them practice
frugal living (Skt. dhūta) in a forest or wilderness, and give up their own
bodies to hungry beasts. Some lead a calm and upright life and follow a vegetarian diet. They dedicate themselves [to cultivation] without negligence.
They delightedly seek the ten powers [possessed by the Tathāgata], leap over
to the highest path, set the heavenly net free, melt away the earthen web,
give rise to myriad merits before they fully manifest, and relieve ordinary
people from [transmigration in birth and death for] ten thousand kalpas. This
is truly the magniﬁcent plan of a great person, and not something you have
had a chance to hear.
“What do you mean by saying, ‘[The renunciants are all] escapees from
corvée labor’? Confucius wished to have a beak three chi long.67 Although
words come out of the mouth, if a long tongue [that is fond of gossip] does
not offend other people, your beak should be three zhang long.68 How deeply
the people are hurt by your annoying statements about things that have nothing
to do with you!”
The Discourse [on the Triple Destruction] says, “If two grownup men
out of three [in a family] renounce the world, why does the [remaining] one
have no chance for the providence [of the Buddha]?”
My explanation is, “[People who have] no chance for the providence [of
the Buddha] were born under [the karmic condition of having] no chance for
the [Buddha’s] providence. Those who have a chance for the providence [of
the Buddha] come into existence precisely under [the karmic condition of
having] a chance for the [Buddha’s] providence. How do I know this is so?
“In the world there is a case where the whole family entered the [Buddhist]
Way. Therefore it is said that they came into existence under [the karmic
condition of having the] chance for the [Buddha’s] providence. [On the other
hand,] there are those who have never heard about bhikṣus (biqiu) from the

36

Fascicle Eight

time they were born. Therefore, it is said that they were born under [the
karmic condition of having] no chance for the [Buddha’s] providence.
“Sixteen princes renounced the world on the same day and entered the
Buddhist Way, following their father.69 This is exactly a case in which the
whole family was drawn by the [Buddha’s] providence and reached [the
Buddhist Way] all at once. Why do you think only two grownup men [out
of three in a family] should renounce [the world]? Those who have no chance
for the [Buddha’s] providence accommodate themselves to the condition of
having no chance for the [Buddha’s] providence and should simply seek to
examine themselves. Just now you are in the Avīci Hell for a long time, while
you anxiously discuss this. Don’t you want to put away your shield and spear?
What I really hope for is that you can come back from [the world of] delusion.”
The Discourse [on the Triple Destruction] says, “The Daoist teaching
raises virtue and makes the country great.”
My explanation is, “There are ninety-six kinds of teachings. The Buddhist
[teaching] is the most esteemed [among them]. Brahmanic [teaching] is like
a small hill. Even if the deities of mountains and rivers can produce clouds
and rain, they are objects to be worshiped by the country and by families. In
the point of raising virtue and making the country great, [these deities] have
more or less efﬁcacy. Nevertheless, in saving [sentient beings] extensively
and boundlessly, pulling them out of great afﬂiction, our vajra sage (i.e., the
Buddha) alone loftily wins the victory.
“The Buddha already existed at the beginning of time, when the Grand
Terminus was divided [into yin and yang], but at that time sentient beings’
causes and conditions were not yet active. Hence the name [“Buddha”] was
hidden for the time being. Why do I say this? Inferring about the past before
the Three Augusts, how could there be neither the Book of Rites nor the Book
of Changes? That is to say, the two hexagrams qian and kun and the two
lines li and yu conveniently arose together with Heaven and Earth. Even
though it is said that they arose together [with Heaven and Earth], the reasons
why these names did not arise [at the same time] are merely because [sentient
beings’] faculties and receptivity had not begun, so the employment of [these
names] had not yet taken place. Although the principles have always existed,
their traces were not evident.

37

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

53c

“As for the two sages, one in China and the other in a foreign country
(i.e., India), their principles are the same. Therefore, it is said in [the Scripture
on the Clean and Pure] Dharma Practice (Qingjing faxing jing), ‘The three
wise men (i.e., Māṇava, Guangjing Bodhisattva, and Kāśyapa) were ﬁrst
sent [to China]. They gradually led [the people] to the secular teaching. Later,
with the Buddhist scriptures they [instructed] the people to eliminate evil
and follow the correct [path].’70 Li Lao’s school is a branch of Śākyamuni’s
teaching. The Buddhist scriptures say, ‘[The Buddha] spoke here and there
but his name varied,’71 and ‘Once he was the leader of the circle of Confucian
scholars, the most reverent priest of the country, or a monk.’72 Or, he was tranquil and inactive and yet he performed a Buddhist service. What the golden
mouth [of the Buddha] expounds corresponds to [reality], just as [two pieces
of] a tally ﬁt together precisely. Why do you leap around to the east and west,
avoiding neither what is high nor what is low?73 Alas! Availing themselves
of my wisdom and trusting to my supernatural powers, heretics consequently
intend to bend and confuse the passages of my scriptures and destroy my
teaching! A person who lacks conscience has come to such a pass!”
The Discourse [on the Triple Destruction] says, “The Way is material
force (qi).”
My explanation is, “The concept of the Way takes the principles as a function.
When we attain the principles we are complete in the Way. For this reason, a
śramaṇa is called a person of the Way (daoren). The people of the Yangping
area (present-day Shaanxi province) are called Daoists (daoshi). The Sage
Śākyamuni attained the foundation of the Way. Penzu and Laozi occupy the
end of the Way.74 For [Śākyamuni,] who attained the foundation of the Way,
the Way is spontaneously revealed before he speaks of the Way. Those who
occupy the end of the Way always talk of the Way, but the Way [of which they
speak] is insufﬁcient. For instance, Confucius, who was deeply learned, did
not make his name only for expertise in a special skill, but his disciples, such
as [Zi]you and [Zi]xia, are regarded as [experts in] all four subjects [of learning]
(i.e., virtuous conduct, speech, state affairs, and literature).
“Zhuangzi said, ‘Life is [due to the collecting of] material force. When
that is collected, there is life, and when it is dispersed, there is death.’75 If
we follow your statement, and if the Way is material force, the Way would
then be collected and dispersed, as life and death. Your Way, then, is the law

38

Fascicle Eight

of birth and death, not of permanence. I have heard that your Way also has
the subject of uniting the yin and yang energies (i.e., sexual practices). I wish
that you will not mention this really disgraceful issue. Moreover, Zhuangzi
says, ‘The Way exists in excrement and urine.’76 It is possible that the Way
that exists in excrement and urine is [the same as] your Way of uniting the
yin and yang energies, isn’t it?”
End of Fascicle Eight of The Collection for the Propagation
and Clariﬁcation [of Buddhism]

39

Fascicle Nine
The Record that the Emperor of the
Great Liang Dynasty Sets Forth the
Right Logic for Spiritual Intelligence
and the Attainment of Buddhahood,
together with the Preface and
Annotation Composed
by Shen Ji of Wuxing

The Way of the Spirit is profound and obscure, and [hence] Xuanni (i.e.,
Confucius) certainly had nothing to say about it.77 Psychological operations
are subtle, [therefore] the Archivist [of the Zhou dynasty] (i.e., Laozi) did
not talk about it, either. This is not because the wisdom of these sages was
not complete but it is difﬁcult to understand [this] with familiar feelings, and
if it is explained in words it is abstruse. Therefore, great scholars of former
generations left discussions about past karma, and eloquent speakers of later
generations stammer when it comes to discussing one’s life to come. Without
utmost discretion of the world, how can [these issues] be made clear?
Therefore, when deluded people hear that the spirit does not cease to exist
[at death], they all think that it is eternal; when they hear that thought (Skt.
citta-carita) is not eternal, they all think that it becomes extinct. When it is
said that [the spirit or thought] becomes extinct, people are confused about
the issue of whether its nature is eternal; when it is said that [the spirit or
thought] is eternal, they are deluded about the issue that its function ceases
to exist. They are doubtful about the nature [of the spirit or thought] based
on its function, and think that its nature can be extinguished; they are doubtful
about its function based on its nature and think that the function is not inﬂuenced. None [among them] is able to seek it exquisitely. Each person has a
strong inclination toward [his or her own view]. They then cause their spontaneous nature of awakening to sink to the level of superﬁcial talk.
The sage ruler (i.e., Emperor Wu of the Liang dynasty) received a profound
auspicious omen and manages [the nation] from the imperial throne. He is

41

54a

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

54b

aware that he should confer the law in advance of Heaven and provide teaching
[based on] observing the people. He fears that incoherent sophistry makes its
own logic and becomes rampant. Who can restore order through subtle descriptions of complicated traces? The literary forms of the teaching left behind by
Śākyamuni are going to disappear. For this reason, [Emperor Wu] wrote this
intelligent discussion in order to promote the most precious scriptures.
I, Ji, thinking from early in my life that my body is empty, set the Buddhist
teaching in my mind and I often appreciate the sound of the Dharma (i.e.,
the Buddhist teaching), and because of this I forget to eat and sleep. Nevertheless, it is difﬁcult for me, having a stupid and dull temperament, to understand [the teaching]. [Every time] I come into contact with the doctrine I
have many questions. Regarding the great meaning of buddha-nature, I lost
my footing and was confused in the path of my mind (i.e., thought). Since
the words of the emperor have pervaded over even distant areas, all the people
equally receive comfort. Myriad nights have ended and eternal dawn has
come to the darkness. Questions about various issues are now clear and completely understood. Personally, I think that phenomena and principles proceed
smoothly. If there is nothing, we do not recognize anything. Function follows
the Way and squares with it. How can the mind not discern this?
Consequently, hovering like ﬂoating clouds, we still sense the harmony
of beautiful sounds; joyful, like a swimming ﬁsh, we still appreciate the harmony of pure sounds produced with a stringed instrument. Moreover, the
divine wonder is sent from the will of Heaven. This is why I dance, waving
my hands and stepping about, and cannot stop myself. With superﬁcial perception I venture to respectfully make an annotation. Might this be an attempt
to trace to the very source of the innermost of Heaven through the eye of a
needle? I am probably confused. Therefore I make this explanation.
Practicing [the Buddhist Way] is based on the establishment of faith.

I, Ji, say, “Ignorant and dark people assuredly give rise to great intelligence.
Intelligence does not arise suddenly; it surely arises through practice. Practice
is not mastered for its own sake; it must be cultivated based on faith. Faith
is [the attitude of] mind in reliance on a teacher and in conformity with reason
without disobedience. Therefore, the ﬁve roots of wholesomeness (Skt. pañcaindriyā) take faith as the basis, and faith in the four objects (sixin) takes being

42

Fascicle Nine

true to them as primary. Since primary faith is established, myriad wholesome
deeds are spontaneously performed. To perform wholesome deeds and reach
fruition is called practice.”
The establishment of faith derives from right understanding.

I, Ji, say, “If we do not know right from wrong, how can we attain faith?
Consequently, the foundation of establishing faith is supported by right understanding.”
When understanding is right, external wrong views (i.e., non-Buddhist
teachings) do not disturb us.

I, Ji, say, “If the mind is right, myriad wrong views are extinguished. From
this it is known that when we hold right views in our minds, external wrong
views do not disarrange us.”
When faith is established, there are no doubts in the consciousness.

I, Ji, say, “Consciousness is the mind. Therefore, the Discourse on the
Achievement of Reality (Chengshi lun) says, ‘The mind, thought, and consciousness are the same in essence though different in name.’78 Now that the
mind has faith, of what are we doubtful?”
Nevertheless, what faith and understanding depend on has its foundation.

I, Ji, say, “To ‘depend on’ means to rely on. When there is the basis for
having peace in the mind, minor issues and actions spontaneously follow
[the basis]. It is evident in the following sentences that there is the basis.”
Why? Because when we examine the origin of the spiritual intelligence
in which imperishability is considered to be exquisite, the exquisite spirit
indeed returns to wonderful fruition.

I, Ji, say, “If there is a case where the spirit is exhausted, why is it called
‘spirit’? Therefore the sutra says, ‘When we see a dead [person], the body
deforms and decays yet the spirit does not perish. According to the actions,
good or bad, [the person made during his life,] fortune and misfortune spontaneously follows him.’79 This is precisely the meaning of the imperishability
and ceaselessness [of the spirit]. If the [spirit] decays just as do grass and

43

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

trees, could it be said to be exquisite? Because [the spirit] is free from cessation, it returns to the culmination of subtlety after all. When the mind is
based on this ground, all principles that you touch become clear. When you
are clear in numerous principles, what practice could you not achieve? The
foundation of faith and understanding means this.”
The essence of the wonderful fruition goes to the end of eternity. The
exquisite spirit cannot avoid impermanence.

I, Ji, say, “Regarding the wonderful fruition, the principle has already
been sufﬁciently clariﬁed. Therefore, its essence simply extends to the end
of eternity. The exquisite spirit takes part in practice and has not yet been
completed. Hence, it must go through changes.”

Impermanence is to perish ﬁrst, arise later, and not stay even for a moment
(chana).

I, Ji, say, “The term chana (i.e., “moment” or “instant”) is [the Chinese
transliteration of] the Indian term [kṣaṇa], which designates an extremely
brief [moment of time]. When [a being] arises and is then extinguished, how
could there [be any possibility] of staying? Therefore, Vimalakīrti lamented,
‘O bhikṣus! We are born, grow old, and die in an instant.’”80

If the mind is employed as being affected by an external object (Skt.
ālambana), the consciousness of the former [existence] must differ from
that of the latter [existence]. In this case, [the mind] goes together with
the circumstance. Who then would be able to attain buddhahood?

I, Ji, say, “The mind moves following the circumstance. This is its external
operation. Even though the latter follows the former, this is not a discussion
of reality after all. Consequently, it is known that the nature of the spiritual
consciousness is quiet and calm and does not move. Since it is quiet and
calm and does not move, it ﬁnally returns to the wonderful fruition.”
The sutra says, “The mind is the right cause and achieves the fruition
of buddhahood after all.”81

I, Ji, say, “Brieﬂy speaking of the cause of attaining buddhahood, there are
two meanings: one is the condition that causes [the attainment of buddhahood]

44

Fascicle Nine

and the other is the right cause [for the attainment of buddhahood]. The condition [that causes the attainment of buddhahood] refers to all wholesome
deeds, and the right [cause] means the spiritual consciousness. All wholesome
deeds have the merit of helping to reveal [buddhahood]. Therefore it is called
the condition [that causes the attainment of buddhahood]. The spiritual consciousness is the basis of the right cause. Therefore it is called ‘right cause.’
It has already been stated that [the mind] achieves the fruition of buddhahood
after all. This clearly veriﬁes that [the mind] is ceaseless.”
Furthermore, [the sutra] says, “If ignorance is transformed it turns into
intelligence.”82 According to this, the purpose of the sutra should be able
to be pursued in reason. Why? The mind is the basis of function. The
basis is one while its function varies. When the function varies, there
are spontaneous rising and falling away, yet the nature of the basis, which
is one, does not change.

I, Ji, say, “When deﬁlement is washed away, the fundamental consciousness
becomes bright. The mutual shift between brightness and darkness is called
‘change.’ In the case where something leaves ﬁrst and another thing comes
later, this is not called ‘change.’”
The basis, which is one, is nothing but ignorance and spiritual intelligence.

I, Ji, say, “Spiritual intelligence is based on darkness. Therefore, ignorance
is considered to be the cause.”

Searching for what is called ignorance, it is not a category of the Grand
Void. Soil and stone have no feelings. How, then, can it be said that they
are ignorant?

I, Ji, say, “In distinguishing between good and bad, we have no ideas without
the mind; in knowing clearly [what is] right or wrong, we have no recognition
without feelings. Since the Grand Void has no feeling, it does not clarify either
a fool or an intelligent [person]. Soil and stone have no minds. How could they
discern understanding or delusion? Therefore it is known that understanding
and delusion depend on the existence of the mind, and a fool and an intelligent
[person both] depend on the existence of consciousness. When ignorance is
mentioned, the meaning depends on the existence of the mind.”

45

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

Consequently, it is known that while discerning thought should be intelligent, its essence is subject to delusion, and since deluded thought does
not know, it is called ignorance.

54c

I, Ji, say, “Intelligence is the real nature. Therefore, it must be intelligent.
Consciousness is affected by external deﬁlement. Hence, delusion unavoidably
enters it. Being deluded and not understanding is called ignorance. Based
on this, the name was given. How could its purport be untrue?”

Accordingly, ignorance has arising and extinction in essence. Arising
and extinction differ from each other in function. The meaning of the
ignorant mind does not change.

I, Ji, say, “Inasmuch as there is essence, there is function. When speaking
of function, it is not essence. When speaking of essence, it is not function.
In function there are arising and falling away, but in essence there is no arising
or extinction.”
I am afraid that if one sees that function varies, he will think that the
mind is extinguished, following the circumstance.

I, Ji, say, “Deluded people are confused regarding essence and function.
Therefore, they cannot break off doubts. Why? Essence and function sustain
a relation of staying neither too close nor too far away. Apart from essence
there is no function. Therefore, it is said [that essence and function sustain
a relation of] staying not too far away. Since the meaning of function is not
essence, it is said [that they sustain a relation of] staying not too close, either.
When people see [that essence and function sustain a relation of] staying not
too far away, they may become confused about [that essence and function
sustain a relation of] staying not too close; when they are confused about
[that essence and function sustain a relation of] staying not too close, they
think that the mind is extinguished following the circumstance.”
Therefore, [in the ﬁve kinds of afﬂictions (wuzhudi huo)] the term zhudi
(the place in which afﬂictions are entrenched) is added after the name
“ignorance.” This shows that ignorance is precisely spiritual intelligence
and the nature of the spiritual intelligence does not change.

46

Fascicle Nine

I, Ji, say, “The reason to link the term zhudi to ignorance is probably to
expel the deluded consciousness. Those who harbor afﬂictions have not [yet]
perceived [the truth].”

How do we know this? If the mind formerly committed a heavy evil act
which causes one to fall into Avīci Hell, and later the consciousness
gives rise to the excellent wholesomeness of non-thought, good and evil
are very far apart from each other in reason, and there is a big difference
between the former and the latter. If in function there is really no basis,
how then can the continuation like this happen?

I, Ji, say, “If there is no basis, function has nothing on which to rely. A
deluded person sees that the similar categories are continuous and thus considers them to be the same. Therefore, the great wholesomeness is taken up
in order to expel the confusion about this continuation.”
From this, it is known that the former evil is spontaneously extinguished,
yet the deluded consciousness does not change; and even though the
latter wholesomeness arises, the mind of darkness does not change.

I, Ji, say, “The arising and extinction of good and evil never damage the
basis.”
Therefore, the sutra says, “What is accompanied by the bondage of
deﬁlement is called ‘ignorance,’ and what is accompanied by all wholesome things is called ‘intelligence.’”83 Isn’t it that the nature of consciousness is one and it varies following conditions?

I, Ji, say, “If good and evil alternately arise, how can it then be said [that
they are] ‘together’? Nevertheless, these words (i.e., “good” and “evil”) are
constantly opposed to each other, and their purposes are always indistinct.
Therefore, this important sentence is given in order to explain this to the
many deluded people.”
Hence, it is known that the change of arising and extinction requites a
past cause, and the alternation of good and evil arises in the present state
of the mind.

47

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

I, Ji, say, “Arising and extinction are caused by actions one previously
performed; it is not that they are caused by the present state of the mind.
Good and evil arise in the current state of the mind; it is not that one’s actions
done in the past cause them.”
Moreover, the mind is the basis. It never changes.

I, Ji, say, “Even though the function differs, the essence does not.”
Since the basis of the function is ceaseless, the law of the attainment of
buddhahood is bright. Since it changes following the state of the mind,
it is clear that birth and death can be brought to an end.

I, Ji, say, “That [the law of] the attainment of buddhahood is bright relies
on the basis. That birth and death can be brought to an end is derived from
the function. If there is function but no basis, one is extinguished and does
not attain [buddhahood]. If there is basis but no function, one attains [buddhahood] and there is nothing to extinguish.”

Criticism of the Discourse on the
Extinction of the Spirit (Shenmie lun)
Preface by Xiao Chen

55a

Fan Zizhen (i.e., Fan Zhen, 450–507?), the elder brother of my wife, wrote
the Discourse on the Extinction of the Spirit, in which he clariﬁed that there
is no buddha. He says that he has defeated numerous people in argument and
caused a thousand people to surrender in a single day. I am still unconvinced.
I would like to examine some doubtful points and inquire about what I have
not yet understood.
What the Discourse has maintained up to today is about the physical
body and the spirit, and what it argues is [whether or not] the principle is
exquisite. For instance, the fact that offerings are presented with ﬁlial piety
at the ancestral temple in spring and autumn is considered to be for what
the sages, in accordance with the Way of the Spirit, laid down instructions
and rites and guarded against ignorance. [The disembodied spirit of] Du Bo
[who was killed by King Xuan of the Zhou dynasty] fully drew a bow [to

48

Fascicle Nine

shoot King Xuan].84 [A man dreamed that] Boyou, [who had been killed by
a man of Zheng state, walked around] in armor.85 It is said that monsters
spontaneously appear between Heaven and Earth; it is not that people who
died became ghosts.
In this way, it is impossible to cross-examine with the Book of Odes and
the Book of History or to compare with things that happened in the past. It
is possible only to debate the separation and reunion of body and spirit. If
body and spirit are one, and exist and are extinguished at the same time, then
Fan Zi[zhen] will exult and rouse himself in an impregnable fortress in the
distance. If spirit and body separate from each other and arise and go to ruin
at different [times], I will overcome my enemy and attain superiority, and
my task will be completed. Moreover, even though I make clear that there
are buddhas, my treatment of [the term] “buddha” is not the same as that of
other secular people. I will explain my real intention at the same time and
attach it after the Discourse.

The Discourse on the Extinction
of the Spirit

The questions and answers are those between a guest and a host in the original
text of the Discourse; the criticism is my present inquiry.
Question: “You say that the spirit is extinguished. How do you know it
is extinguished?”
Answer: “The spirit conforms to the body and the body conforms to the
spirit. For this reason, when the body exists, the spirit does, too. When the
body withers away, the spirit is extinguished.”
Question: “The body is the name of what has no perception. The spirit is
the name of what has perception. There are differences in conformity with
phenomena between what has perception and what does not. In reason, it is
not acceptable that spirit and body are one. That body and spirit conform to
each other is not what I have learned.”
Answer: “The body is the substance of the spirit and the spirit is the function
of the body. This means precisely that the body is the substance and the spirit
is the function. It is impossible that body and spirit differ from each other.”
Criticism: “The Discourse asserts that body and spirit are one. It should
then give evidence for their inseparability. However, [the Discourse] simply

49

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

55b

says, ‘The spirit conforms to the body and the body conforms to the spirit.
It is impossible that body and spirit differ from each other.’ This is debating
without evidence. It is unlikely that this is your explanation.
Here I will testify on the basis of dreams that it is impossible that body
and spirit are one. While someone is asleep, his body is an object that has
no perception, but it has occasion to see something. This is because the spirit
goes out [of the body] and makes contact with [other objects]. The spirit does
not stand by itself; it must inhabit the body. It is just like that people do not
live in the open air but need a house in which to live. The body is just a ﬁlthy
and foolish thing, just as a house is merely a closed-up place. When the spirit
returns to the body, the consciousness becomes slightly confused, and [in its
confusion] what [the spirit] has seen becomes a dream. When people come
back to their homes, their spirits are suddenly obstructed. Since [their spirits
have suddenly become] obstructed, brightness turns to darkness. Sometimes
in a dream people soar up into the deep sky or travel ten thousand li to a
distant place. [In this case,] if the spirit does not travel [far,] does the body
go? If the body does not go and the spirit does not separate from the body,
how could a case like this be possible?
It is said that [a dream] is a manifestation of what one thinks. So when a
person peacefully enjoys deep sleep, his body is like a piece of wood that
lies ﬂat, and his breath is like cold ashes. Even when we call out to him, he
cannot hear us; if we touch him, he does not feel it. If it is said that spirit and
body are one, this means that both the outside and the inside are inactive. If
a [sleeping person] does not have contact with sounds from the external
world, how then could he give rise internally to thoughts? From this, it can
be certainly known that even if the body is motionless the spirit moves swiftly.
Furthermore, I have questions about dreams in general.
Some [dreams] meet with unexpected results.

Zhao Jianzi dreamed of a naked boy singing a song that could [be interpreted] as meaning that the state of Wu would invade the state of Zou.86 One
of the eunuchs of the state of Jin dreamed [in the morning] that he had
ascended to Heaven carrying the marquis on his back, but [in fact, at midday
on the same day] he had to carry the marquis on his back out of the privy
[into which the marquis had fallen].87 These are examples of this.

50

Fascicle Nine

Some [dreams] are unreasonable.

Lü Qi [of the state of Jin] dreamed that he had shot an arrow at the middle
of the moon.88 The empress of Wu state dreamed that her intestines left [her
body] and ﬂew around the Gate of Heaven (i.e., the front gate of a palace).89
These are examples of this.
Some [dreams] are precursors of things that have not yet happened.

Lü Jiang (i.e., Taigong Wang, Lü Shang) dreamed that Heaven named his
son Yu.90 A man of Cao state dreamed that many gentlemen were plotting to
ruin the state of Cao.91 These are examples of this.
Some [dreams] are pretexts of symbols.

Cai Mao attained an ofﬁcial rank after he dreamed that he had lost the
rice crop [since the Chinese character zhi, “to attain ofﬁcial rank,” consists
of the two Chinese characters: he, “rice crop,” and shi, “to lose”].92 Wang
Jun had a dream about three swords and became a district magistrate of a
province [since the Chinese character zhou, “province,” consists of three of
the Chinese character dao, “sword.”].93 These are examples of this.
Some [dreams] have nothing that conforms to reality.

A man of the northern tribe [who lives in a desert] dreamed of a boat. A
man of the Yue region [in southern China, where river boats are a major
means of transportation] had a dream of riding a horse. These are examples
of this.
Some [dreams] later come true, and some do not.

The head of the Yin dynasty (i.e., Emperor Wu Ding) obtained Fu Yue,
[a sage who was later promoted to Prime Minister by Wu Ding,] in a dream.94
Emperor Wen (r. 180–157 B.C.E.) of the Han dynasty dreamed that he obtained
Deng Tong.95 [These are examples that] testify [to dreams that later came
true]. Since there are too many examples of dreams that never come true, I
will not dwell upon them [here].
All of these indicate that the mutation of the spirit is vague and uncertain,
and [the relation between] the unseen world and this world is unpredictable.

51

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

This is easy to understand in brief but difﬁcult to discuss thoroughly with
logic. If it is not accepted that the spirit goes out [of the body], all [explanations] must be sought within the body. I am afraid [you think] that a piece
of the hidden spirit is cut off from seeing the external world. Although you
lean on [the divination of] the six kinds of dreams96 or try to aid [your discourse] with [Buddhist terms such as] conception (Skt. saṃjñā) and cause,
it is impossible [to verify your discourse] in reason.”
Question: “The spirit is originally not the substance and the body is originally not the function, either. Why is it impossible that [spirit and body]
differ from each other?”
Answer: “Their names differ from each other, but their essences are one.”
Question: “Their names already differ from each other. Why is it possible
that their essences are one?”
Answer: “[The relation] between spirit and substance is similar to that
between sharpness and a sword. [The relation] between body and function
is similar to that between a sword and its sharpness. The word ‘sharpness’
is not the sword; the word ‘sword’ is not sharpness. There is, however, no
sword apart from its sharpness, and there is no sharpness apart from the
sword. I have not heard that when a sword disappears its sharpness remains.
How could it be possible that the body is lost yet the spirit remains?”
Criticism: “The sharpness that a sword possesses is due to the effect of
the [sword having been] sharpened on a whetstone. Therefore, it can slice
iguanodons and dragons in water and cut rhinoceroses and tigers on land.97
If its sharpness is used up thoroughly and its function comes to an end, the
sword’s tip and edges will certainly break and the sword becomes blunt. Just
like this, sharpness is lost, yet the sword remains. Namely, the spirit is lost
yet the body remains. Why do you say there is no sword apart from sharpness
and the words ‘sword’ and ‘sharpness’ differ from each other but their essences
are one? Since a sword and sharpness are not extinguished together, body
and spirit do not perish together, either. Even though you are capable of
making an example from familiar things, it goes against reality in reason.”
Question: “[The relation between] a sword and sharpness is probably as
you say, but the signiﬁcance of [the relation between] body and spirit is not
the same as this. Why do I say so? The substance of a tree has no perception,
while the substance of a human being has perception. A human being already

52

Fascicle Nine

has substance, as does a tree, yet [the human being] has perception that a
tree does not have. Isn’t it that a tree has one [characteristic] (i.e., substance)
but a human being has two (i.e., substance and perception)?”
Answer: “This sounds strange! If a human being has substance, like that
of a tree, that is considered to be the body, and he has perception, which a
tree does not have, that is regarded as the spirit, then it might be as you say.
Now, regarding the substance of a human being, this substance has perception.
As for the substance of a tree, its substance has no perception. The substance
of a human being is not [the same as] that of a tree; the substance of a tree
is not [like] that of a human being. Is it possible to have a substance like that
of a tree combined with perception, which a tree does not have?”
Question: “The reason the substance of a human being differs from that
of a tree is because [the former] has perception. Would a human being who
has no perception be any different from a tree?”
Answer: “A human being does not have substance without perception. It
is just as a tree does not have a body that has perception.”
Question: “Isn’t the dead body [of a human being] a substance without
perception?”
Answer: “Yes, it is a substance without perception.”
Question: “If that is the case, a human being surely has a substance like
that of a tree, as well as the perception that distinguishes [him or her] from
a tree.”
Answer: “A dead body has substance like that of a tree, yet it does not
have the perception that distinguishes [a human being] from a tree. A living
person has this perception that distinguishes [a human being] from a tree,
yet he or she does not have a substance like that of a tree.”
Question: “Isn’t the skeleton of a dead body the same as that of a living
person?”
Answer: “A living body is not a dead body; a dead body is not a living
body. The distinction between them is already evident. How could a person
who has the skeleton of a living person have the skeleton of a dead body?”
Question: “If the skeleton of a living person is not the same as that of a
dead body, the [deceased’s] skeleton must not derive from that of a living
person. If [the deceased’s skeleton] does not derive from the skeleton of a
living person, from where does this [deceased’s] skeleton come?”

53

55c

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

56a

Answer: “It comes from the skeleton of a living person, which changes
and becomes the [deceased’s] skeleton.”
Question: “Even if the skeleton of a living person changes and becomes
the [deceased’s] skeleton, wouldn’t there be death on the basis of life? So,
it is known that a dead body is still a living body.”
Answer: “If a leafy tree changes and becomes a withered tree [with no
leaves], how could the substance of the withered tree be same essence as
that of the leafy tree?”
Question: “The essence of a leafy [tree] changes and becomes the essence
of a withered [tree]. The essence of a withered [tree] is exactly the [same]
essence as that of a leafy [tree]. It is just like the essence of very ﬁne thread
that changes and becomes the essence of twisted yarn; the essence of the
twisted yarn is exactly the same essence as that of the very ﬁne thread. Is
there anything faulty in this?”
Answer: “If a withered [tree] is exactly a leafy [tree] and a leafy [tree] is
nothing other than a withered [tree, a tree] should then appear withered when
it is ﬂourishing and bear fruit when it is withered. Moreover, a leafy tree
should not change and become a withered tree. Since a leafy [tree] is exactly
a withered [tree], no further change can happen to a withered [tree]. In addition, if a leafy [tree] and a withered [tree] are the same, why isn’t a tree ﬁrst
withered and leaﬂess, only later does it have leaves? Why is it ﬁrst leafy and
later withered [and leaﬂess]? Very ﬁne thread and twisted yarn [made of that
thread] are [essentially] the same [substance]. It is impossible to compare
them to [a tree].”
Question: “When [a person’s] life leaves his body, [his life] should be
suddenly and completely exhausted. Why does his dead body remain for a
long time?”
Answer: “There must be a sequential order in the essence of arising and
extinction. Therefore, what arises suddenly must be extinguished suddenly;
what arises gradually must be extinguished gradually. What arises suddenly
are such things as a cyclone or a sudden rainstorm. What arises gradually
are such things as animals or plants. There is sudden [arising and extinction]
and gradual [arising and extinction]. This is the law of phenomena.”
Criticism: “The Discourse says, ‘The substance of a human being has
perception while the substance of a tree has no perception.’ Isn’t this because

54

Fascicle Nine

a human being recognizes when it is cold or hot, he knows pain and itchiness,
he lives when he is nourished, and dies when he is [seriously] injured? A tree
is the same. It is leafy in spring and withered in fall. When it is planted it
must grow, but when it is pulled out [at the root], it must die. Why do you
think [a tree] has no perception?
Here now the substance of a human being is just like that of a tree. When
the spirit stays [in the body], the body arises; when the spirit leaves [the
body], the body is exhausted. [The body that] arises is precisely like a leafy
tree, and [the body that] is exhausted is exactly like a withered tree. Why do
you assert that this is not the perception of the spirit and say that substance
has perception? Myriad things are all perceived by the spirit; they are not
perceived by the substance. The nature of grass, trees, and insects is, however,
to simply be aware of ﬂourishing, withering, arising, and extinction. The
consciousness of a human being distinguishes safety from danger, or advantage
from disadvantage. Why do you say it is not that [a human being] has substance
like that of a tree, which becomes the body, and has perception that distinguishes [a human being] from a tree, which becomes the spirit? This would
mean that body and spirit exist as two [elements] that can be distinguished
from each other. Trees merely receive the partial energy of yin and yang, while
human beings bear the exquisite intellectual function of the numinous being.
In consciousness, both [human beings and trees] are probably the same, but
they differ from each other in spirit. In the discussion on the skeleton [of a
dead body] and that [of a living person], and in the explanation for giving and
receiving death and life, judgment has already been previously settled. The
issues are absurd, as well. Why must we debate about them in detail?”
Question: “In the case where the body conforms to the spirit, are [body
parts,] such as hands, considered to be the spirit, too?”
Answer: “All are parts of the spirit.”
Question: “If all are parts of the spirit, then just as the spirit ought to be
able to think, hands and other body parts should be able to think, too.”
Answer: “Hands and other body parts have perception [of such feelings as]
pain and itchiness, but they have no faculty of thinking to judge right or wrong.”
Question: “Are perception and thought the same or different?”
Answer: “Perception is precisely thought. What is shallow becomes perception and what is deep becomes thought.”

55

56b

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

Question: “If this is so, there ought to be two kinds of thoughts. Since
there are two kinds of thoughts, are there then also two kinds of spirits?”
Answer: “The body of a human being is only one. How could it be possible
to have two kinds of spirits?”
Question: “If there cannot be two kinds of spirits, why does [a human
being] have perception [of such feelings as] pain and itchiness as well as the
faculty of thinking to judge right or wrong?”
Answer: “Even though hands differ from feet, they all are [parts] of a person, and even though right and wrong, or pain and itchiness, differ from each
other, they all are of the spirit.”
Question: “If the faculty of thinking to judge right or wrong is not concerned with hands and feet, with what should it be concerned?”
Answer: “The faculty of thinking to judge right or wrong is taken charge
of by the heart organ.”
Question: “The heart organ is the heart of the ﬁve internal organs (i.e.,
heart, liver, spleen, lungs, and kidneys), isn’t it?”
Answer: “Correct!”
Question: “What distinction is there among the ﬁve internal organs? Does
only the heart have the faculty of thinking to judge right or wrong?”
Answer: “What difference is there among the seven apertures in the human
head (i.e., eyes, ears, nostrils, and mouth)? Their functions are not equal.
Why?”
Question: “Thought has no set pattern. How is it known that this is taken
charge of by the heart organ?”
Answer: “When the mind becomes ill, the faculty of thinking falls into
disorder. From this, it is known that the heart is the basis of thought. ”
Question: “How do you know that [the faculty of thinking] does not lodge
in other body parts, such as the eyes?”
Answer: “If the faculty of thinking can lodge in the eyes, why does the
faculty of sight not lodge in the ears?”
Question: “Since the essence of thought has no basis, it can lodge in the
eyes. The eyes have their own basis and they do not borrow other body parts
[in order to function].”
Answer: “Why do the eyes have the basis? Why does thought have no
basis? If [thought] has no basis in my body and it can lodge anywhere else,

56

Fascicle Nine

it is possible that Zhang Jia’s mind lodges in Wang Yi’s body, or Li Bing’s
nature lodges in Zhao Ding’s body. Is this the case? No, it is not.”
Criticism: “The Discourse says, ‘Body and spirit do not differ from each
other. [All body parts] such as hands are of the spirit.’ This indicates that the
spirit takes the body as the essence. When the essence is complete, the spirit
is complete, too; when the essence is injured, the spirit becomes deﬁcient.98
What is spirit? It is discernment and thought. Now, even if a person receives
a cut on his hands and feet, or his skin and ﬂesh are damaged, his wisdom
does not fall into disorder. It is just as Sun Bin, who suffered the punishment
of having his feet severed, became clearer in strategy, or Lu Fu, who had
had his arm amputated [because of a disease] remained solely serene in Confucian scholarship.99 These are appropriate testimonies that the spirit separates
from the body, and even if the body is injured the spirit is unharmed.
“The spirit simply employs wisdom in order to do things and it lodges in
the organs in order to facilitate the intellectual function. Each of the visual,
audio, olfactory, and gustatory senses has what it takes as a basis, and thought
and consciousness belong to the heart organ. It is similar to dwellings, which
have a gate on the east to invite wise people, a balcony on the south for views,
a window on the north to take in fresh air, and carved windowsills on the
west that project the moon; [in such a dwelling] the host uprightly occupies
the middle of the room and conducts all his business.
“If the issue is just as your discourse says, each of the [sense organs of
the] mouth, nose, ears, and eyes has its part of the spirit. Then, if an eye
becomes ill, the spirit of the visual sense will be damaged and both eyes
ought to go blind together; if an ear becomes ill, the spirit of the auditory
sense will be harmed and both ears ought to go deaf together. [Nevertheless,]
this is not actually the case. From this, it is known that the spirit is considered
to be the organ, but is not considered to be the essence.
“Moreover, [the Discourse] says, ‘The heart is the basis of thought. Thought
cannot lodge in other parts.’ In regard to the mouth, eyes, ears, and nose, this
view is correct. If, however, it is concerned with other people’s minds, this
is not so.
“Although the ears and nose work together with one body, they cannot
be mixed together. It is because what each of them has control of differs from
the other organs and the function of each organ differs from that of the others.

57

56c

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

Even though other people’s minds exist in each of their bodies, it is possible
to communicate with one another. This is because the principles of the mind
are equally ingenious, and discernment and thought are equal in achievement.
Therefore, the Book of History says, ‘Open your mind and pour it into my
mind,’100 and the Book of Odes says, ‘What other people have in their minds
I can measure by reﬂection.’101 Lord Huan of Qi state followed the plans of
Guan Zhong.102 Emperor Gaozu of the Han dynasty employed Zhang Liang’s
strategy.103 These cases all show that one can lodge in another’s mind [while]
based in one’s own body. Why do you say that Zhang Jia’s mind cannot lodge
in Wang Yi’s body, or Li Bing’s nature cannot lodge in Zhao Ding’s body?”
Question: “Sages’ bodies are similar to those of ordinary people, but there
is a difference between ordinary people and sages. Hence, it is known that
body differs from spirit.”
Answer: “This is not so. Pure gold can shine while impure gold cannot.
Could there be a case where pure gold, which can shine, has the essence of
impurity, which cannot shine? Moreover, could there be a case where the
spirit of a sage lodges in the body of an ordinary person? There is no case
where the spirit of an ordinary person lodged in the body of a sage, either.
Therefore, [Fang]xun (i.e., Yao) had [eyebrows of] eight variegated colors,
and [Zhong]hua (i.e., Shun) had eyes with double pupils. Xuan[yuan] (i.e.,
the Yellow Emperor) had a forehead resembling that of a dragon, and Gao
[Yao] had a mouth like that of a horse.104 These are differences in physical
appearance. In Bi Gan’s heart seven apertures stand side by side.105 Boyue’s
gall was as large as a ﬁst. These are differences in the heart and internal
organs. Therefore, it is known that the characteristics of sages always differ
from those of ordinary people. It is not only that their way is more remarkable
than that of sentient beings; the bodies of sages also go beyond those of all
creatures in the world. I dare not be content with [the view that] ordinary
people and sages have the same physical bodies.”
Question: “You said that sages’ bodies must differ from those of ordinary
people. I venture to ask you: Yang Huo looked like Confucius and [the eyes]
of Xiang Ji (i.e., Xiang Yu) resembled those of Emperor Shun. Between Shun
and Xiang [Ji] or between Confucius and Yang [Huo] there are differences
in intelligence even though they were similar in appearance. What is the
reason for this?”

58

Fascicle Nine

Answer: “The stone called min resembles jade, but it is not jade; the bird
called ju looks like a male phoenix, but it is not a male phoenix. In things
there really are such cases. [The case of] human beings is originally not
exceptional. The features of Xiang [Ji] and Yang [Huo] are similar [to those
of Emperor Shun and Confucius, respectively], but the former are not
[Emperor Shun and Confucius] in reality. It is because the heart organs [of
Xiang Ji and Yang Huo] are not equal [to those of Emperor Shun and Confucius]. [The resemblance of] their physical features alone is meaningless.”
Question: “You may say that ordinary people and sages differ from each
other; their bodies and internal organs are not the same. Sages are completely
perfect, and they are peerless in reason. Confucius, however, did not look
the same as the Duke of Zhou, and King Tang’s appearance differed from
that of King Wen.106 Spirit has nothing to do with appearance. It is more evident here.”
Answer: “Regarding the issue that sages are equally sages, they are equal
in sacred ability, but this does not mean that their bodies must be the same.
It is just like horses whose coats vary in color run equally fast, or jade stones
that are diverse in color are still equally beautiful. Therefore [the jade produced
in] Chuiji of Jin state and [the jade of Bian] He of Chu state are as valuable
as ﬁfteen cities.107 [The horses called] Hualiu and Daoli could both gallop a
thousand li [in a day].”108
Question: “I have already heard that body and spirit are nondual. That the
spirit is extinguished when the body withers should be indeed so in reason.
I dare ask you: the Canon [of Filial Piety (Xiaojing)] says, ‘They prepare
the ancestral temple and make offerings to serve the spirits of the deceased.’109
What does this mean?”
Answer: “The sage’s teaching is exactly so. The reason is to cause people
to follow their ﬁlial minds and oppress thoughts of slighting [their ancestors].
[There is a passage in the Book of Changes], ‘God is the one who clariﬁes
it.’110 This is the meaning.”
Question: “Boyou (i.e., Liang Xiao of Zheng state), [who had been killed
by Gongsun He, appeared] clad in armor [and killed Si Dai and Gongsun
Duan]. Pengsheng, [who had been executed for murdering Lord Huan of Lu
state,] appeared as a boar.111 These incidents are recorded in ancient books.
Why are these exerted only for the teaching?”

59

57a

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

57b

Answer: “Things about ghosts are vague; they may or may not exist. There
are many who die an unnatural death, yet not all of them become ghosts.
Why would only Pengsheng and Boyou do so? Now he is a man, now a boar.
It is not necessarily the case that [a ghost] is the son of the lord of Qi state
or Zheng state.”
Question: “The Book of Changes says, ‘Thus it is known that the condition
of spiritual beings is similar to the law of Heaven and Earth, and there is no
difference between these two.’112 Furthermore, it says, ‘There is a carriage
full of ghosts.’113 What do these [statements] mean?”
Answer: “There are birds and animals. There is a difference between them:
[birds] ﬂy and [animals] run. There are people and disembodied spirits. There
is a difference between them: people live in the world of the living and disembodied spirits exist in the world of the dead. I do not know that someone
who died became a disembodied spirit, or the disembodied spirit that was
extinguished became a person.”
Criticism: “The Discourse says, ‘Could there be a case where the spirit
of a sage lodges in the body of an ordinary person? There is no case where
the spirit of an ordinary person lodges in the body of a sage, either.’ [Nevertheless,] Yang Huo looked like Confucius and Xiang Ji resembled Emperor
Shun. These are precisely [examples] that the spirit of an ordinary person
can lodge in the body of a sage.
“The stone min and jade, or the bird ju and a male phoenix, cannot be
used as parables [in this case]. The stone min has its own name, min; jade is
truly called jade; the full name of the bird ju is designated as yuanju; a male
phoenix is called the divine phoenix. The names already differ from each
other and their features differ from each other in reality as well. Shun had
the eyes with double pupils and Xiang Ji also had eyes with double pupils.
This is not the case of having two different names, min and jade. We simply
observe the similarity: [both Shun and Xiang Ji had] double pupils.
“Furthermore, there are other examples, such as that Nüwa had a body
like a snake and Gao Yao had a mouth like a horse. [These cases show] not
only that the spirit of a sage can enter into the body of an ordinary person,
but also that the spirit can subsequently lodge in the body of an insect or animal. From this, it is more evident that body and spirit differ from each other,
and brightness and darkness are not the same.

60

Fascicle Nine

“If body and spirit are uniform and the cause of the former existence is
cut off in reason, only a sage ought to be born to a sage; a worthy person
must give a birth to a worthy person; and a brave person, a coward, an ignorant
person, and an intelligent person are all supposed to resemble their parents
[in their dispositions]. In considering what body and spirit [as uniform] shape
and create, and what a single kind of material force [of the universe] nurtures,
it is impossible that Yao, who is wise and clever, yet [his son Dan]zhu is silly,
or that [Gu]sou is ignorant but [his son,] Shun, is a sage.
“The Discourse further says, ‘Sages are equal in sacred ability. This does
not mean that their abilities must be the same. It is just like horses whose
coats vary in color run equally fast.’ Here, are the horses’ coats the abilities
that run fast? Among horses whose coats are the same color, old, worn-out
horses and [young] ﬁne horses may differ [in their abilities to run fast]. In
this way, the color of the horse’s coat has nothing to do with the characteristic
of running fast. This is because in body there is no sacred ability. In the body
of a human being there is no difference between an ordinary person and a
sage, but there is a difference between being strong and being weak. Therefore,
a patient spirit stays in a profound body, while an impatient spirit dwells in
an approachable body. In short, everything merely comes down to this point.
Regarding the bodies of sages mentioned previously by [Fan Zhen], he directly
refers to the bodies of Confucius and Shun but he does not say that their
bodies have sacred intelligence. If [your view] is not contradictory to mine,
do not approach this delusion.”
Question: “If I know that my spirit is extinguished, what advantage is
there [in knowing this]?”
Answer: “Buddhism is harmful to state affairs. Śramaṇas ruin popular
customs. Just as ﬁerce winds blow and fog arises, [Buddhism] spreads out
widely, without stopping. I lament its baneful inﬂuence and intend to save
those who indulge in [Buddhism]. People use up their wealth in order to go
to Buddhist monks, and they go bankrupt in order to follow the Buddha, yet
they neither sympathize with their relatives nor feel pity for poor and destitute
people. Why? It is really because they have the deep feeling to favor themselves and a shallow intention to save others. Therefore, when they give a
very small amount of grain to a poor friend, they have a stingy expression
on their face, but when they send a thousand zhong (about 5,540 bushels) of

61

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

57c

grain to rich Buddhist monks, their great joy is expressed in their entire body.
Isn’t this because they expect a great reward from the Buddhist monks but
[little or] no repayment from their friend? When they make a donation, they
are not concerned in helping the distressed, yet [they are concerned that] the
merit attained [by donating to monks] must come to themselves.
“[Buddhist monks] delude people with obscure words, frighten people
with [stories of] torment in Avīci Hell, decoy people with preposterous talk,
and make people joyful with [promises of] happiness in Tuṣita Heaven.
Therefore, [Confucianists] take off the Confucian robe and put on a Buddhist
monk’s robe. They abandon the sacriﬁcial stand and pot [for Confucian rites]
and arrange vases and bowls [for Buddhist services]. In every family, people
give up attachment to their family members. Every one cuts off his offspring.
As a result, [Buddhism] causes soldiers to lose courage in military affairs,
ofﬁcials to absent themselves from government ofﬁces, [stores of] grain to
be used up because of people’s laziness, and commodities to be exhausted
because of construction projects. Therefore [Buddhist monks] are thieves
and robbers. [Nevertheless,] voices praising the Buddha’s excellence are still
powerful. This is all because of [Buddhism]. This tendency continues without
stopping, and the harm goes on limitlessly.
“If we know that the creation [of all things] is endowed from Nature, that
phenomena of the universe change equally by themselves, that everything
suddenly comes into existence and suddenly disappears, and that arising
canot be controlled and disappearing cannot be stopped, then each of us will
be content with our nature, availing ourselves of the laws of nature. [Then]
the common people are satisﬁed with [working in] their ﬁelds and gentlemen
remain calm, being free from avarice. If people till the land and obtain food,
we will not run short of supplies of food. If they raise silkworms in order to
obtain [thread for] clothing, we will not run out of clothes. When people of
the lower classes have a surplus they will offer it to those of the upper class.
People of the upper class maintain wuwei and wait for the common people
[to offer food and goods to them]. Then people can fulﬁll the entire course
of their lives, attend their parents with devotion, manage themselves, act for
the sake of others, do things for the good of the country, and make their ruler
powerful. [All of this will be achieved] if they act in this way.”

62

Fascicle Nine

Criticism: “The existence of the Buddha depends on whether or not the
principles of the mind exist. I have already spoken about this previously, but
I would like to brieﬂy speak of it again here. From now I will point out the
gains and losses [of Buddhism] and speak of its advantages and disadvantages
in order to correct your excessive discussion.
“You say that śramaṇas ruin popular customs, damage ediﬁcation, waste
[a great amount of] money and property, and reduce [the number of those
who do] military service. Some monks do so, but this is not the Buddha’s
fault. When the Buddha established the teaching, its basis was to be fond of
life, to abhor killing, to practice good deeds, and to be engaged in almsgiving.
To be fond of life is not only limited to the wish that birds and animals should
multiply but also to consider that the numen of a human being is important.
Could it be possible that to abhor killing means to suspend a sentence, forgive
a criminal, or let a criminal abscond? This refers to investigating criminals
and judging them with sympathy. To practice good deeds does not necessarily
mean to revere [a buddha image that is] one zhang and six chi tall. It is to
consider faithfulness and honesty as superior. To be engaged in almsgiving
does not at all mean to use up one’s wealth for construction projects. It means
to consider that helping those who are in distress is virtuous. If everyone
were to cut off his offspring the Dharma seed (i.e., the Buddha’s teaching)
would certainly never be transmitted. If Buddhist temples are built side by
side there would be no land to sow and plant. Even ordinary people understand
this. Needless to say, it is unlikely that our Benevolent One (i.e., the Buddha)
would be happy about this.
“At present, if Buddhist monks who ‘wait by the stump,’ [hoping other
hares will come by that same spot because they once caught a hare at that
place] and confused, petty people see someone [shivering] with cold, they
do not give even a poor article of clothing to him, or if they encounter a starving man they do not give even coarse food to him.
Nevertheless, [laypeople] vie with one another in gathering Buddhist monks
who lack insight, and compete with one another in making many buddha
[images]. They abandon their relatives and never think of them. They abolish
offering sacriﬁces [to the gods and ancestors] and never practice moral cultivation. They tear up good silk fabric [to ornament] Buddhist temples and

63

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

58a

scatter cinnabar and gold under pagodas. They think such acts are all for a
ﬁeld of merit (Skt. puṇyakṣetra) and expect a reward. This is all because
their comprehension of the Buddha is not deep and their understanding of
the Dharma is not excellent. Even though they call the Buddha the Buddha,
do they understand the purpose of taking refuge in the Buddha? They call a
Buddhist monk a Buddhist monk, yet how could they reach the [true] meaning
of following Buddhist monks? In this condition, divine beings do not bless
them. I can do nothing for them, either.
“In the ways of the six schools of philosophy, each has had a long-accumulated evil effect. The Confucian school has the fault of being biased; the
Mohist school has the fault of being extreme;114 the Legalist school has the
fault of being too severe; the Nominalist school has the fault of being sophistic.
This is entirely because the founders [of these schools] lost the [correct] transmission [of the teachings] and came to fall into the mire. You now take up
the fault of being biased or extreme, but you do not criticize the founders
Confucius and Mo [Di]. You pick up the fault of being too severe and sophistic
but you do not blame the founders Han [Fei] and Deng [Xi]. Yet you punish
only our Tathāgata and disparage his right, perfect enlightenment. This is
similar to becoming angry at wind and waves and destroying a ship [in a fury].
“Rebels and villains presently deceive the ruler and their parents who are
in a superior social position, and they are cruel to people of the same class
in an inferior social position. Some do not fear the brilliant law [of the country], but are suddenly afraid of the government ofﬁce of the netherworld.
They shrink from King Yama’s ferocity and fear the brutality of the ox-headed
wardens of hell. Consequently, they repent their evils and reform themselves.
This is an advantage [of Buddhism]. Moreover, the law of evil acts and meritorious deeds [in Buddhism] cannot differ from that of the worldly teaching,
and should not go against human feeling. If there is someone who serves the
ruler with loyalty, earnestly attends his parents with ﬁlial piety, and is trusted
by his friends, it never happens to such a person that if he commits a fault
that squanders his virtue he is disdained and abandoned, or if he commits
the sin of killing insects or ﬁsh he falls into hell.
“No one surpasses Yi Yin, [a minister of the Yin dynasty,] in loyalty, and
no one is above Zeng Shen in ﬁlial piety. Lord Yi slaughtered an animal in

64

Fascicle Nine

order to nourish King Tang.115 Zengzi (i.e., Zeng Shen) cooked a fowl in
order to nourish [his father] Dian. Both of these men, however, went to the
hell of intense heat (Skt. tapanaḥ), [just as other ordinary people do,] and to
the hell of sharp-pointed swords together. This is because a great achievement
may be canceled out by a minor fault: they served their superiors yet they
were against beneﬁting their inferiors.
“Formerly, Mi Zi[xia] made a false statement and rode a carriage [of the
lord of Wei state because he was rushing to his sick mother], but he was
spared from execution because of his great generosity.116 Alas! I once thought
that the numinous artisan (i.e., the Buddha) is not as good as the lord of Wei
state. Therefore, it is known that this [teaching] (i.e., Buddhism) is a precaution
for merciless people and not an admonition for kindhearted people. If we
thoroughly examine its deviation and arbitrariness, the fault does not lie in
the Buddha. When we observe fortune and misfortune, we realize that the
teaching was given in order to lead [people to the right path].
“If one stops thinking trivial matters in order to respect the basis, does
not uproot the basis in order to make an exhaustive investigation of trivial
matters, thinks of forgetting about himself in order to propagate the Dharma,
and does not put off the Dharma in order to beneﬁt himself, then even though
he may say that he has not yet been a Buddhist, I certainly think that such a
person is a Buddhist.”

Criticism of Secretariat Fan’s Discourse
on the Extinction of the Spirit
by Cao Siwen

The Discourse says, “Spirit conforms to body, and body conforms to spirit.
For this reason, when the body exists, the spirit does, too. When the body
withers away, the spirit is extinguished.”
Criticism: “Body does not conform to spirit and spirit does not conform
to body. These [two] are united and then they perform functions. Accordingly,
uniting is not conforming. While one is alive, [his or her spirit and body] are
united and perform functions. At the time of death the body still remains but
the spirit departs. On what basis do I say so? In former times Zhao Jianzi
was ill for ﬁve days, during which he did not recognize people [around him],

65

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

58b

and Lord Mu of Qin state came to his senses seven days [after he lost consciousness].117 Both of their spirits traveled to the place of the Celestial
Thearch, where the Thearch had magniﬁcent music played for them in Juntian
(Melody Heaven, one of nine heavens). Is this an example that the body
remains while the spirit departs? If the spirit is extinguished when the body
perishes, as the Discourse says, then body and spirit should certainly be
together, just as a shadow [follows its form] or echo [follows its sound]. If
this is so, when the body is ill the spirit would also be ill. How, then, could
only the spirits [of Zhao Jianzi or Lord Mu] travel to the Celestial Thearch
and be delighted by the magniﬁcent music of Juntian, while their bodies
[were ill and] they did not recognize the people [around them]? This means
that the spirit (hun) communicates with others while one sleeps. Therefore,
the spirit (shen) [of Zhuangzi] became a butterﬂy and ﬂew around.118 That
is to say, his body and spirit separated from each other. When he awoke his
body began functioning, and he became the veritable Zhuangzi. Namely, his
body and spirit were united. There is both separation and unity of spirit and
body. When they are united they become one entity; when they separate from
each other, the body perishes and the spirit departs. Therefore, when [Jizi
of] Yanling (i.e., Jizha of Wu) buried his son, he said, ‘The bones and ﬂesh
return again to the earth but the spirit in its energy (hunqi) can go everywhere.’119 This exactly means that even though the body perishes, the spirit
is not extinguished. If this is so, then the clear testimonies found in the scriptures and history books are of uncommon brilliance. [The issue] is just like
this. How could it be that when the body perishes the spirit is extinguished?”
The Discourse says, “The questioner says, ‘The Canon [of Filial Piety]
says, “They prepare the ancestral temple and make offerings to serve spirits
of the deceased.’ The explanation says, ‘It is not that there are spirits of the
deceased. This is because the sage’s teaching is exactly so. The reason is to
cause people to follow their ﬁlial minds and oppress thoughts of slighting
[their ancestors].’”
Criticism: “What the Discourse says is completely a sentimental expression,
not the sage’s purpose. Please let me quote a passage from the Canon [of
Filial Piety] in order to testify to the sage’s teaching. The Canon of Filial
Piety says, ‘Formerly, the Duke of Zhou sacriﬁced to Houji (Minister of

66

Fascicle Nine

Agriculture) at the border altar in order to enshrine him as the correlate of
Heaven, and he honored King Wen in the Brilliant Hall in order to enshrine
him as the correlate of the Supreme Thearch.’120 If body and spirit are extinguished together, who then was enshrined as the correlate of Heaven, and
who was enshrined as the correlate of the Supreme Thearch? Moreover, when
[Zilu falsiﬁed a case in which Confucius] had vassals, even though he had
no vassals, Confucius said, ‘Is it possible to deceive Heaven?’121 If the spirit
of [Hou]ji did not exist and yet he is enshrined as the correlate [of Heaven],
does this mean that Zhou Dan (i.e., the Duke of Zhou) deceived Heaven? If
[Hou]ji did not really exist and yet he was vainly enshrined as the correlate
of Heaven, this is precisely to deceive Heaven, and it also deceives the people.
This would indicate that this sage’s teaching guides the people with deception
and falsity. How could one who establishes a teaching on the basis of deception
and falsity cause people to master the mind of a ﬁlial child and oppress
thoughts of slighting [their ancestors]?
“Seeking for the purpose of the Discourse, its prerequisite is that the spirit
does not exist. I will try to question closely again.
“Confucius offered a small amount of vegetable soup and melons in sacriﬁce at his ancestral temple.122 The Book of Rites says, ‘We welcome [the
spirits of ancestors] with joy and send them off with sadness.’123 If there is
no spirit, what are we supposed to welcome in reception? If there is no spirit,
what are we supposed to send off at that time? If [Confucius] was happy
when he welcomed [nonexistent spirits], it would be false happiness that
appeared on his face. If he was sad when [nonexistent spirits] departed, the
tears he shed from his body (i.e., eyes) would be false. If this [was the case,
then] in the religious services Confucius performed deception ﬁlled his mind,
and his ancestral temple was full of falsity. Could the sage’s teaching be like
this? Nevertheless, you say, ‘The sage’s teaching is exactly so.’ Why?”
I, Siwen, speak. I personally read Fan Zhen’s Discourse on the Extinction
of the Spirit, in which he made himself the guest as well as the host. Consequently, there are more than thirty articles. Without thinking of my ignorance,
I, Siwen, slightly criticized only two articles of the important points of the
Discourse. I earnestly desire to break the root [of the Discourse] with this.
I will sincerely take risks to submit it to Imperial hearing. My nature is

67

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

shallow and deﬁcient, and I am afraid that I cannot refute this peculiar writing
(i.e., the Discourse). When I look up I disgrace a blessing from Heaven, and
when I look down I tremble in fear as a consequence of [my criticism].
Humbly, yours.

[Imperial Response]
The two articles you criticized will be separately read in detail.
I proclaimed my response to you above.

Response to Office Manager Cao’s
Criticism of the Discourse on the
Extinction of the Spirit
[by Fan Zhen]

58c

Criticism: “Body does not conform to spirit and spirit does not conform to
body. These [two] are united and then they perform functions. Accordingly,
uniting is not conforming.”
Answer: “If [body and spirit] are united and perform functions, it is clear
that they have no function unless they are united. It is just like the animal
called qiong[qiong] and the animal called ju[xu] depend on each other; if
one of them becomes disabled, the other cannot [survive]. This is exactly
essential evidence for the extinction of spirit, but it is not a right conclusion
for the existence of the spirit. Your intention is basically to force a ﬁght on
me. Will you, however, become reinforcement for me?”
Criticism: “In former times Zhao Jianzi was ill for ﬁve days, during which
he did not recognize people [around him], and Lord Mu of Qin state came
to his senses seven days [after he lost consciousness]. Both of their spirits
traveled to the place of the Celestial Thearch, where the Thearch had magniﬁcent music played for them in Juntian. Is this an example that the body
remains while the spirit departs?”
Answer: “Regarding the issue that Zhao Jianzi became a distinguished
guest [of the Celestial Thearch] and Lord Mu of Qin state traveled to the
Celestial Thearch, since it is said that they enjoyed [the magniﬁcent music
of] Juntian with their ears and made themselves easy tasting all sorts of food
and drink with their mouths, it is possible that they paciﬁed their bodies in
a grand mansion, their eyes were delighted with a good view of the universe,

68

Fascicle Nine

they wore beautifully embroidered robes, and they ‘bit and reined’ (i.e., rode)
a dragon. Therefore, it is known that what the spirit expects does not differ
from what people do. Each of the four limbs and the seven apertures in the
head [of the spirit] is equal to those of the [human] body. Since it cannot go
far with a single wing, it ﬂies with both wings. This is adapted to the spirit,
without doubt. How then could [the spirit that] goes by the body become
independent?”
Criticism: “If the spirit is extinguished when the body perishes, as the
Discourse says, then body and spirit should certainly be together, just as a
shadow [follows its form] or echo [follows its sound]. If this is so, when the
body is ill the spirit would also be ill. How, then, could only the spirits [of
Zhao Jianzi or Lord Mu] travel to the Celestial Thearch and be delighted by
the magniﬁcent music of Juntian, while their bodies [were ill and] they did
not recognize the people [around them]?”
Answer: “If the issue is just as you think, then when the body is ill the
spirit is not. When one is injured, he suffers from pain. [Under your logic,]
in such a case the body would feel pain but the spirit would not. When one
has an afﬂiction, he is anxious. [Under your logic,] in this case the body has
anxiety yet the spirit does not. If anxiety and pain have already been experienced by the body in this way, how could the spirit be bothered for nothing?”
“I, Cao [Siwen], think that [body and spirit] are united and perform functions while one is alive; they share pain and disablement. When one dies,
the body remains and the spirit travels. Therefore [the spirit] that traveled to
the Celestial Thearch is different from the body.”
Criticism: “[This means that] the spirit communicates with others while
one sleeps. Therefore, the spirit [of Zhuangzi] became a butterﬂy and ﬂew
around. That is to say, his body and spirit separated from each other. When
he awoke his body began functioning, and he became the veritable Zhuangzi.
Namely, his body and his spirit were united.”
Answer: “This criticism can be said to be a thorough argument, but it cannot be said to be [the ideas of] the one who has mastered the principle. You
say, ‘The spirit [of Zhuangzi] became a butterﬂy and ﬂew around.’ Did
[Zhuangzi] truly become a ﬂying insect? If so, when in a dream someone
becomes a cow, he would then bear the shafts of another person’s cart on his

69

59a

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

back, or if he becomes a horse in a dream, he would then be ridden by other
people. [In this case,] the next morning there would be a dead cow or a dead
horse [where the person had been asleep]. However, there is no such thing.
Why not? Moreover, [the empress of Wu state dreamed that] her intestines
ﬂew around the Gate of Heaven (i.e., the front gate of a palace). She should
have died instantly. How could she continue to live after losing her liver and
lungs? Furthermore, the sun and moon have their places in the sky, and land
stretches a thousand li between east and west as well as between south and
north. It is unlikely that [the moon] comes down and enters into the bosom
of a common woman.124 Dreams and phantasms are unreal. There is no base
from which they arise. It is too extraordinary if we were to take them to be
real. If we unite ourselves with intelligence and ponder over the sky, we can
travel all around the sky from our seats. If our spirits are confused within us,
we untruly see peculiar things. How could it be that Zhuangzi [became a
butterﬂy] and really disported himself in the south garden, and Zhao Jianzi
truly ascended to the Gate of Heaven? My cousin Xiao Chen at Ying also
keeps grumbling about this based on dreams. I wonder who wants to take a
look at it.”
Criticism: “[Therefore, when Jizi of] Yanling buried his son, he said, ‘The
bones and ﬂesh return again to the earth, and the spirit in its energy can go
everywhere.’ This exactly means that even though the body perishes, the
spirit is not extinguished.”
Answer: “When a human being is born, the energy is provided from
Heaven and the body is received from Earth. Therefore, [when he dies,] the
body vanishes down into the earth and the energy extinguishes into Heaven.
Since the energy extinguishes into Heaven, it is said that ‘it can go everywhere.’ That ‘it can go everywhere’ means simply that it is unfathomable.
Is it necessary that [the energy] has spirit as well as perception?”
Criticism: “What the Discourse says is completely a sentimental expression,
not the sage’s purpose. Please let me quote a passage from the Canon [of
Filial Piety] in order to testify to the sage’s teaching. The Canon of Filial
Piety says, ‘Formerly, the Duke of Zhou sacriﬁced to Houji at the border
altar in order to enshrine him as the correlate of Heaven, and he honored
King Wen in the Brilliant Hall in order to enshrine him as the correlate of

70

Fascicle Nine

the Supreme Thearch.’ If body and spirit are extinguished together, who then
was enshrined as the correlate of Heaven, and who was enshrined as the correlate of the Supreme Thearch?”
Answer: “If everyone is equally a sage or a very wise person, the teaching
originally does not exist. The reason for the foundation of the teaching lies
in the people. The people’s feeling usually values life and despises death. [If
they believe that] there is a numinous being after death, a feeling of awe
increases, but [if they think that] there is nothing to know after death, they
give rise to disrespectful thoughts. Since sages were aware of [the people’s
feeling] like this, they made ancestral temples, raised altars, and cleared the
ground around them [for the performance of sacriﬁces] in order to cause the
people to deepen their sincere minds; they spread out bamboo mats and
arranged stools [for worship] in order to cause the people to completely
compel themselves [to worship]; they cause the people to respect their ancestors and offer exhaustive sacriﬁces to Heaven; and they cause the people to
revere their fathers, enshrine them as the correlates of Heaven, and offer sacriﬁces to them in the Brilliant Hall.
“Furthermore, faithful and honest people have the foundation of their
minds, while rufﬁans are awestruck on this point. The reason the imperial
cultural education shines in the upper social class and customs are simple
and sincere in the lower social class is because this way is employed. Therefore, the Canon [of Filial Piety says], ‘They make the ancestral temple where
they present offerings to disembodied spirits.’125 That is to say, by employing
the way of disembodied spirits we perform this ﬁlial offering. [Furthermore,
the Canon of Filial Piety says,] ‘In spring and autumn they offer sacriﬁces,
thinking of [their ancestors] as the seasons come round.’126 [The sage] clariﬁed
that he encourages people to honor their ancestors [with sacriﬁces]; it is forbidden that one who dies in the morning is forgotten in the evening.
Zigong asked, ‘Does a person have cognition after death?’ Confucius said,
‘If I say that a person has cognition after death, a ﬁlial son may slight his
life and immolate himself [when his parents die]. If I say that a person has
no cognition after death, an unﬁlial son will abandon [his parents] and never
bury them.’ When Zilu (i.e., Jilu) asked about serving the spirits of the dead,
the Master (i.e., Confucius) said, ‘While you are not able to serve people,

71

59b

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

how can you serve the spirits?’127 [Zilu] precisely spoke of offering sacriﬁces
to the spirits. Why did [Confucius] not allow [Zilu] to serve them? It is
because if a person has cognition after death, [a ﬁlial son will] slight [his own]
life and immolate himself [when his parents die]. Why did [Confucius] not
clearly say that [cognition] exists [after death] and why did he give such an
evasive answer? Examining its meaning, it is already discerned that cognition
does not exist after death. Ancestral temples, a sacriﬁce to Heaven in winter,
and a sacriﬁce to Earth in summer are all expedients of the sages’ teachings.
The way of the unvarying principles ( yilun) simply cannot be abolished.”
Criticism: “Moreover, when [Zilu falsiﬁed a case in which Confucius] had
vassals, even though he had no vassals, Confucius said, ‘Is it possible to
deceive Heaven?’ If the spirit of [Hou]ji did not exist and yet he is enshrined
as the correlate [of Heaven], does this mean that Zhou Dan (i.e., the Duke of
Zhou) deceived Heaven? [If Houji did not really exist and yet he was vainly
enshrined as the correlate of Heaven,] this is precisely to deceive Heaven,
and it also deceives the people. This would indicate that this sage’s teaching
guides the people with deception and falsity. How could one who establishes
a teaching on the basis of deception and falsity cause people to master the
mind of a ﬁlial child and oppress thoughts of slighting [their ancestors]?”
Answer: “A sage is the one who manifests benevolence, who stores up
his functions within, who thoroughly comprehends the spirit, and who completely knows the processes of transformation. Therefore, it is said that ‘The
sage masters his principle, while the wise person keeps to his principle.’128
Could it be possible to seek only the means [to attain the goal] and limit the
teaching by words?
“Deception merely refers to impeding ediﬁcation, corrupting customs,
and leading the people to injustice. If it is possible to stabilize the upper class
of the society, to govern the people, to improve public morals, and to have
the brightness of the sun, moon, and stars above, and the happiness of the
common people below, what deception is there?
“Please let me ask you a question. King Tang, [founder of the Yin dynasty,]
banished King Jie, [the last ruler of the Xia dynasty,] and King Wu, [founder
of the Zhou dynasty,] attacked King Zhou, [the last ruler of the Yin dynasty].
These cases are of killing a sovereign, aren’t they? Nevertheless, Mencius

72

Fascicle Nine

said, ‘I have heard that [King Wu] put the fellow Zhou to death, but I have
never heard that he killed a sovereign.’129 You do not blame the sages’ conduct
of banishing [a sovereign] or committing regicide. Nevertheless, you make
strenuous efforts regarding the issue that offering a sacriﬁce to [Hou]ji is
absurd, don’t you?
“The southern suburbs of a city [where Heaven is worshiped on the summer
solstice], the round mound [where Heaven is worshiped on the winter solstice],
and the Brilliant Hall where the emperor performs sacriﬁcial offerings to
Heaven and Earth are exactly the headquarters of Confucianists; they are not
for endless disputes about the signiﬁcance of body and spirit. Why do things
come to this?”
Criticism: “[The Book of Rites says,] ‘We welcome [the spirits of ancestors]
with joy and send them off with sadness.’ And so on.”
Answer: “The signiﬁcance of this issue is naturally understood without
thorough explanation. I will not waste words on a useless issue. There are
many statements about this in the Book of Rites. I recently try to write about
this section, but regret a bit that I have not [yet] completed it.”
I, Siwen, speak.130 I read for the ﬁrst time the Discourse on the Extinction
of the Spirit, composed by Fan Zhen in response [to the Imperial edict]. He
still holds fast to his previous delusion. I, Siwen, tried to speculate about his
logic and principle and charged forward with the four demonstrations. I will
respectfully report this to the Throne. I am, however, ignorant and shallow
in feeling and intelligence, and I have nothing with which to refute his vigorous
discussion. When I look up I cover the sacred mirror with dust, and when I
look down I tremble in fear as a consequence of [my criticism].
Humbly, yours.

[Imperial Response]
The matter has my understanding in all its particulars. [Fan] Zhen already
established the meaning by going against the scriptures, and he delivered a
talk that opposes the truth. It is difﬁcult to upbraid with sacredness those
who have lost sacredness, and it is difﬁcult to berate with the truth those who
oppose the truth. If the situation is like this, on the whole it is all right to stop
debating [about this] in language.
Above is the Imperial response.

73

59c

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

The Second Criticism of Secretariat
Fan’s Discourse on the Extinction
of the Spirit [by Cao Siwen]

The Discourse says, “If [body and spirit] are united and perform functions, it
is clear that they have no function unless they are united. It is just like the
animal called qiong[qiong] and the animal called ju[xu] depend on each other;
if one of them becomes disabled, the other cannot [survive]. This is exactly
essential evidence for the extinction of spirit, but it is not a right conclusion
for the existence of the spirit. Your intention is basically to force a ﬁght on me.
Will you, however, become reinforcement for me?”The Discourse again says,
“[The relation] between body and spirit is similar to that between a sword and
its sharpness. . . .131 I have not heard that when a sword disappears its sharpness
remains. How could it be possible that the body is lost yet the spirit remains?”
[The Discourse] furthermore says, “[Jizi of] Yanling said that the body
vanishes underground and the spirit extinguishes into Heaven. Therefore, it
is said [that the spirit] can go everywhere.”
[The Discourse] also says, “That [Hou]ji is enshrined as the correlate of
Heaven does not deceive Heaven. It is just like when King Tang banished
[King Jie] and King Wu attacked [King Zhou]; these are not cases of killing
a sovereign. You do not blame the sages’ conduct of banishing [a sovereign]
and committing regicide. Nevertheless, you make strenuous efforts regarding
the issue that offering a sacriﬁce to [Hou]ji is absurd, don’t you?”
Criticism: “The [example of the] animals qiong[qiong] and ju[xu] is evidence only for the case that functions are made of what are united; it is not
evidence for the issue that when the body dies the spirit immediately perishes.
The reason I say this is because the animal qiong[qiong] is not the animal
ju[xu], and the ju[xu] is not the qiong[qiong]. If the qiong[qiong] is now
killed, the ju[xu] does not die, and if the ju[xu] is beheaded, the qiong[qiong]
does not perish. They do not conform to each other. At present, you refer to
[the example of] these [animals] as keen evidence and good reinforcement
regarding the issue that body and spirit perish together. This is as if you were
to give someone a spear that points toward yourself and you then seek a way
to survive. How sad! This is nothing but the ﬁrst testimony for the issue that
the body dies yet the spirit is not extinguished.

74

Fascicle Nine

“You say in the Discourse, ‘[The relation] between body and spirit is
similar to that between a sword and its sharpness. . . . I have not heard that
when a sword disappears its sharpness remains. How could it be possible
that the body is lost yet the spirit remains?’
“The ground of your discourse on the issue that body and spirit perish
together is merely this single point. An ignorant person has a delusion. Why?
Spirit and body, the two things, are united and perform functions. Namely,
as you refer to in the Discourse, the qiong[qiong] and ju[xu] that depend on
each other are [an example of] this. A sword and its sharpness are simply
two different names for the same thing. In this case, since a thing has two
different names, if the sword is abandoned its sharpness does not exist; since
two different things are united and function, when the body dies the spirit
departs. At present, you refer to a thing with two different names and try to
prove [by this] that two different things are united and function. This looks
like a hairbreadth’s difference, but in fact it is a difference of thousands of
li. This is also the second testimony for the issue that the body dies yet the
spirit is not extinguished.
Furthermore, [the Discourse] gives the statement of [Jizi of] Yanling, ‘The
body vanishes underground and the spirit extinguishes into Heaven.’ The
Discourse says that body and spirit are one entity and they conform to each
other. If the body dies here, then the spirit should also perish in the body.
How could it be said that ‘the body vanishes underground and the spirit extinguishes into Heaven’? How can it be said, furthermore, that ‘[the spirit] can
go everywhere’? This is also the third testimony for the issue that the body
dies yet the spirit is not extinguished.
Moreover, [the Discourse] says, ‘That [Hou]ji is enshrined as the correlate
of Heaven does not deceive Heaven. It is just like when King Tang banished
[King Jie] and King Wu attacked [King Zhou]; these are not cases of killing
a sovereign.’ Is this supposed to remove evils by expedients? The rulers Tang
[Yao] and Yu [Shun], however, had no trouble in banishing or attacking [their
immediate predecessors]. It is understandable in this case, the era was not
peaceful; it was the last period of the three ancient dynasties (i.e., Xia, Shang,
and Zhou), and the teaching was established as an expedient in order to
relieve the people temporarily; therefore [Hou]ji was enshrined for the time

75

60a

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

being as the correlate of Heaven and King Wen was enshrined temporarily
as the correlate of the Supreme Thearch. Nevertheless, when Yu [Shun] ruled
over the empire, he performed the imperial sacriﬁce for the Yellow Emperor
once every ﬁve years, offered sacriﬁces to Emperor Ku, and worshiped
Zhuan[xu] as the remote ancestor and Yao as the originator. [In his time] the
simple and sincere customs and traditions had not yet come to an end, and
there was no need for expedients. Now Heaven has been deceived and the
Supreme Thearch has been slandered. Why? What has been quoted to support
[the Discourse] is like this. This is again the fourth testimony for the issue
that the body dies yet the spirit is not extinguished.
These four testimonies have already been established, and the root [of the
Discourse] has spontaneously collapsed. The remaining various side issues
will be dispersed before the wind blows away.”
The Discourse says, “[The Book of Rites says,] ‘We welcome [the spirits
of ancestors] with joy and send them off with sadness.’ The signiﬁcance of
this issue is naturally understood without thorough explanation. I will not
waste [words] on a useless issue. There are many statements about this in
the Book of Rites.”
[The Discourse] further says, “Deception merely refers to impeding ediﬁcation and corrupting customs. If it is possible to stabilize the upper class
of the society and govern the people, what deception is there?”
Criticism: “I said in my previous criticism, ‘If [Confucius] was happy
when he welcomed [nonexistent spirits], it would be false happiness that
appeared on his face. If he was sad when [nonexistent spirits] departed, the
tears he shed from his body (i.e., eyes) would be false.’ In fact, the scaling
ladder (i.e., a means) of my vulgar criticism and the sharp point of my weak
reason lie in these words. You, the respondent, however, have not understood
them well, and say only, ‘[The signiﬁcance of this issue] is naturally understood without thorough explanation.’ Please let me explain it again.
“According to the purport of your discourse, you already admit that Confucius had false happiness and false tears. In addition, you admit that [Hou]ji
was enshrined as the correlate of Heaven indicates pointing to nonexistence
and considering it as existence. Confucius said, ‘Having not and yet affecting
to have, empty and yet affecting to be full. . . , [it is difﬁcult with such characteristics to have constancy].’132 This is not something that can be divined

76

Fascicle Nine

with diagrams; it is something kept away from wise sayings. If this practice
is employed in order to instigate [the people for ediﬁcation], how could it
be possible that [ediﬁcation] is not damaged and customs are not corrupted?
You, however, say, ‘[If] it is possible to stabilize the upper class of the society
and govern the people, [what deception is there?]’ Why? The Discourse says,
‘It is already understood [without thorough explanation],’ but an ignorant
person (i.e., Cao Siwen) has not yet understood it. I will again send an inquiry
in a humble way. I would like to learn something from you directly.”
End of Fascicle Nine of The Collection for the Propagation
and Clariﬁcation [of Buddhism]

77

Fascicle Ten

The Emperor of the Great Liang
Dynasty’s Imperial Response to His
Subjects: [The Examination of ] the
Discourse on the Extinction of the Spirit
In order to make an argument in the current situation, there must be a formality.
If you would like to talk about the nonexistence of the Buddha, you should
establish host and guest, make the points of argument clear, distinguish the
strong points from the weak points, refute the Buddhist doctrine that your
opponent asserts by means of the Buddhist doctrine that you understand.
Then, the reason supporting the existence of the Buddha falters and the Discourse on the Extinction of the Spirit spontaneously prevails. Is it appropriate
to recklessly put forth a heretical view without seeking out others’ thoughts,
to utilize the veiled mind, to wag your tongue, to vainly draw suffering, and
to aimlessly slander?
Insects speciﬁc to a season (i.e., summer) are fearful and apprehensive of
the changes [of the four seasons]; a frog in a well regards vastness as nonsense.133
Why is this? It is because [the insects,] engulfed in ignorance and idleness,
struggle for life that is as brief as a breath, and [the frog] has been badly informed
of the world and waits by the parapet of the well. How could [these creatures]
know the eternity of Heaven and Earth and the vastness of the dark sea?
Mencius said, “What people know is not so much as what they do not
know.”134 This is true! Observing the teachings founded by the three sages
(i.e., Confucius, Laozi, and Śākyamuni), they all speak of the imperishability
[of the spirit]. Since their writings regarding this are extensive, it is difﬁcult
to record them all. I will take up only a couple of examples [here] and try to
make a statement.
The “Chapter on the Meaning of Sacriﬁces” (Jiyi) [in the Book of Rites]
says, “Only ﬁlial sons can perform a sacriﬁcial ceremony for their parents,”135
and the section on “Ceremonial Usages” (Liyun) says, “After three days’ puriﬁcation, one assuredly sees those to whom his sacriﬁce was to be offered.”136
79

60b

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

If it is said that one offers a sacriﬁce to someone to whom he is not supposed
to offer and sees those he is not supposed to see, this is to go against proper
principles and rebel against his parents. This is unspeakable. The Discourse
on the Extinction of the Spirit is something I do not understand.

Letter Given by Dharma Teacher
Fayun at Zhuangyan Temple to
Lords, Kings, and Noble Courtiers
and their Responses

[Letter Given by Dharma Teacher Fayun (467–529)]
Here I send you His Majesty’s [Imperial] Response to His Subject: The
Examination of the Discourse on the Extinction of the Spirit.
What is marvelous and tranquil can be known but cannot be explained. The
signiﬁcance of this has not been explained even from [the time of] Confucius,
and the principles have been unclear since [the time of] the Duke of Zhou.
His Majesty becomes Heaven, shines upon the foundation, conforms to
the Way, instructs people according with their faculties, and bestows his
response [to the Discourse on the Extinction of the Spirit] to his subjects.
His purpose and instruction are attentive to every detail. The rite of ﬁlial
offering is already evident. Even [a person as ferocious and cruel as] King
Jie, [the last ruler of the Xia dynasty,] will hold in mind devotion for his
parents, just as [ﬁlial and upright men such as] Zeng [Shen] and Shi [Yu]
did. The speech of the three periods of existence (i.e., Buddhism) is also
clear. Even [a person as tyrannical as] King Zhou, [the last ruler of the Yin
dynasty,] will follow the feelings of Sadāprarudita, [a bodhisattva who laments
aloud the suffering of sentient beings]. Among all those who are not trees or
plants, who would not sing praises of [His Majesty]? I hope you will accept
the moral education and greatly praise him together.
Submitted by Shi Fayun.

60c

The Answer of the King of Linchuan
I received the Imperial Response [to His Subjects: The Examination of]
the Discourse on the Extinction of the Spirit that you sent to me. I humbly
read its profound gist. The argument is accurate, and the composition is
perfect. The ways of the two teachings (i.e., Buddhism and Confucianism)

80

Fascicle Ten

are agreeable for modern times. The teaching of the three periods of existence
(i.e., Buddhism) carries weight in the present age. [This writing] is good
enough to cause those who go astray to return to the right path by themselves,
and to make the wondrous purport even brighter. One of these days I will
write a response in which I will show my analysis completely.
I, Xiao Hong (473–526), bow (Skt. vandana).

The Answer of the King of Jian’an
[I received] your gracious letter. You kindly showed me the Imperial
Response to His Subjects: The Examination of the Discourse on the Extinction
of the Spirit. His Majesty’s insight shines over distances, and his thoughts
are deeply expressed. I humbly read what is subtle, and truly realize I am
ignorant. You intimately showed it to a vulgar man [like me]. I deeply appreciate your generous consideration.
I, [Xiao] Wei (477–534), bow.

The Answer of the King of Changsha
You have kindly shown me the Imperial Response to His Subjects: The
Examination of the Discourse on the Extinction of the Spirit. His Majesty’s
discretion profoundly coheres, and his intelligence shines deeply over distances. This can be a tool for people of deluded views to attain enlightenment;
it teaches and leads on those of ignorant minds. I study this intensively with
respect, read it repeatedly, and cleanse my worldly thoughts. You intimately
showed it to me. I greatly appreciate your favor.
I, Xiao Yuanye (479–526), bow.

The Answer of Shen Yue (441–513), Director of the Imperial Secretariat
The spirit is originally immortal. This is what I have believed for a long
time. The assertion [given in] [the Discourse on] the Extinction of the Spirit
really startled me. Recently, when Dharma Teacher [Hui]yue (452–535) came
out of the palace, I also received a copy of the Imperial Response to His Subjects[: The Examination of the Discourse on the Extinction of the Spirit]. I
happily received it, paying my respects, and scrutinized it tirelessly. This
[writing] not only subdues the heterodoxy but it also can destroy demons
eternally. Hereupon [the teachings of] Confucius and Śākyamuni are equally
promoted. This is truly the imperishable wondrous purport and [will serve

81

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

as a] ferry for all ages. I, your disciple, have also recently completed and
presented [in public] my doubts and examinations about the Discourse [on
the Extinction of the Spirit].
I, Shen Yue, bow.

61a

The Answer of Fan Xiu (460–514), Grand Master for Splendid
Happiness and Current Commandant of the Right Guard
of the Crown Prince
I, Xiu, bow.
I humbly looked at the Imperial Response to His Subjects: The Examination
of the Discourse on the Extinction of the Spirit.
His Majesty’s instruction is profound, and he discerns the very beginning
of a movement. Referring to a non-Buddhist text, he promotes Buddhism,
illuminates and enlightens ignorant people, and teaches and leads on those
who have not yet awakened. Just now he causes all the people of the world
to respectfully look up at him, all the beings of the ten directions to praise
him, those who have different views to hold their tongues and say nothing,
and both the Buddhist clergy and laypeople to be happy together. I attentively
learn this through recitation night and day, and write it on the end of the sash
of my ceremonial gown, [so that I will not forget whether] waking and sleeping. You kindly showed this to me. I deeply appreciate your favor.
I, Fan Xiu, bow.

The Answer of Wang Ying, Governor of Danyang
[I received] your gracious letter. I humbly read the signiﬁcance of the
Imperial statement that the spirit is immortal.
His Majesty’s perspicacious thought is resourceful and deep. His affections
[toward his subjects] are observed just as clouds grow. [This writing] shows
reason and clariﬁes instances. [My doubts] have been dispersed, just as ice
melts away. [The way] to indicate the issue and make a statement is as clear
as if it were illuminated by the sun. This will enlighten the ignorant and carry
those who lack ability [to the goal]. There is no one among all sentient beings
who will not take this and keep this in mind. I will respectfully write this on
the end of the sash of my ceremonial gown [so that I will not forget], and I
will revere this throughout my life.
I, your disciple Wang Ying, bow.

82

Fascicle Ten

The Answer of Wang Zhi (460–513), Secretariat Director
[I received] your gracious letter. I humbly read the Imperial Response to
His Subjects: [The Examination of] the Discourse on the Extinction of the
Spirit. The purport is lofty and the meaning is extensive. It shines upon me
as if enlightening the ignorant.
I, your disciple, have followed Buddhism from my early days. It has been
a long time of practicing and following the teaching I learned a long time
ago. I not only echo [His Majesty’s] very lofty [views], but also praise and
encourage his purport. Moreover, the two interpretations he showed graciously
in his response are calming to my mind, and beautifully illuminate what I
have learned. I do not know how he could expound and propagate his deep
plan and gloriously display his sacred account any more than this does. Furthermore, it disables a purposeless person (i.e., Fan Zhen) from distorting
the truth. There will be no chaotic obstruction either within or outside [the
country]. I would really like to clap my hands in joy.
I am humbly favored by your instruction. I will deeply keep your favor
in mind.
I, Wang Zhi, bow.

The Answer of Yuan Ang (461–540), Right Chief Administrator
[I received] your gracious letter. Together with it, I humbly looked at the
Imperial Response to His Subjects: The Examination of the Discourse on
the Extinction of the Spirit. I respectfully read [the Imperial Response] repeatedly. I suddenly awoke from my binding in confusion. The spirit is imperceptible and tranquil. It is hard to get at the principle. Alas! How could I, an
ignorant man, explore it?
Taking an example from familiar matters, I do not know all about the
body that I still use every day, not to mention the principle of profound and
obscure [things], which is often incorrectly understood. Respectfully inquiring
about it in the sacred books, they clearly state that [the spirit] is not nonexistent.
I must simply revere the teaching and take refuge in the position of the existence [of the spirit]. Even if we follow the position that [the spirit] exists and
speak of its existence, we are still unable to reach the [original] nature. Consequently, we discuss nonexistence from the position of “not nonexistence.”
This means we may be further away [from the truth].

83

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

Except for someone whose understanding towers above others and whose
wisdom is peerless, how could we subtly infer the statement that [the spirit]
is not extinguished, and how could we deeply comprehend the purpose that
[the spirit] continues from one life to the next? Also, [His Majesty] cites two
illustrations. I see precisely that the existence of the spirit is obvious. Seeking
this in the three periods of existence, the doctrine of the immortality [of the
spirit] is more evident. It can be said that “When I try to penetrate it, it seems
to become ﬁrmer; when I look up to it, it seems to become higher.”137 [His
Majesty’s examination] will surely clear away all delusions and vice, and
cause those who are misguided to return to the right path. I will humbly recite
this tirelessly, dancing with great joy.
I, your disciple Yuan Ang, bow.

61b

The Answer of Xiao Bing, Chamberlain of the Court for the Palace
Garrison
[I received] your gracious letter. Together with it, I humbly looked at the
Imperial Response to His Subjects: The Examination of the Discourse on
the Extinction of the Spirit. Even though [the law of] the three periods of
existence is evident, the teaching of the One Vehicle is profound. Some people
have the obscuration of biased views and still adhere to strange doctrines.
Our sage emperor explored what is hidden, searched out what is subtle,
focused on the spirit in the metaphysical world, probed into the very root of the
principle, reached the [original] nature, and embraced Heaven and human beings.
He discussed and analyzed both the Buddhist teaching and non-Buddhist teachings. The main purpose and intention of his composition is profound. Might
[his examination] cause all sentient beings to disperse their delusions? Truly it
may also cause even an icchantika to immediately awaken. Surely this will be
enhanced in the world, and this model will be handed down to future ages.
You kindly sent me the information. I deeply keep it in my mind.
I, a man bereaved of his father, Xiao Bing, lower my head to the ground
and bow.

The Answer of Xu Mian (466–535), Imperial Secretary of the Ministry
of Personnel
According to the Imperial decree, the Imperial Response to His Subjects:
[The Examination of] the Discourse on the Extinction of the Spirit was brieﬂy

84

Fascicle Ten

shown to me one day. [I received] your gracious letter, together with [this
writing that] you sent to me. I humbly studied and read it closely. It probes
into the very root of the principle and reaches tranquility. The nature and
reasons of the issue are minutely investigated and the inscrutable essence is
penetrated. Both the writing and its meaning are clear. It profoundly transcends
the secular world. When I respectfully go into the details of [the doctrine of]
the three periods of existence, its brightness is like enlightening the ignorant.
I will not only recite and sustain this sincerely, but also always distribute
it to those who have not yet been awakened. You kindly showed this to me.
I received your great favor.
I, your disciple Xu Mian, bow.

The Answer of Lu Gao (459–532), Palace Cadet of the Crown Prince
I, Gao, bow.
I humbly read the Imperial Response to His Subjects: The Examination
of the Discourse on the Extinction of the Spirit.
[Vimalakīrti] followed the doctrine that being free from any thought of
attachment (Skt. apratiṣṭhāna) is the foundation.138 He kept silent [about
entering the gate of nonduality] and cut off thinking.139 What is concealed
in the collection of [words spoken by] the Tathāgata is mysterious and absolute.
It is difﬁcult to express it in words. Therefore, it caused Zhongchu (i.e., Yu
Chan) to propose the assertion of the allegory of ﬁrewood and ﬁre [to explain
the relationship between body and spirit], and Huiyuan to disseminate the
criticism [of the assertion that the spirit is extinguished, just as ﬁre consumes
ﬁrewood].140 Questionable assertions have been conveyed and discussed by
many people. We have wasted years, sunken in incongruity.
His Majesty’s brightness was endowed by Heaven. His sacred intelligence
is innate. Understanding the faculties of the people, he bestowed medicine
to us. He made use of expedients according to the object. Consequently, he
straightened out propriety and corrected faults. He points out ﬁlial piety and
shows one corner of the aspect [so that the people will be aware of the
remaining three corners].141 This is truly because confusion arises from
vulgar learning. He caused the people to cleanse themselves of confusion
and bestowed the [Buddhist] Way on them. Delusion is supported by compositions of non-Buddhist teachings. [His Majesty] then accommodated
himself to the non-Buddhist teachings in order to clarify the Buddhist teaching.
85

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

He freely made statements and prevailed by surprise. Based on what is in
accordance with the principles, he ﬁxed [the doctrine of] the three periods
of existence as ﬁrmly as a city that is defended by moats, and sustains sentient
beings. If [his examination] breaks ignorance in the present and rends [evil]
nets into pieces in the future, at what point would his writing not be beneﬁcial?
How could the advantage of these few words presented by him be minor?
[His Majesty] was born on the basis of celebration of the former existence,
and simultaneously he has the highest virtue.
I took part in receiving a share of his discussion with respect. I am happy
to pay respects to him. You kindly showed this to me without forgetting me.
I deeply appreciate it.
I, Lu Gao, bow.

61c

The Answer of Xiao Chen (476–512), Cavalier Attendant-in-Ordinary
I, your disciple Chen, bow.
[I received] your gracious letter. I humbly looked at the Imperial Response
to His Subjects: The Examination of the Discourse on the Extinction of the Spirit,
which wondrously surveys [the relation between] people’s faculties and the spirit,
and which brings ethical education into full play. This is really good enough to
cause the pure Dharma to increase its brightness and Confucianists to respect
their studies. The people will attain liberation without a teacher’s guidance, and
the public will admire the Way of ﬁlial piety. Here the basis of the principles of
human relationships is more clariﬁed. One who goes against the scriptures and
who introduces disorder into the public customs will spontaneously destroy himself. I recite this, clapping my hands in joy, and overwhelmingly pay respect.
My brother (i.e., Fan Zhen), who is stupid and incompetent, invited faults
and now faces his trial. He is tormented and fearful in public and private,
and his feelings and thoughts increase his terror. Therefore, he has no composure from which to respectfully praise [His Majesty’s] magniﬁcent plan
and properly acclaim its essential signiﬁcance. He received [His Majesty’s]
ediﬁcation with respect and heard his guidance. He can only prostrate himself,
feeling frightened and ashamed.
You deeply show your favor and encouragement to me. I will remember
with admiration your kindness and guidance.
I, your disciple Xiao Chen, bow.

86

Fascicle Ten

The Answer of Wang Bin and Wang Jian, Attendants-in-Ordinary
[We received] your gracious letter. We humbly looked at the Imperial
Response to His Subjects: The Examination of the Discourse on the Extinction
of the Spirit.
His Majesty’s thought profoundly coheres, and his logic is preeminent.
When he argues about the three periods of existence, he clearly explains the
doctrine. When he cites two instances, the Way of ﬁlial piety is easily understood. [This writing] will block the path made by someone who deeply studies
[scriptures on his own], and close the mouth of the heretic. This is good
enough to cause the devil’s low fences to fall down eternally and the rightful
peak to be lofty for a long time.
We, your disciples, respectfully receive the highest path and observe the
law of Heaven. How could our joyful minds be commonplace?
Wang Bin and Wang Jian bow.

The Answer of Lu Xu, Secretariat Drafter of the Heir Apparent
I received your very gracious letter. I humbly looked at His Majesty’s
[Imperial] Response to His Subjects: The Examination of the Discourse on
the Extinction of the Spirit.
I bent and lifted my head, and kneeled and worshiped this. I loitered about
and bowed. I have heard in private that sages simply have a single principle
[to govern the world],142 but Tang [Yao] and Yu [Shun] have previously made
no such remarks. To know an omen just as a god does is only to receive with
respect the edict of the Liang dynasty today. When the Way is carried out
[properly], all beings keep out their corruption and delusion. When virtues
last long, the world praises the illuminative guidance. [The emperor’s examination] can precisely help the people, nourish his own virtue, save sentient
beings equally for a hundred years, care for the people, make the people
active, and bring every being into submission eternally.
You, the Dharma teacher, have deep knowledge and determination. You
sustain it (i.e., Buddhism) and keep all [teachings] faithfully. Your determination is great and you are well versed in many things. You understand the
essence of the spirit very well.
I, Lu Xu, bow.

87

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

62a

The Answer of Xu Gun, Gentleman of the Palace Gate
I, Gun, bow.
[I received] your gracious letter together with the Imperial Response to
His Subjects: The Examination of] the Discourse on the Extinction of the
Spirit that you sent to me. I humbly read the profound purport, which removed
obstructions from my mind and washed away my troublesomeness.
I personally think that it is difﬁcult to seek the basis of profound reason,
and the origin of the subtle and esoteric teaching is not seen. Only a superior
sage can talk about the foundation. How could a man who does not have
supreme intelligence lead [the people] to its apex? His Majesty probes into
the very root of the spirit, masters the mysteries of tranquility, examines the
Way, and abides in the subtle state. When he gives virtuous utterance, [the
law of] the three periods of existence spontaneously becomes evident. When
he expresses virtuous words, even [people as far away as] a thousand li
receive his inﬂuence. His sincerity accords with propriety; his righteousness
moves both human beings and deities; his reasoning stimulates the profound
ways [of Buddhism]; and his virtue covers both the unseen world and this
world. The long darkness of the vast great night suddenly [disappears at]
dawn. Foolish and ignorant sentient beings become awakened by themselves
overnight. They exert themselves for the secret merits [made by the Buddha]
in the Deer Park (Skt. Mṛgadāva), and saturate their daily lives with the
stream of the [Buddhist] Dharma. The great reputation spreads eternally and
the majestic reality goes swiftly to all directions. Those who are confused
and hindered will know to return to [the right path]. Those who have sunk
in doubt will spontaneously [have their doubts] come to an end.
Since I, your disciple, returned to [Buddhism] early and believe in it deeply,
I am much happier about [the Imperial Response]. I will always follow it and
make it my course of action. I will not venture to say anything against [its
purport]. I, however, [have little insight, just as if] I were to try to determine
the amount of water in the sea by using a calabash, or try to view [the sky]
through a pipe. I am simply worried all the time that I may fail.
I, Xu Gun, bow.

The Answer of Wang Jian (477–523), Palace Attendant
It is very kind of you to take the trouble to send a letter to me. Together

88

Fascicle Ten

with [your letter] I respectfully read the Imperial Response [to His Subjects]:
The Examination of the Discourse on the Extinction of the Spirit.
His Majesty’s purport is profound and illuminating. It educates and enlightens many ignorant people. The signiﬁcance exposes the delicate issue, and
the principle propagates the tranquil and profound matter. The Canon [of
Filial Piety] speaks of the signiﬁcance of the corpse, and Section One of the
Great Appendix [in the Book of Changes] describes the issue of the wandering
spirit.143 What I, an ignorant man, have recognized is that [the spirit] is not
extinguished.
Furthermore, His Majesty’s thought is magniﬁcent and extensive. He has
completely mastered the principles and traces to the very source of subtlety.
Referring to writings, he testiﬁes with books. [Our confusion] is evanescent
like ice that is melting away. Those who have vulgar eyes will respectfully
turn around, and those who have the deﬁlement of delusion will reform their
insecure minds. [His Majesty] disclosed the past clearly and instructs us for
the future. I will humbly follow the profound teaching. I cannot stop stamping
my feet in glee.
I, Wang Jian, bow.

The Answer of Liu Yun (465–517), Palace Attendant
[I received] your gracious letter. You kindly showed me the Imperial
Response to His Subjects: [The Examination of] the Discourse on the Extinction of the Spirit.
There is no dualism in a concourse where all points meet; the main purpose
is originally one. That [the spirit] continues from previous existences without
cessation is the great law of the Buddha’s teaching. To enter into the hall [of
the ancestral temple], [to see] the faces [of the dead], and [to hear] their
voices are the profound purpose of [Confucius’] great teaching. [The purposes
of] these two sages, one in China and the other in a foreign land, match each
other just as shadow [follows its form], or an echo [follows its sound]. Even
though the truth exists without a doubt, suspicions [about the immortality of
the spirit] and the deep attachment to it were equally divided. I will humbly
follow the profound purpose [of His Majesty], which illuminates, as if enlightening me in my ignorance. [His Majesty] indeed comprehends the profound
tenor, traces to the very source of the spirit, and understands tranquility. There
is a similarity between [His Majesty] and Heaven and Earth in completely
89

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

surveying the characteristics [of the spirit]. The unresolved doubts of the
past thousand years melt away along with the spring ice. A lifelong perverted
mind is opened together with a drifting cloud.
I will simply recite [the Imperial Response] repeatedly, in order to be
released from suffering eternally. I appreciate your concern for me. My
sadness is truly paciﬁed.
I, your disciple Liu Yun, stated above, bow with my head to the ground.

The Answer of Liu Cheng (d. 513), Attendant-in-Ordinary
[I received] your gracious letter. You kindly showed me the Imperial
Response to His Subjects: The Examination of the Discourse on the Extinction
of the Spirit. The profound purport is abstruse, and the reasoning traces to
the very source of deep points.
I personally think that in cultivating causes [for the future] and going
toward fruition, the spirit does not have two consciousnesses; in attaining
emancipation through the [Buddhist] Way the buddha-nature is only one. In
the Yin dynasty they [used sacriﬁcial vessels and] showed the people that
[the dead] have perceptions.144 Confucius sacriﬁced to the spirits, as if they
were present.145 Reason is always transmitted to those who have the subtle
awakening, and justice is made clear to those who have life and perceptions.
Yang [Zhu] and Mo [Di], however, put these into confusion; they offered
far-fetched explanations meaninglessly. Hindrances went on and Confucianism, in particular, was concealed.
His Majesty’s mind profoundly discerns [the true state of things], and his
testimonies are faultless. He completely grasps the outline, and unfolds and
displays details. He praises and censures the three dynasties (i.e., Xia, Yin,
and Zhou), and he leads all to the same conclusion. Both reality and unreality
are clear, without hindrance.
I will humbly read this with respect over and over again so that both my
doubts and parsimonious thoughts will be exhausted. Your letter and consideration for me are greatly appreciated.
I, Liu Cheng, stated above, bow with my head to the ground.

62b

The Answer of Wang Mao, Supervisor of the Household of the Heir
Apparent
I, Mao, bow.

90

Fascicle Ten

[I received] your gracious letter. I humbly looked at the Imperial Response
[to His Subjects: The Examination of] the Discourse on the Extinction of the
Spirit, to which I pay my respects. I am very happy and I cannot but dance
about, clapping my hands.
The mysterious law is extensive and vast. Even though it is not something
of which we speak thoroughly, it is luminously revealed in the writings left
behind by various sages. There is no one who does not clap his hands in glee,
who does not respectfully straighten himself, and who does not follow the
established rules. How could it be possible to recklessly speak unfounded
statements and falsehoods, and bring a heavy false charge against the imperial
mandate that was previously made? If one thinks that he has no expectation
for the cause and condition of the life to come, and abandons the utmost propriety he is offered, then the wrong path is boundless for him; it is uncertain
whether he will be able to return to the [right] path. Once visited by suffering
and emptiness he will repent [of his sin], but it will be too late.
His Majesty bears intelligence, embodies sacredness, and wondrously
discerns the truth and the untruth. He expresses righteousness, illuminates
expressions, and navigates for those who are drowned [in delusions]. Would
only heavenly and human beings praise and respect him? Truly all buddhas
also emit light for him.
I, your disciple, have from early in my life basically relied on the Pure
Land to ease my mind. Fortunately I have lived a long time and met with
this prosperous world. I will surely accumulate [good] causes for my next
life and educate myself with this merciful guidance for a long time. The sincerity of my joy is not only for today. I cannot simply express it. I always
deeply appreciate your outstanding favor to me. I will visit you one of these
days. I have no more words for now.
I, Wang Mao, bow.

The Answer of Yu Yong, Chamberlain for Ceremonials
[I received] your gracious letter. You kindly showed me His Majesty’s
Imperial Response to His Subjects: [The Examination of] the Discourse on
the Extinction of the Spirit.
Before I humbly ﬁnished reading this, [my foggy thoughts that are like]
smoke and mist were again removed. I personally think that wormlike animals

91

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

have perception but trees and plants have no consciousness. Groundless discourse, such as [the Discourse] on the Extinction of the Spirit, intends to
equalize those [living beings] that have perception with those that have no
consciousness, and asserts that omniscience (i.e., enlightenment) is extinguished together with the body [at death]. In reason, this is really sad. Except
for one whose virtue matches Heaven and Earth, who is one of the four great
ones in the universe (i.e., the king),146 who belongs to the sun (i.e., the ruler
in the human world) that can go against convention, or who has the opportunity to secretly edify [the people], no one would be able to receive the
theory of the twofold truth (i.e., absolute and conventional), and the discussion
of the three periods of existence would almost come to an end.
His Majesty feels pity for those who are born from the four modes of birth
and evidently sink in the six realms of existence. He examined and compared
the teaching of Confucius with that of Śākyamuni, and gave evidence drawn
from both [teachings]. He enabled those who live in the land [that is farthest
from the sea] to know about the sea, and those in hell to see the sun. These
words of utmost importance are as bright as the autumn sun. Numerous
doubts disappear just as does the spring ice. Even though [I knew that His
Majesty] issued the discussion to propagate the Way and I openmindedly
appreciated his virtue, I was furthermore given his instruction and guidance.
I bow down, delighted with [the good] acts I performed in my previous life.
You, the Dharma teacher, keep the Dharma gate (i.e., the Buddhist teaching)
in mind and stick to it. You will deeply agree with my joy in this. I respectfully
appreciate [the Imperial Review] with praise. I will recite this throughout
my life tirelessly.
I, your disciple Yu Yong, bow.

The Answer of Xiao Ang (483–535), Acting King of Yuzhang
[I received] your gracious letter. You have extensively circulated the Imperial Response to His Subjects: The Examination of the Discourse on the
Extinction of the Spirit.
His Majesty’s purport and the analysis he gave are able to make deluded
people bright. The immorality of the spirit is apparent in the circulated books.
Since reason is abstruse, people are confused. His Majesty’s discernment is
illuminating. He examines by knowing [the character of] coming events, and

92

Fascicle Ten

goes beyond what is stored up in all past [experiences]. He wields wonderful
thought beyond the laws of nature, and criticizes the heretic’s wild assertion.
Moreover, he refers to the scripture of rites (i.e., the Book of Rites), and examines truth and falsehood. The Way of ﬁlial piety is surely propagated here.
I, a man bereaved of his father, Xiao Ang, lower my head to the ground
and bow.
The Answer of Yu Tanlong, Superior Grand Master of the Palace
[I received] your gracious letter. I humbly looked at His Majesty’s [Imperial] Response to His Subjects: The Examination of the Discourse on the
Extinction of the Spirit, which enlightens the ignorant brightly and illuminates
them clearly.
The utmost truth is abstract and tranquil, and the tenor of the teaching is
abstruse. The superior sage (i.e., the emperor) is extremely intelligent. Therefore, he traced to the very source of wondrous reality. Ordinary people who
live in the impermanent world (Skt. sahā) do not recognize profound matters
by themselves. I have heard that for making an assertion, the instructions
given in scriptures are all traces of the teaching. Regarding the Buddha,
foreign books state peculiar things. It is difﬁcult to expect reasoning for them.
This is beyond description. I rely on the work and the sacred thought of His
Majesty. He analyzed and explained various situations for his subjects. Are
we not glad with praise? I will imprint the clear purport in my mind and keep
this throughout my life.
I feel more greatly obliged to your instructions, my Dharma teacher.
I, your disciple Yu Tanlong, bow.

The Answer of Xiao Mi, Frontrider of the Heir Apparent
You kindly showed me the Imperial Response to His Subjects: The Examination of the Discourse on the Extinction of the Spirit.
Before I had even ﬁnished reading it, my heart became as delighted as if
clapping my hands in glee. His Majesty is attentive by nature. With his sacredness and various abilities, he does not sever the heart of language and yet
his expressions overﬂow with implications. Since the testimony of the meaning
is fully provided from classical scriptures, the frame of mind of ﬁlial piety
is manifested here. Because [His Majesty’s] purport is supported by Buddhist
scriptures, his mind of great benevolence is even greater. I will respectfully

93

62c

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

keep this [writing] at my elbow, spread it out on a desk or near my pillow,
and read it thoroughly, day and night. I will write this on the end of the sash
of my ceremonial gown for eternal use and show it to everyone.
Your great consideration is really appreciated.
I, your disciple Xiao Mi, bow.

63a

The Answer of Wang Sengru (465–522), Palace Aide to the
Censor-in-Chief
[I received] your gracious letter. [Together with it] you kindly sent and
showed me His Majesty’s response to all the ofﬁcials who respectfully inquired
about the Discourse on the Extinction of the Spirit. I humbly read this over
and over again, deeply received it, and studied it with respect. It enlightens
the ignorant and dispels hindrances. I became clear just as the clouds open.
I personally think that it is difﬁcult for the culmination of things to take
shape, and that no one but a sage can make this clear. Since the truth is tranquil
and obscures its location, the ignorant become deluded. Except for one whose
spirit goes beyond the implications of language, and whose thought transcends
[the condition] prior to [receiving] an omen, how could anyone illuminate
these sublime words? When we hear the sound of metal and stone (i.e., a
piece of good writing) and see through the subtle state like this, there is no
wild path. [His Majesty] taught this, certainly recommended it, and showed
it to us as if it exists [in front of our eyes]. He causes the person who presented
the discourse to not end up in the long muddy wheel tracks, and those who
have exclusively fallacious views to not sink into the sea of delusion eternally.
I took part in receiving his profound plan with respect. Who would not
be pleased and pay their respects to this? I will end my response here; I will
not go on tediously.
I, Wang Sengru, present this and bow.

The Answer of Wang Yi, Gentleman Attendant at the Palace Gate
[I received] your gracious letter. You kindly showed me the Imperial
Response to His Subjects: The Examination of the Discourse on the Extinction
of the Spirit.
Heaven is profound and tranquil; it is originally beyond discussion. It is
assuredly difﬁcult to hear about human nature and the Way of Heaven.147

94

Fascicle Ten

[His Majesty’s] benevolence in fostering [the people] with tender care moves
them according to each one’s place, and the teaching with which he guides
them is bestowed along with each incident. He is sympathetic toward the
frog that stays at the bottom of the well, and feels pity for the cicada that
lives only a very short time. Thoughts come from the depths of his heart, his
words are subtle, and his reasoning is clear. When he refers to classical scriptures, his composition is simple but his purpose is profound. When he concentrates on a tranquil and abstruse issue, he can go through it by a single
reason. Ancient books are numerous, yet he embraces them in one sentence.
He reveals the hidden purport of various sages. He has ﬁnally brought longstanding stagnant delusions to an end. Thanks to this, the issue of whether
or not [the spirit] is extinguished is understood. Based on this, the Way of
ﬁlial piety ﬂourishes. This is truly good enough to warn and admonish those
who are seriously confused, and to serve as a model for a hundred generations.
As it is said, “A sage’s course of action is vast and great. Fine words are quite
evident.”148
I, your disciple, am ashamed of [my inadequacy in] discerning reason; I
am weak in my ability to judge others’ intentions. I successfully participate
in hearing the moral instruction. I was bestowed with the subtle writing. Thus
I am rejoiced at this even while occupying the lowest seat. I am forever
grateful for the sacred rule.
I, your disciple Wang Yi, bow.

The Answer of Wang Tai, Gentleman Attendant of the Ministry of
Personnel
One day, having been invited to a banquet, I took part in hearing Secretariat
Fan [Zhen]’s writing, the discourse on the spirit and the body that are extinguished together. This person is quite different from others and not familiar
with human feelings. Since I am merely of inferior ability, I have not been
able to break the horns of Wulu [Chongzong] (i.e., Fan Zhen).149
[I received] your gracious letter. You showed me His Majesty’s purpose.
He subtly refers to the Way of ﬁlial piety and enhances the profound principle
[of Buddhism]. I will always recite this sincerely and rid myself of ignorance
and delusion.
I, your disciple Wang Tai, lower my head to the ground and bow.

95

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

The Answer of Cai Zun (467–523), Palace Attendant
[I received] your gracious letter. [His Majesty] declared the Imperial
instruction of responding to [the people’s] inquiries about the Discourse on
the Extinction of the Spirit.
The mysterious law is profound and wondrous. It is really difﬁcult to
completely discern it. Even though former sages spoke cordially, talented
people in later generations are still deluded. His Majesty’s purpose is accordingly explained and the ignorant are brilliantly enlightened. Assuredly he
rises above all past generations and exclusively possesses wondrousness. He
awakens [the people of] the future and immortalizes [the teaching].
I humbly received the imperial message with respect. I am extremely
happy to retain this. I will sincerely copy it on the end of the sash of my ceremonial gown and rid myself of confusion and hindrance eternally.
I, Cai Zun, bow.

63b

The Answer of Wang Zhongxin, Director of Jiankang
I, Zhongxin, address you.
[I received] your gracious letter. You kindly showed me the Imperial
Response to His Subjects: [The Examination of] the Discourse on the Extinction of the Spirit. I humbly read this profound and beautiful [writing], and I
cannot stop clapping my hands and jumping with joy.
His Majesty’s divine sagacity is innate and his sharp faculty is outstandingly
profound. The ﬁve kinds of ceremonies (wuli) shine on his outward appearance
and the three transcendental knowledges sparkle within him. When the golden
[Dharma] wheel slowly revolves, the [Buddhist] Way saves the whole world.
When jade libation cups are already arranged, ﬁlial piety ﬂourishes in the
seven imperial shrines. The sun of wisdom (Skt. jñāna-divākara-prabhā)
reveals in the sky of China, and the Dharma cloud hangs down in the trichiliocosm. The meaning of [worshiping] as if [spirits] exist [in front of our
eyes] was made clear again this morning. That the eternality [of nirvana] is
evident is everlastingly testiﬁed through all coming kalpas. For this reason,
[His Majesty’s] virtue surpasses that of a hundred kings and his reputation
will be supreme eternally.
[The mind of] your disciple (i.e., my mind) rests in the Dharma gate and
worships the great teaching (i.e., Buddhism). My sincere [joy], [evidenced

96

Fascicle Ten

by] the motions of the hands and the stamping of the feet is simply greater
than that of a wild duck [that obtains] pond weeds.
I, Wang Zhongxin, bow.

The Answer of Shen Ji, Adjutant of Outer Troops of the King of Jian’an
I, your disciple Ji, bow.
You showed me the Imperial Response to His Subjects: [The Examination
of] the Discourse on the Extinction of the Spirit. I am humbled and dance
in joy.
I, your disciple, personally think that teaching is not spontaneously spread,
but is truly spread by people. People need the consciousness and the consciousness desires the position. Doesn’t this mean what is said in the Book
of Changes, “What is great treasure for the sage is to attain the [highest] position”?150 Nevertheless, there may be a case when there is a position and yet
someone is not suitable for the position. In another case there may be a [good]
person yet the position is not suitable for him. Reasonably speaking, it is the
most difﬁcult to ﬁnd all three elements (i.e., a person, consciousness, and a
position) together. Therefore Confucius concluded the Spring and Autumn
Annals (Chunqiu jing) with the record about the capture of a unicorn called
lin,151 and Mencius turned back to the title Nobility of Heaven.152 It is really
because they had no positions [suitable for them]. Alas! Genuine ediﬁcation
is about to go down and disappear!
His Majesty occupies the position of the most august with [the virtues of]
benevolence, sacredness, majesty, and brightness. A mountain range may be
moved by a blast of hot air, but the harmonious sound [made by the blast]
is not affected; the toll of a bell and the sound of a drum may be disturbed
by the rooster crowing and the hogs grunting, but all the sounds cannot be
blocked. As for saving frightened people from a long night [of spiritual darkness], except for [His Majesty,] whose virtue matches that of Heaven and
Earth, who else would be able to do so?
I, your disciple, bask in the marvelous teaching from the early days. So
I have already heard about this (i.e., the immortality of the spirit). Nevertheless,
a group [of petty people, like a ﬂock of] swallows and sparrows, still confuse
each other, and [unstable people, like] ﬂying dried mugwort, compete with
each other. His Majesty’s purpose was accordingly bestowed. The expressions

97

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

are lofty and the principle is delightful. He encourages the wholesomeness
of human and heavenly beings and admonishes people for their gravest punishments (i.e., impious conduct). He gives the instruction in a brief writing
that clariﬁes [it for] both Buddhists and non-Buddhists. If a child were to
fall into a well, even ordinary people would be heartbroken, not to speak of
His Majesty, who governs the people with mercy. He certainly considers
sympathy to be the essence. [The sophistry that] refers to that a white horse
is not white is still seen to be inferior position to [the teaching of His Majesty,
who has mastered] the golden mean.153 Regarding [His Majesty’s] mind,
which he has received beyond the law of nature, and his determination to
promote ediﬁcation, evil spirits and monsters will destroy their own cheeks
and tongues [and shut up]. How can this be adequately expressed? His marvelous writing is as noble as Heaven, and this cannot be originally inferred.
You forthwith showed it to me. I feel quite ashamed of myself for having
little virtue.
I, your disciple Shen Ji, bow.

63c

The Answer of Sima Yun, Gentleman Attendant of the Ministry of
Sacrifices
[I received] your gracious letter. At the same time you showed me the signiﬁcance of the Imperial Response to His Subjects: [The Examination of the
Discourse on] the Extinction of the Spirit. I humbly read it completely, and
sang and danced with joy.
Consciousness and thought are deeply hidden; the numen is obscure and
subtle. They cannot be caught up with by walking with short steps, and they
cannot be surveyed by the minds of ordinary people. Sages of non-Buddhist
teachings are aware of this, and so they repressed [this teaching] and did not
talk about it. Therefore, even after Confucius, the issue is still unclear; after
the Duke of Zhou this still remains obscure. Nevertheless, mediocre people
forget reason, believe [only] in what their eyes perceive, dig [the earth] with
an awl, and view [the sky] through a pipe. This causes different opinions to
rise with irresistible force. They momentarily seek fame [with the sophistry
of] “separating the hardness [of a stone from its white color],”154 and consequently they are confused about the reality of diligence. When ignorance and
delusion become to this point, we should feel deeply sorry for this.

98

Fascicle Ten

Our emperor’s way pierces this world as well as the unseen world, and is
brighter than the sun and moon. He investigates thoroughly the apex of Heaven
and Earth, and searches the innermost part of things from beginning to end.
He hates the manner in which a foul-smelling water plant called you overpowers
[a pleasing] fragrance and a purple color (i.e., a compound color) takes away
the luster of vermilion (i.e., a primary color). He is angry when the stone min
that resembles jade hinders jade and a pheasant disturbs a phoenix. Thereupon,
he revealed sincerity and bestowed this graceful purport, which is truly good
enough to exalt subtle awakening and deliver [people from a condition that
is like being] sunk in mud. He illuminates the culmination of the mind as a
familiar case, and clariﬁes the basis of the virtue of ﬁlial piety as a profound
case. Truly he causes those who learn heathen ways to cut off their evil minds
and those who lean toward honesty to make ﬁrm their admiration.
I fortunately happened to receive with respect [His Majesty’s] ediﬁcation.
I receive favors and kind considerations from you. So I jump with joy. I am
obliged to you, and my gratitude to you becomes even deeper.
I, Sima Yun, bow.

The Answer of Shen Gun, Adjutant of the Personnel Evaluation
Section of the King of Yuzhang
I, Gun, bow.
I, your disciple, personally think that in the way to exchange what is
sought, there must be equal give and take. Regarding the case of “not instructing so as to create annoyance to the ignorant,”155 this vainly results in restlessness. A sudden idea would almost come to end. Therefore, I stopped
receiving consultation for myself. I am sincerely ashamed of myself for not
examining highly profound things. I have only vague knowledge about the
mechanism of causality. I genuinely hope that if I [am able to] walk on hoarfrost without falling backward, [eventually] stronger ice will come.156
You, the Dharma teacher, have a mind as broad as hills and valleys and
with which, fortunately, even evil people can be accepted. Though I do not
have the rank to ascend to the court, you invited me to join the group [studying] the Buddhist teaching. Du Yi [of the Jin dynasty] said, “If a person wants
to call a thirsty horse to a water fountain, the horse comes even if [the person]
does not use a horsewhip.” You showed me His Majesty’s [Imperial] Response

99

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

64a

to His Subjects: [The Examination of] the Discourse on the Extinction of the
Spirit. I humbly read it morning and night tirelessly, without sparing myself.
[His Majesty] established this Dharma hall and leads the confused group
of people. The relationship between father and son (i.e., the Way of ﬁlial
piety) is already mentioned and [the law of] the three periods of existence
is explained. The conditions of the spirits can be pursued here. It is said that
the sea is vast, but who can know how vast it is? It is said that the sky is high,
but it is impossible to measure its height. His Majesty’s sacred discourse
probes profound issues, and its purpose goes beyond the world of language.
With my ignorant mind I am incompetent to comment on this. I imprint in
my mind the instruction I received, and I will study this intensively with
respect through my life.
I, your disciple Shen Gun, bow.

The Answer of Wang Qi, Officer of the Personnel Evaluation Section
of the King of Jian’an
You kindly showed me the Imperial Response to His Subjects: The Examination of the Discourse on the Extinction of the Spirit.
I personally think that the spirit is obscure and quiet. Successive sages
have not preached anything about this. It is said that even Confucius did not
talk [about the spirit].157 Zhuangzi ﬁctitiously made up the words [of the
spirit]. When I seek [these things] in records, my grief and vagueness cross
each other and deepen.
I chanced to see [His Majesty’s] present discussion. His thought arose
from the profound point, his sublime purpose was deeply settled, the truth
is already spread, and the vital point of ﬁlial piety is concurrently investigated
thoroughly. Truly this is enough to step beyond eternity and to illuminate
both present and future.
I, your disciple, was born in the great time, and I am able to take part in
seeing His Majesty’s writing. [Doubts] I had had in my mind disappeared,
just as ice melts away. Truly I realized with what I had been carelessly deluded.
Who among all those who have a mind would not study this intensively with
respect? Needless to say, I, an ignorant man, am especially deeply impressed
with this.
I, Wang Qi, bow.

100

Fascicle Ten

The Answer of Wei Rui (440–520), Right Guard General
The truth is abstract and tranquil. It is difﬁcult to argue about what is profound and obscure. When one says it exists, it seems it does not. When one
says it does not exist, in fact it exists. This issue is subtly expressed in Laozi’s
sayings and exquisitely revealed in Śākyamuni’s teaching. The words [of the
truth] are luminous in Daoist scriptures. The history of writings [of the truth]
is of long standing in Buddhist and Daoist scriptures.
His Majesty’s way embraces the universe and is as bright as the sun and
moon. The mechanism of appearance and disappearance is assuredly illuminated, and a vital point of existence and nonexistence is already seen. Consequently, [His Majesty] handed down the brilliant discourse, with which he
responded with analysis to his subjects. His guidance is already deep, and
his logical explanation of the meaning is surely harmonious. Who among all
those who have a mind would not rejoice? I was shown His Majesty’s writing,
which I attentively read. My deﬁlements have disappeared, just as clouds
are dispersed. Concurrently I clapped my hands in joy.
You, the Dharma teacher, have a good stroke of fortune; the karma you
created in your previous life caused you to meet the Dharma in this life. You
parted from the ﬁve desires, entered into the eight kinds of meditation for
liberation, left behind the three realms of existence, and follow [the teaching
of] the One Vehicle. I could again happily hear your virtuous voice and come
to praise you more. I beneﬁt from your kind letter. My gratitude to you is
really deep.
I, Wei Rui, bow.

The Answer of Xie Chuo, Chief Minister for Law Enforcement
I, Chuo, bow.
[I received] your gracious letter. I was shown the Imperial Response to
His Subjects: The Examination of the Discourse on the Extinction of the
Spirit. I humbly read the profound plan, which puriﬁed my mind.
[His Majesty] has already rejected shortsighted discussion and truly
explains various doubtful points.
I personally think that [of all creatures] a human being is the most highly
endowed, and his spiritual function is inexhaustible. People of the best class
know [the character of] coming events and store up all past [experiences],

101

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

64b

and people of the next class nearly attain [the standard of perfection].158 From
this viewpoint, there is in reason no possibility [for the spirit] to be extinguished. Therefore, Confucianists explicate ceremonies of sacriﬁce [for the
spirits], and Buddhists are engaged in great benevolence and illuminate the
condition of birth [and death]. The Buddhist and non-Buddhist teachings
become clear [in this issue]. It is already enough to relieve us from hindrance.
Moreover, His Majesty’s instruction is patient and his references and
information are more extensive. He promotes what supports and begins [all
things] to the people, and offers a guideline about discernment and studying
to those who are smart and openhearted. He assuredly taught the ignorant
and drew them out of hindrances. From his seat he surveyed the extremely
profound issue. Heretical beliefs have already been cut off and the right path
has returned. Disputants will feel ashamed of themselves for having stuck
to [heretical beliefs]. Mr. Fan [Zhen] will become aware that he has been
[suffering from] an incurable disease. Who among those who are delighted
with being sentient would not give praise by clapping their hands?
I, your disciple, however, think that I have studied in the school of the
Sage in vain. I was entirely ignorant, restricted in vision, and shallow in
understanding. I received [your letter] with respect, jumping with joy. I am
eternally delighted by your protection and guidance.
I, Xie Chuo, bow.

The Answer of Fan Xiaocai, Libationer of the Minister of Education
I, your disciple Xiaocai, bow.
I was shown the Imperial Response to His Subjects: The Examination of
the Discourse on the Extinction of the Spirit.
I personally think that when Pengsheng became a boar [after he was killed
by a man of Qi state] and stood up,159 disaster fell upon the Lord of Qi state,
and the incident in which [Zhang] Yuanbo put on a ceremonial cap [and
appeared in Fan Shi’s dream] is well known in the history of the Han
dynasty.160 Moreover, when we take account of parables of murderous
schemes, we know they mean that [the spirit] must exist. The tenet of the
immortality of the spirit pierces through the Buddhist clergy and laypeople
equally. If we intend to destroy the spirit, the Buddhist and non-Buddhist
teachings will both be lost. This is like the case where someone steals a glance
of the height of the sky through a pipe. How could he distinguish west from
102

Fascicle Ten

east? If someone were to attempt to measure the blue sea with a calabash,
how could he gain even a rough estimate of the amount of the water?
His Majesty’s purpose is broad and deep. He is attentive to the subtle Way.
His sacred mind is compassionate by nature and absorbed in sacriﬁcial ceremony and worship. He not only makes the [Buddhist] scriptures and teaching
ﬂourish, but truly he also causes ignorant people to become awakened in the
[Buddhist] Way.
You show deep concern for me. I am obliged to you for handing down
[His Majesty’s composition]. I will imprint this instruction and guidance on
my mind, which brims with [joy].
I, your disciple Fan Xiaocai, bow.

The Answer of Wang Lin, Attendant-in-Ordinary
[I received] your gracious letter. You kindly showed me the Most August’s
[Imperial] Response to His Subjects: The Examination of the Discourse on
the Extinction of the Spirit. I sincerely went to the limit of my mediocre
ability and respectfully read His Majesty’s composition.
His voice brims with the sound of metal and stone, his reasoning penetrates
the deep spring, his righteousness penetrates the six lines of a hexagram, and
his statement completes [the law of] the three periods of existence. This is
sufﬁcient to cause those of biased learning to know the ultimate law of nature
and those who have gone astray to remember returning [to the right path].
Fortunately I, your disciple, was born in a happy and brilliant [time]. I
am favored by your great kindness. Moreover, I was able to read His Majesty’s
composition. I rubbed my eyes and took a good look at his wondrous writing.
The sincerity of my pleasure is as boundless as that of a wild duck [that
obtains duckweed].
You bestowed on me various favors. I do nothing but imprint this in my
mind repeatedly and jump with joy.
I, your disciple Wang Lin, reply to you.

The Answer of He Jiong, Gentleman of the Bureau of Provisions
I, Jiong, bow.
You graciously bestowed on me your letter, and showed me [the Imperial]
Response to His Subjects: The Examination of the Discourse on the Extinction
of the Spirit.

103

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

I have personally heard that one sacriﬁces to the spirits as if the spirits
were present.161 Even though I seek [this meaning in the words of] previous
monarchs, they did not fathom it. [The spirits] dwell in the eternal world;
they do not change. I keep this in mind and stick to this, and only then does
[the meaning] become clear to me. The profound mystery I had studied intensively with respect disappears, just as ice melts away. Therefore I come to
know that vast and profound traces of sages do not derive from a single way.
Different actions and responses basically follow the times. Today the perﬁdious
ﬂow has already come to an end. The ignorant will become enlightened. People possess faculties; [His Majesty’s] teaching simply puts them in motion.
He ﬁrmly establishes the signiﬁcance of ﬁlial piety and clariﬁes the tenor of
the Enlightened One (i.e., the Buddha). Who among those who possess a
mind would not rejoice at this? How could even Emperor Yan and Emperor
Shaohao [Jintian] vie with [His Majesty] for superiority? Even Xuan[yuan]
(i.e., the Yellow Emperor) and [Tao] Tang (i.e., Emperor Yao) could not compete with him. His lofty, highest virtue cannot be named, either. His clear
and Great Way hereupon reaches its apex.
I, He Jiong, bow.

64c

The Answer of Wang Yun (481–549), Recorder of the King of Yuzhang
I, Yun, bow.
[I received] your gracious letter. You showed me His Majesty’s [Imperial]
Response to His Subjects: The Examination of the Discourse on the Extinction
of the Spirit.
I have personally heard that “one will seem to see [the deceased] in the
place [where his spirit tablet is]” is a maxim in the canon of rites.162 It is now
the great tenor of Buddhism that [the spirit] is not extinguished. Nevertheless,
the wondrous characteristics [of the Way] are evanescent and profound, and
the working of the spirit is extremely tranquil. Except for those who have
mastered the Way, how could anyone understand in his heart the ultimate Way
of nature? Without one who knows what produces all things, we have no way
on which to depend to meet responses from the unseen world.
His Majesty has thorough knowledge of the myriad matters he manages, his
mind roams in the seven factors of wisdom in order to cultivate superior wisdom,
he feels compassion for sentient beings and warmly raises up the common people,

104

Fascicle Ten

cleanses deﬁlements, encourages [the people] with the wisdom of realization,
relieves them from ignorance and delusion, and causes them to ascend to the state
of the long-lived virtuous. He truly is great! He excels in transcendental wisdom.
My family respectfully follows the great Dharma from generation to generation, and transmits the teaching of the [Buddhist] Way. I, your disciple,
however, am of a shallow learning, and of impolite manner. My deﬁlements
are still arising. I have already received [His Majesty’s] teaching and heard his
great guidance. I am able to understand with his single voice. All wholesomeness
can be within my whole body. My great pleasure is beyond comparison.
I, your disciple Wang Yun, bow.

The Answer of Sun Yi, Gentleman of the Granaries Section
[I received] your gracious letter. You kindly showed me the Imperial
Response to His Subjects: The Examination of the Discourse on the Extinction
of the Spirit. I humbly received this with respect and am delighted with it. I
cannot stop rejoicing.
Large rivers and seas are deep and vast. This is not something of which a
frog in a well can be aware. We [Buddhists] set our minds at ease and enter into
meditation. How could a heretic perform [this practice]? Without moving even
a single hair [in meditation], all evils will be dispersed, and by crossing over
on the ship (i.e., the Buddhist teaching) we will go beyond to the yonder shore.
His Majesty keeps the two polarities (i.e., Heaven and Earth) in his body,
his virtue combines those of the three dynasties (i.e., Xia, Shang [i.e., Yin], and
Zhou), by means of the marvelous plan, he manages the ultimate Way of nature,
and he takes charge of supreme wisdom in order to regulate the people. When
he issues an order, [the people obey him, just as] the grass bends when the wind
blows. When he sits upon the throne and governs the nation, he keeps silent but
his ediﬁcation moves just like that of a god. He raises the Five Thearchs and
follows their tracks. His method is eternal, beyond myriad kalpas. Moreover,
by ringing [a stone and tolling] a large bell he [instructs us as easily as if he
were to] point to his own palm. He sends down wondrous ideas and enlightens
the ignorant. His logic is admirable and deep, and his purpose penetrates the
issue and goes further. He is equal to a precious jewel beyond price, and equivalent to an undeﬁled lotus ﬂower. Filial reverence covers the people, and his
instruction and examples glorify previous sages. Even slowly moving creatures

105

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

recognize this pleasure together with us, and living things that ﬂit, ﬂy, or crawl
are all happy about this blessing.
I greatly appreciate that your letter was distributed even to me, one who
occupies the lowest seat. I received this with sincerity, and will write it on
the end of the sash of my ceremonial gown. This will instruct my ignorant
and deluded mind eternally.
I, your disciple Sun Yi, bow.

65a

The Answer of Xiao Misu, Aide to [the Magistrate of] Danyang
[I received] your gracious letter. Together with it, I humbly looked at the
Imperial Response to His Subjects: The Examination of the Discourse on
the Extinction of the Spirit. It is said that when human nature and the Way
of Heaven are spoken of, reason is cut off. By great fortune I was graciously
granted [this] wondrous instruction. I received it in the manner like throwing
myself at your feet. I will keep joy and respect in my mind.
I personally think that the Way of the Spirit is quiet and silent, and it is
difﬁcult to see the edge of the sea of the Dharma. Therefore, even though we
accumulate knowledge, as if piling up hemp and reeds, we cannot survey it.
Our consciousness understands objects sensed as visual color or form, but
they are still ambiguous. How could an ignorant person be aroused and look
up at them? Nevertheless, it has been a very long time since the cloud of wisdom was gradually transmitted to the east [from India] and the boat of treasures
crossed over to the south. The sound of the Dharma has spread into remote
areas. While wise rulers and good premiers have believed in [Buddhism] from
generation to generation, I, rather unexpectedly, have not heard about the one
who personally grasped the profound origin and himself realized the subtle
goal (i.e., enlightenment). Hence, [Buddhist doctrines such as] the twofold
truth and the eight kinds of meditative powers that lead to liberation are entirely
lacking in the emperor’s statement. The nine kinds of Buddhist scriptures and
the Tripiṭaka are bent to and mixed up with the national learning (daxue, “great
learning”). Alas! What a deplorable matter this is!
I personally examined the origin of the extinction of the spirit; [I found
that] a man called Ulūka started this idea, in a scripture called the Vaiśeṣika
(Weishi). Although his assertion was refuted by Āryadeva, his inﬂuence has
not yet ceased. Therefore, it causes people of different learning, who have

106

Fascicle Ten

numerous doubts, to establish various views. If we had not received the teaching of the one who apprehended this issue in the past, we would really have
ended up in confusion even in the next life.
His Majesty’s way beneﬁts the world, and his faculty penetrates everything
without any set pattern. He inspects both the [White] Tiger Library (Baifuguan;
i.e., Confucianism) and the Dragon Palace (Longgong; i.e., Buddhism), and
he leads [people] equally by the highest virtue [of Confucianism] and the ultimate reality [of Buddhism]. Therefore he is in accord with the secular teaching
and ascertains the way of the truth; that is to say, he follows the teaching of
ﬁlial piety and propagates the teaching of the nature of awakening. He illuminates the distressed ignorant people hereupon and removes the net of their
doubts. Though Śākyamuni speaks skillfully with ﬂexibility and Confucius is
good at inducing people by means of extensively studying all learning and
keeping himself under the restraint of the rules of propriety, how can that be
compared with this? How lofty is [His Majesty]! He has already performed
the ten wholesome acts, and is not far from [attaining the status of] the golden
wheel king (Skt. cakravartin) [who rules the four continents of the world].
You, the Dharma teacher, received the wisdom to discern emptiness by
nature, and have received training and learned much [about the Buddhist teaching] in this world. When you turn the Dharma wheel, the eight kinds of gods
and demigods who protect Buddhism gather like clouds. When you speak sublime words, heavenly beings accept them. Therefore, you can spread the incense
of the precepts in the private quarters of the imperial palace, and embellish
His Majesty’s abode with the ﬂowers of realization. How truthful you are! You
can cause all the people to listen to the voice of the Buddhist Way.
I, your disciple, have no recollection of Śākyamuni’s scriptures, and I
have not reached the gate of the Confucian school. Although I wish to hear
[the teaching] in the morning, I end the day feeling ashamed of myself for
frivolously squandering [my life]. I simply hope to follow the boundless
Dharma and beneﬁt other people as well as myself. I am suffering from a
disease, and my mind and thought are confused with fear. I have sincerely
done my best to state my thoughts. I do not know whether or not I have
arranged this in [good] order. I look forward to visiting you to ask questions
and intimately receive the greatest teaching from you.
I, your disciple Xiao Misu, lower my head to the ground and bow.

107

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

65b

The Answer of Fu Jing (462–520), Secretariat Gentleman
I was graciously shown the Most August’s [Imperial] Response to His
Subjects: The Examination of the Discourse on the Extinction of the Spirit.
I humbly received the profound purport, and was able to dispel many doubts.
His Majesty’s mind shines alone, and he is apart from others in looking
at the issue for his wondrous examination. Therefore, this is not something
ignorant people would be able to penetrate and look up to. Nevertheless,
ordinary scholars of narrow views, [like me,] personally sought a distinguished
opinion. Now we have again received these tenets [from His Majesty]. I
looked for the doctrine extensively in the scriptures; the doctrine is exactly
founded on the tenets [given by His Majesty]. This is truly just like when
two pieces of a tally match.
You, the Dharma teacher, publicized and exalted His Majesty’s astute and
discreet principles, and greatly praised his sacred words. You precisely cause
the two teachings (i.e., Buddhism and Confucianism) to come to the same
[teaching], and the absolute and the relative [truths] (i.e., the Buddhist Way
and secular ways) to square with each other. Fortunately I was able to participate in receiving the favor of your instruction and guidance. I am inﬂuenced
and molded by the highest ediﬁcation. I clap my hands in glee, [while occupying] the lowest seat. Yet I truly dance at the same time. I am looking forward
to meeting you to ask questions in the near future. I will exhaust my sincerity
on that occasion. While writing this, I feel happy and grateful. I do not know
how to [adequately] express my thoughts.
I, Fu Jing, present this.

The Answer of He Yang, Erudite of the Five Classics
[I received] your gracious letter. You kindly showed me the Imperial
Response to His Subjects: The Examination of the Discourse on the Extinction
of the Spirit.
I studied this [composition] intensively with respect, recited it, and enjoyed
it again and again. Therefore I know that [His Majesty’s] wonderful [wisdom]
encompasses the origin of what produces all things, his business is apart
from what ordinary people can recognize, his spirit concentrates on the meaning beyond language, and his principles excel ordinary people’s minds. His
Majesty’s astute and discreet discernment profoundly reaches human nature

108

Fascicle Ten

and the Way of Heaven. Therefore his faculty is outstanding and profound,
and he realizes [the truth] by himself, transcendently and deeply. He gives
an account of the three sages in order to lead those who have not yet understood. He shows the two issues in order to remove biased delusions. Hence,
the purpose of the perpetuity of ﬁlial duty is even more clariﬁed, and the
ultimate law of causality is more easily understood. The perfect scriptures
expounded [by the Buddha] on Vulture Peak (Skt. Gṛdhrakūṭa) manifest here
again. The clean teaching [established by Confucius on the bank of] the Zhu
River becomes clear again at this point. Even if compared to the sun and
moon, there is nothing that can go beyond this.
I, your disciple, am stupid, confused, and very ignorant, yet I, an unworthy
man, receive the maxim with respect. I will research the wonderful tenor. I
feel as if I am still dancing with joy.
You, the Dharma teacher, publicized and exalted the highest Way and
made the great plan clear and bright. You bestowed [the Imperial Response]
on me, an incompetent person. I am even more impressed by you.
I, your disciple He Yang, present this.

The Answer of Liu Qia, Secretary of the Heir Apparent
[I received] your gracious letter. With respect I looked at the Imperial
Response to His Subjects: The Examination of the Discourse on the Extinction
of the Spirit. I humbly opened the letter of white silk, and respectfully looked
at the profound account.
The composition is as harmonious as the music of Emperor Shun and
Emperor Yu, and the meaning surveys the [sixty-four] hexagrams and the
Great Appendix [of the Book of Changes]. [The Imperial Response] encompasses all scriptures and covers all writings. [His Majesty] spreads the authentic teaching, which is handed down to us in written form. The profound reason
is outstanding; it is difﬁcult to have the opportunity to hear [it]. [His Majesty]
takes [the teachings of] wise people and sages into consideration, and analyzes
even extremely small points. He understands thoroughly both Buddhist and
non-Buddhist paths. His words surpass the ultimate of heavenly and human
beings. Except for those who have mastered the highest virtue like his and
whose thoughts match the virtuous spirits, would it be possible to deeply
clarify the essential points of the Way that the human intellect hopes to attain?

109

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

I will prudently write this on the end of the sash of my ceremonial gown,
and wear it eternally. Now that the [His Majesty’s] pure guidance has entered
into me, it shines as if to enlighten me, an ignorant man. I will visit you on
purpose to study [the Buddhist Way] one of these days, and explain more
about this.
I, your disciple Liu Qia, bow with my head to the ground and present this.

65c

The Answer of Yan Zhizhi (457–508), Erudite of the Five Classics
[I received] your gracious letter. I humbly looked at the Imperial Response
to His Subjects: The Examination of the Discourse on the Extinction of the
Spirit.
The body is separated [from the spirit] and engages in coarseness. Moreover,
[the spirit] is abstruse and mysterious; it is difﬁcult to comprehend. Needless
to say, the principle of discernment is minute. How could those of confused
views understand this? Therefore, the view that life ends with death and the
view that life is permanent intersect and arise, and competition based on the
difference [between these two views] occurs quickly. If we keep the Middle
Way (i.e., the principle of nonduality) in mind, we can come back to [the right
path] when we are swayed by desire. If you pay attention only to the two [opposite] ends of a matter, you will be unable to reach the yonder shore forever. In
discussions on the extinction of the spirit, this obstruction is really heavy.
I respectfully rely on His Majesty, the chief support of the highest teaching.
The brilliant imperial instruction was accordingly issued. The issue has been
clariﬁed, just as clouds disperse. [This imperial instruction] not only profoundly tallies the books authored by sages and virtuous emperors of ancient
times, it also deigns to promote the signiﬁcance of ﬁlial piety. [His Majesty]
has most likely wonderfully reached the origin of life and deeply mastered
the basis of conduct. He consolidates even more the moral character to maintain the rules of propriety and [a feeling of sadness that he cannot help when]
he treads on hoarfrost and dew.163 With the knowledge of examining the
spirit, he respects the joy of practicing meditation and enhances his mind.
Everyone should learn the mind of determination (Skt. dharma-kṣānti) in
the path of wisdom and force back the tide of the sea of delusions.
I, your disciple, try to establish my pure mind from early days, but I have
not yet known how to cross over to the yonder shore. I humbly read [the

110

Fascicle Ten

Imperial Response] and my body and mind were ﬁlled with jubilation. You
kindly think of me and encourage me. I deeply appreciate your favor.
I, Yan Zhizhi, present this.

The Answer of Cao Siwen, Houseman of the Eastern Palace
You graciously sent the Imperial message to me. I, your disciple, recently
received the point of this argument with respect in person, too. It is truly
lamentable that Secretariat Fan became confused and cornered [with the Discourse on the Extinction of the Spirit] in this way. His Majesty was deeply
afraid that people would be deluded. Therefore he bestowed the instruction
of compromise. Once this imperial instruction is practiced, even those of
ignorant mind will understand that the spirit is immortal.
I, your disciple, recently criticized somewhat [Fan’s Discourse on the
Extinction of the Spirit] following [the teachings of] the Duke of Zhou and
Confucius,164 which I now enclose in this letter. Please be so kind as to take
a look [at it] and refute [Fan’s] strange points against [Buddhist] scriptures.
Since I do not probe deeply, [please tell me the points] to restrain or to expand.
I will not talk of many things here.
I, your disciple Cao Siwen, bow.

The Answer of Xie Ju, Vice Director of the Palace Library
[I received] your gracious letter. You kindly showed me the Imperial
Response to His Subjects: The Examination of the Discourse on the Extinction
of the Spirit.
I have personally heard the [old] saying, “When all things are in disorder,
they are examined with celestial phenomena, and when various words are
confused and chaotic, they are judged with the sacred principles.” This is
clear from past events, and energetically shown here [in His Majesty’s writing].
I humbly appreciate His Majesty’s instruction bestowed in written form. The
instruction deeply molds and fashions [the people]. Except for those who
investigate thoroughly the signiﬁcance of words and symbols, who can recognize such subtle matters?
The Imperial reason is profound to the utmost degree. It effects the complete
development of [every] nature, and makes an exhaustive discrimination of the
spirit. [His Majesty] feels pity on [those who] have the six coverings (liubi),165

111

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

and feels sorrow that they have the four kinds of evil attachments (a heretical
doctrine of the ninety-six non-Buddhist schools). He dispels the insigniﬁcant
assertions that cause confusion about the Way. He delivers those who are on
a narrow path to the Great Way. The purpose is unrestrained and yet mysterious, and the meaning is gentle yet clear. Extensively studying all learning
and keeping himself under the restraint of the rules of propriety ﬁll [the
world] greatly. Wide comprehension and great scope are all embraced here.
With a single sound of his voice and his chanting of half a gāthā (four-line
verse) he manifests his outstanding realization. Sunlike wisdom and a mind
like [clear] water remove deﬁlement and confusion here. This causes the
heart of the ultimate Way to have a place to which to return, and teaching
others and thinking of oneself to have a place [in which to settle down]. Heterodoxy naturally ceases, and false accusations against wholesomeness spontaneously come to an end. [His Majesty] concentrates on the world beyond
language before written language was made, and he directs the ﬂow of meditation in the sea of suffering. Can he bear only the Tripiṭaka and cover the
seven [non-Buddhist] books?
I, your disciple, am fortunate to abide in the best of times and secretly
receive correct guidance. I receive a special favor from you, and clap my
hands in joy. I will follow [the Imperial Response] with respect and write it
on the end of the sash of my ceremonial gown.
I, Xie Ju, bow.

66a

The Answer of Ma Yuanhe, Chamberlain for the National Treasury
[I received] your gracious letter. You bestowed on me the Imperial
Response to His Subjects: The Examination of the Discourse on the Extinction
of the Spirit.
I have personally heard that the purpose of the crucial point [His Majesty]
showed is not studied by ordinary people, and the pivot that tallies with a
wonder is mastered only by the virtuous. Therefore, various teachings go
around, but the principle comes to sincerity and wholesomeness. Numerous
scriptures state full details, yet the main point comes down to deliverance.
I humbly think that by natural endowment His Majesty forms the people,
masters the Way, and regulates ediﬁcation. His principle transcends language
and his consideration extends beyond the phenomenal world. He attacks and

112

Fascicle Ten

blocks heterodoxy, and expounds that [all teachings] are united into one. All
things in the universe know the ultimate law of nature. Human and heavenly
beings look up at him and follow him. He is truly like a bridge formed of
ships aﬂoat on the blue sea or the sun and moon in the dark sky.
Discussions on the extinction of the spirit do not convince me. Why?
When past sages spread teachings, they forced them on [the people] or guided
[the people] to them, in different ways. In short, the principle is in fact not
dual. The Book of Changes says, “The family that accumulates wholesomeness
is sure to have superabundant happiness, and the family that accumulates
evil is sure to have superabundant misery.”166 The Canon of Filial Piety says,
“Parents are content with [their sons] while living, and when they are worshiped after death their disembodied spirits enjoy [offerings].”167 Although
[in these two scriptures the law of] the three periods of existence is not evidently discussed, the tenor is apparent. When ﬁrewood is completely burned
up the ﬂame dies out. This is an expedient teaching of Hinayana Buddhism.
The wondrous existence (i.e., existence beyond nonexistence) is transparent.
This is the proﬁcient assertion of the ultimate. If one conforms to the principle
on the basis of his feelings, the principle is indeed reliable. Moreover, if we
pay careful attention to performing the funeral rites for parents and the ceremonies of sacriﬁce to ancestors, the people’s virtue will deepen. The succession of a state and a family from generation to generation is derived from
this. The treasures of the three powers are marked by various changes and
movements. Discussions on the extinction of the spirit are frequently harmful
to political affairs. “Those who refute sages have no law in their minds, and
those who object to ﬁlial piety disown the principle of affection toward parents.”168 If one fails in these two issues, it will be difﬁcult for him to conduct
himself in the world of His Majesty.
I, your disciple, am ignorant and inexperienced in the highest Way. You
deigned to send a letter to me, an ordinary man of shallow learning. I am
ﬁlled with awe indeed. There is no place in this world for me.
I, your disciple Ma Yuanhe, bow.

The Answer of Wang Jing, Court Gentleman for Evaluations
You showed me His Majesty’s [Imperial] Response to His Subjects: The
Examination of the Discourse on the Extinction of the Spirit.

113

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

66b

I humbly think that His Majesty [administers state affairs,] letting his
robes fall down and folding his hands, at the Imperial Court, while in his
mind he enjoys making a trip to eternity. He lives without wasting even a
single day. His way is distinctive and he is simply sharp. Thereupon he made
inquiries to his subjects, and extensively promoted the meaning of ﬁlial piety.
His Majesty’s writing is profound; the ingenious principle is deep and boundless. Except for a sharp and smart ruler, or a sunlike monarch whom we
follow, or clouds we gaze upon from afar, could there be someone who can
analyze profound and tranquil issues and who can clarify them in an elegant
discussion? [His Majesty] elucidated the great sacred [teaching] in an instant,
and right away settled ordinary people’s doubts. This is not only because in
reason he thinks with the deep mind, but also because in meaning he is close
to his subjects. In a country where the harmonious energy is held and where
love is kept, and in a region where the society remains peaceful even though
the ruler does not do anything special and where customs are simple, there
is no one who does not bow in appreciation of kindness and who is not favored
by the customs handed down from Tang (i.e., Emperor Yao).
I, your disciple, am a lonely man from the area between the Yangzi and
Huai Rivers. I have no learning and no skill. Even though I have followed
a teacher and have had an audience with the emperor, I am not versed in even
a single scripture. Even if I were to try to recall an old composition, how
could I remember anything closely resembling this?
The Five Classics are vast and profound, and the categories of items are
broad and abundant. As for the purpose of spiritual intelligence, there is a
great variety of meanings. Regarding the music from instruments made from
metal, stone, string, and bamboo, and the story that the Duke of Zhou [swore
an oath to the spirits] on behalf of King Wu, are they not meant to be for His
Majesty’s purpose? Furthermore, when we speak of the “Chapter on the
Meaning of Sacriﬁces” [in the Book of Rites], there is particularly clear evidence. If it is said that the spirits do not exist, then it would be possible that
sages do not exist either. If it is approved that sages exist, there should also
be the spirits. The law of the spirit is luminous. How could it be allowed that
[the spirit] is extinguished?
My, your disciple’s, view is stupid and shallow. I have nothing with which

114

Fascicle Ten

to publicize and exalt His Majesty’s kindness. Since I was asked, I frankly
expressed my opinion.
I, your disciple Wang Jing, bow.

The Answer of Lu Ren, Gentleman Cavalier Attendant, and Lu Chui
(470–526), Secretariat Drafter of the Heir Apparent
[We received] your gracious letter. You kindly showed us His Majesty’s
[Imperial] Response to His Subjects: The Examination of the Discourse on
the Extinction of the Spirit.
Formerly when people of different schools argued about the path, Mencius
took upon himself the Duke of Zhou’s way.169 When Hinayana Buddhists
put the [Buddhist] Way into confusion, Nāgārjuna explained the [authentic]
teaching of Śākyamuni. Thus, in circles of Yangzi and Mozi, every time they
moved their tongues their mouths stiffened. Regarding followers of the six
leaders of non-Buddhist teachings, their chariots were in disorder and their
banners dropped (i.e., they were completely routed).
It can be said that those who assert the extinction of the spirit are biased
in learning and inﬂexible. [They are similar to] those who travel south while
seeking the Yan region [of the north], or those who head toward the Chu area
[in the south] while steering the shafts of the carriage toward the north. If
one travels a thousand li on roads in this way, he will be farther away [from
his destination].
His Majesty feels pity on those who go astray. Thereupon, he exerted himself to create this Imperial composition, in which he investigated what lies
deep and attained what is distant. He completely comprehends the processes
of transformation and knows what the spirit is. He causes the ignorant equally
to disperse their doubts, just as ice melts away, and he explains the essential
points of the Way as brightly as the moon shines.
We, your disciples, are both mediocre, yet we beneﬁt from your kindliness.
Wearing a cap, we [serve] at the imperial court that corresponds to Heaven.
We have heard the discussion to examine and study ancient matters. We sincerely feel happy about this guidance; our joy increases more and more. You
graciously distributed [the Imperial composition] to us. We will respectfully
write this down on the ends of the sashes of our ceremonial gowns.
We, Lu Ren and [Lu] Chui, present this.

115

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

The Answer of Wang Sengshu, Vice Commandant
[I received] your gracious letter. You kindly showed me the Imperial
Response to His Subjects: The Examination of the Discourse on the Extinction
of the Spirit.
How great is the right Way! How can we see it through a tiny pipe? How
can those who speak of human nature learn this? [His Majesty,] however,
excellently treats the issue following each category. I am happy and contented
with the fact that my ignorance has dispersed. I will respectfully follow and
sustain [the Imperial Response] and take a course of action. I will recite this
in due order.
You, Dharma teacher, are outstanding in virtue today, and your reputation
is remarkable throughout all generations. You speak in every assembly of
knowing the whole [of a thing from a single bit of information].170 You certainly reward people with a wealth [of wisdom] to enlighten the ignorant. I
think that you clarify and propagate His Majesty’s purpose. The cloud [of
doubts] will disperse luminously.
I, your disciple, feel ashamed of myself for studying under adversity and
being unable to see the whole of a matter with my [poor] discernment. How
could I revere with praise the great brightness and publicize and uplift the
wondrous model? The advocate [of the Discourse on the Extinction of the
Spirit] sticks to a single delusion and complies with singlemindedness. It is
indeed impossible for him to speak of the right path. How could he know of
the certain danger of becoming stuck in a hitch when he has gone too far.
The principles of this world and of the other world are bright and errorless.
Cause and effect arise mutually and have no independence in relationship.
When the body perishes, it naturally belongs to a class of trees and plants,
but the spiritual intelligence always exists following conditions. Therefore,
there is a story in the Zuozhuan that Pengsheng appeared as a boar,171 and
we ﬁnd this passage in the Book of History, “Ancestors have arrived.”172 The
Rites of Zhou (Zhouli) says, “If music changes nine times, human and spiritual
beings can know this. You should observe ceremonies.”173 [In the Zuozhuan
there is an episode of] by tying up grasses [someone] repaying a favor he
has received.174 How could [the spirit] consequently be extinguished? How
could it be possible that the spirit does not exist in what was dreamed by
Yuan Gui?175 The immortality of the spiritual intelligence is written in the

116

Fascicle Ten

Buddha’s golden sayings. In the statements of Confucius there is more evidence of this. Even though [Laozi composed] the Five Thousand Words (Dao
de jing) and there are three hundred cantos in the Book of Odes, if we attain
their principle it may spontaneously be embraced in a single sentence. Therefore we do not have to trouble ourselves to extensively seek for testimonies
of [the immortality of the spirit].
The three sages established brilliant teachings, and the various schools
of thinkers permanently established great doctrines, but those who are ambitious and too hasty still strikingly make compositions and study [strange
doctrines] again and again. His Majesty has presently clariﬁed the essence
and illuminated what is hidden and tranquil. His discernment penetrates both
the Buddhist and non-Buddhist teachings. Since [the teachings of] ancient
sages are eternal and His Majesty ﬁnds that heresy recklessly arises, he greatly
gives rise to [favors] herein and bestows a piece of writing with love. This
causes even icchantikas to attain realization immediately and consequently
attain the fruition of buddhahood, and it openly and clearly cleanses persistent
delusions in Jambudvīpa. Moreover, the beneﬁcial cause for gentlemen of
the ofﬁcial class is great.
I, your disciple, have enjoyed the [Buddhist] Way without any order, but
you, Dharma teacher, have given me a bamboo basket full [of favors]. Consequently I was nicely allowed to share His Majesty’s writing. You caused
me to be able to delightedly receive the cool breezes. I pay respect to this,
dancing with joy. There is nothing with which my joy can be compared. I
will keep [your favor] in mind deeply and much more.
I, your disciple Wang Sengshu, lower my head to the ground and bow.

The Answer of Ming Shanbin (443–527), Erudite of the Five Classics
[I received] your gracious letter. You kindly showed me the Imperial
Response to His Subjects: The Examination of the Discourse on the Extinction
of the Spirit. Its foundation is deep and its purport is profound. How could
[an ignorant being like] a deer or rabbit investigate them? One understands
things following one’s own faculty. Probably each person will be happy about
what he sees. I will make my course of action following [His Majesty’s composition]. I cannot stop dancing with joy.
You, Dharma teacher, are outstanding in learning in the present time, and
[you have] accorded with the Way for a thousand years. [The ability] to
117

66c

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

enlighten the ignorant is truly within your brilliant virtue. I think that you
propagate [His Majesty’s] subtle purpose without missing anything.
I, your disciple, have excused myself from focusing on Buddhist scriptures
for [spiritual] cultivation, and I am not proﬁcient in knowledge. How can I
respectfully give an account of the profound Way and glorify the teaching?
The advocate limits [his view] to what he sees and hears. How could he
reach what is vast and profound? He can see what happens in a hundred
years, and he will be deluded throughout the three periods of existence. He
says that since the physical body perishes, the spirit is extinguished together
with the body. This is already against what is stated in Buddhist scriptures
and it also goes against the teaching of Confucius. How can we argue about
the highest Way and speak of the wondrous doctrine with him?
In this world we have ceremonies and music, while in the other world
there are spiritual beings. Therefore, when Confucius gave an instruction,
he responded to [Jilu’s] question, [“While you do not know life, how can]
you know about death?”176 King Wen of the Zhou dynasty established a teaching; [he made an oath] that he, a man of versatile talent [who is able to serve
the spirits], will die instead of [King Wu].177 The Book of Odes says, “The
Three Augusts reside in Heaven.”178 The Book of History says, “Ancestors
have arrived.”179 Moreover, the famous man who roamed on a bridge spanning
the Hao River (i.e., Zhuangzi) wrote the Discourse on the Coexistence of
Opposite Views (Fangsheng zhi lun).180 The Archivist of superior intelligence
(i.e., Laozi) said, “The manes of the departed do not manifest their spiritual
energy.”181 When one puts ﬁrewood forward [toward the ﬂames as the force
of the ﬁre weakens], the ﬂames are transmitted [and increase the ﬁre’s intensity].182 [People become] very close to each other and are reborn. All these
stated and recorded in the classic books are evident and clear matters.
Since conditions (yuan) are transient, they are extinguished. Because
karma is something to be made, it is impermanent. Therefore, even when
the ﬁve skandhas (Skt. pañcaskandha) unite and become things, they end
up in nothingness, just as smoke vanishes in the air. Even when the four
small elements (siwei) are groundlessly formed together, they disappear, just
as a ﬁre is extinguished.
I personally think that the Way of Spiritual Intelligence is neither karma
nor conditions. Since it is neither karma nor conditions, although it moves,

118

Fascicle Ten

it is not extinguished. Since it is the subject that can perceive the object and
also karma, the subject of activities, there are differences in the reward and
retribution of joy and sorrow. This is Śākyamuni’s wondrous assertion, at
which the gentry lower their heads [in respect]. Even though there are different
paths of teaching, the truth returns to one. At present [Fan Zhen] has abandoned the original texts of the Duke of Zhou and Confucius, and goes against
Śākyamuni’s genuine statement. I do not know what he is going to become
when he is like this. Even when the True Dharma was practiced in the world,
there were still [two different] assertions: at death the world is extinguished
and life ends (Skt. uccheda-dṛṣṭi), and both the world and life are eternal
(Skt. śāśvata-dṛṣṭi). Moreover, after entering into the period of the Semblance
Dharma there could be no situation in which there is no heretical view.
Regarding the issue that the spirit exists and is not extinguished, the three
sages have the same tenor. This is clearly written in books but many years
have passed [since the time the books were written], so wise Confucian scholars and the erudite have not completely encountered this meaning.
His Majesty’s intelligence is complete in the doctrines of emptiness and
existence, and his intellectual function investigates thoroughly the origin of
the spirit. Accordingly, he gave rise to the sacred sincerity and personally
wrote this composition. He promotes the highest teaching and enlightens
those who are seriously confused. He relieves learned people from their
doubts forever. His favor has reached everyone throughout the world.
You caused me to be able to have a chance to appreciate His Majesty’s
teaching and to receive his favor. I pay my respects to you and I am truly
delighted with [His Majesty’s teaching].
I, Ming Shanbin, bow.

The Answer of Yu Qianlou, Court Gentleman for Comprehensive Duty
The Canon of Filial Piety says, “Parents are content with [their sons]
while living, and when they are worshiped after death their disembodied
spirits enjoy [offerings].”183 The “Chapter on Records of Music” (Yueji) [in
the Book of Rites] says, “In this world there are ceremonies and music, while
in the other world there are spiritual beings.”184 The Book of Odes says, “[The
music] is majestic, peaceful, and harmonious. The spirits of our ancestors
will hear it.”185 The Zong Boshi section [in the Chunguan of] the Zhouguan
(i.e., Zhouli), says, “If music changes nine times, human and spiritual beings
119

67a

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

can know this. You should observe ceremonies.”186 The “Chapter on the
Meaning of Sacriﬁces” [in the Book of Rites] says, “When we go into the
hall [of the ancestral temple] [the spirits] heave a sigh, and we certainly hear
their sigh of lamentation.”187 The Book of History says, “If you, Three Kings,
truly bear the responsibility for [the illness of] Heaven’s great son (i.e., King
Wu), [please let me, Zhou Dan (i.e., the Duke of Zhou, who can serve spiritual
beings), be a substitute for his person].”188 The Zuozhuan says that the spirit
of Gun (i.e., the father of the legendary ruler Yu) changed into a yellow bear,
Boyou became a ghost, and Pengsheng appeared as a boar.189
Above are seven items [regarding the immortality of the spirit].
I, your disciple, was born within the past hundred years. I heard [the law
of] the three periods of existence from my early years. I have examined
numerous scriptures and sought various ancient facts about this. The evidence
that spiritual beings exist is already shown in Chinese books. The fruition
of the highest wisdom is also indicated in the studies of the western region
(i.e., India). The sacred teachings [of China and India] tally with each other
on the point that the spirit has no end. While their expressions may differ,
their principles are found to be the same.
[The Way of] the Sage’s (i.e., the Buddha) ediﬁcation is, however, based
on thoroughly understanding the people’s receptivity. This means to praise
or censure people following an urgent case and to give or take away in accordance with each person’s faculties. What the people do not understand is not
spoken, and what is spoken must be accomplished. [The Buddha] does not
respond to [the people] when it is not the appropriate time, and when he
responds to them he alone saves them.
The reward and retribution of karma, however, varies. Consequently, the
path of acceptance differs from the path of refusal. The conditions of going
and coming gather together, and the mind that sinks [in delusion] and the
mind to be awakened are in opposition to one another. Those who are intimate
with a little knowledge remain in darkness about this great tenet, and those
who stick to familiar information do not discern what is profound and subtle.
This is similar to the case where [a cicada and a little dove, which are only
capable of ﬂying over] an elm or spindle tree, laugh at [the great bird called
peng that can soar ninety thousand li [into the sky],190 or the case where [the
people of] China are amazed at [the vastness of] the trichiliocosm. Originally

120

Fascicle Ten

this is a natural consequence. People like these thereupon scheme far-fetched
explanations, control [people] with sensational statements, make false assertions, and instigate the uneducated people. This is called heresy, which formerly Confucius considered to be harmful.
Our emperor succeeds the Three [Augusts] and the Five [Thearchs], attends
to all state affairs, and succeeds to the seven hundred [wise people who gathered in the second meeting for compiling the Buddhist teaching] in order to
control the six elemental energies of the changing [seasons].191 His achievements are immeasurable and his way [of teaching] is pure at the same time.
He has the virtue of great ability to govern the universe, and the brightness
that is just like having the sun on his left and the moon on his right. This is
something that former emperors and kings did not distinguish, that many
sages do not possess, that all the people should thoroughly understand, and
that we will certainly achieve in the future. There is no one who is obstructed
to receive [His Majesty’s] profound wave and does not attain his deep point.
I humbly read the wondrous discussion, which completely covers absolute
and relative reality. The three powers are clearly recorded. All the people of
His Majesty’s territories (jiufu) are attracted to [this discussion]. Even slowly
moving creatures and wormlike animals know of this and dance with joy, not
to mention [the rejoicing of] people. Who cannot beat time with one’s hand?
I, your disciple, am young and wanting in reading thoroughly the meaning
of writings. I am particularly ignorant in logic. Since [His Majesty’s discussion] matches my long-cherished intention, I secretly dance with deep joy.
Regarding the extent of various schools of thinkers, their statements are quite
numerous. When we look for the issue of spiritual beings, there are many
clear testimonies. Moreover, the scriptures of prajñā originally clarify this
meaning (i.e., the immortality of the spirit). Because [these scriptures] are
rejected by evil people, I will not quote anything from them. Except for
correct words, what else could correct [their mistakes]? I have brieﬂy mentioned the seven items, all quoted from [Chinese] scriptures. These are just
like if very tiny things were to lean against the Five Peaks, or a snail were
to cling to the emperor’s six military corps. I dare to state just a little bit of
my view, and surely break into a cold sweat [with anxiety].
I, your disciple Yu Qianlou, bow.

121

67b

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

The Answer of Yin Jun (484–532), Household Provisioner of the
Heir Apparent
Recently [I received] your gracious letter. You kindly showed me His
Majesty’s Imperial [Response to] His Subjects: The Examination of the Discourse on the Extinction of the Spirit.
Human nature and the Way of Heaven cannot really be heard. His Majesty
simply observes the twofold truth and concurrently understands [the teachings
of] the three sages thoroughly. He clariﬁes both of these in a few words and
explains what is subtle in simple writing. He teaches that sentient beings
[should] live within the ﬁve kinds of ceremonies, and his purpose is inclusive
of the universe outside the limits of the human world. This can be compared
to how a river and the sea both lead to land, or how the sun and moon ride
high in the sky.
I humbly read [the Imperial Response] and am very happy; I rejoice both
in body and mind at this. Why? I, your disciple, have been inﬂuenced by the
profound ediﬁcation from early in my life, and now, when I have become
old, I have never lost [faith in Buddhism]. I am always afraid that my discernment and study have not been extensive and I may yet turn back halfway
in vain. When I sit straight and contemplate quietly, my mind wanders about
and scatters, or when I give a statement or set up a discourse, I am sometimes
daunted by eloquent and sharp people. The Great Way is very smooth, yet
common people love the byways. This is entirely due to the [inﬂuence of
these eloquent and sharp people].
At present I humbly received the wondrous purpose with respect. I was
illuminated as if my ignorance has been enlightened. I always carry this with
me and chant it. I will eternally take this as my treasure. I have been involved
in public and private matters for the past several days, and was also laid up
with illness, so I was unable to respond to you immediately. I cherish your
favor more deeply.
I, Yin Jun, bow.
The Answer of Zhang Mian (490–531), Assistant in the Palace Library
In my search, [the law of] the three periods of existence is bright and the
two effects (i.e., reward and retribution) [in the law of cause and effect] luminously reveal themselves. How is it possible to be deluded by the six dusts

122

Fascicle Ten

(Skt. ṣaḍ viṣayāḥ), to not be awakened, to be confused in the ﬁve realms of
existence, and to sink [in delusion] for a long time? I think that “when the
body withers, the spirit is extinguished” or “when a skeleton perishes, the
consciousness decays” are the wrong views of a heretic. How could [a heretic]
control Gautama’s True Dharma? In my sense, this is compared to a case in
which a man easily deploys a brigade to oppose a powerful vanguard [of his
enemy], or a case of a man arbitrarily making an old, worn-out horse and a
legendary ﬁne horse that is capable of covering one thousand miles a day
race at the same level of speed. I am afraid that at the end of a long kalpa
[the day when a heretic] leads insects will certainly arrive. The body dies
and decays, and again another body is received, but the exquisite spirit does
not change. Human beings and animals comply with [causes and] conditions.
[This tenet is found in] the brilliant composition of the Nirvana Sutra and
the valuable sayings in the [Taizi] ruiying [benqi jing].192
His Majesty sacredly illuminates what is tranquil and profound, and clearly
examines what is deep. Comparing to the two phrases regarding sacriﬁcial
offerings [quoted from the Book of Rites], he understands that the spirit is
not extinguished. He makes clear that the reckless conduct [of the heretic]
goes against one’s parents. His justice, woven into [in his composition], follows the eightfold holy path to enlightenment (Skt. ārya-aṣṭāṅgika-mārga).
It is difﬁcult to be able to hear [His Majesty’s] words, just as [Confucius’
discourse about] human nature and the Way [of Heaven] cannot be heard.193
I, your disciple, visited the Ruo River when I was young. I received the
precepts in the area of Fan and Deng (present-day Henan province), and studied under Dharma teacher Qi at the White Horse Temple (Baimasi). [Dharma
teacher Qi] frequently talked to me about the profound tenor of birth and
death, and spoke often of the subtle purpose of the exquisite spirit. From that
time on, I have taken refuge in [the Buddhist teaching] and cut off all doubt
about these issues.
I again see that this judgment has destroyed the devil’s path to a greater
extent. This not only causes us to experience [Buddhism] in this world, but
also to establish a relationship with [Buddhism] in the next existence. I know
only to take refuge in [Buddhism], and tacitly compare myself to Seeking
Fame (Qiuming) [described in the Lotus Sutra].194

123

67c

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

You graciously beneﬁted me by showing [the Imperial Response] to me.
I deeply appreciate your favor.
I, your disciple Zhang Mian, bow.

The Answer of Lu Lian, Erudite of the Five Classics
I, Lian, address you.
I received your letter. You graciously showed me the Imperial Response
to His Subjects: The Examination of the Discourse on the Extinction of the
Spirit. I humbly read His Majesty’s purpose, which clearly illuminates my
deﬁlement and ignorance.
My, your disciple’s, entire clan believes in the Three Treasures. From the
time of my youth I have followed the Buddhist teaching. Even though I sincerely take refuge in the highest teaching, I am in the dark about the principle
of nonduality.
I carefully thought of many sages, both Buddhist and non-Buddhist, and
found that they expand and guide [the people] with distinguished writings.
The Tathāgata explained the three vehicles in order to indicate one principle,
and spoke of the twofold truth in order to awaken those who are stuck [in delusion]. Former kings explained the ﬁve [kinds of] ceremonies in order to cause
the people to thoroughly understand love and respect, and propagated the music
of the six generations [starting with the Yellow Emperor] in order to lead
spiritual beings. They further showed [the law of] the three periods of existence
in order to prove [the law of] cause and effect. Moreover, they clariﬁed that
sincerity moves [others] in order to verify the reality of reward and retribution.
How is it possible to promptly reject the origin of the spirit and eternally cut
off consciousness as a condition? If this was the case, reward and retribution
for good and evil deeds would be merely an empty statement, and the establishment of sacriﬁces and reverence [to the spirits of ancestors] would be false.
When we seek this in common sense, is it possible to be content with this?
Nevertheless, ignorant and deluded people still remain quite obstinate.
Therefore His Majesty clearly viewed [all things] with a tranquil mind,
and his spirit visited the subtle gate [of Buddhism]. He put forth reason in
words that are as bright as morning sunlight, and gave testimony by issuing
this writing, which is as clear as a glowworm [in the darkness]. This is enough
to quickly educate ignorant and confused people and cause ordinary people
to contentedly have faith.
124

Fascicle Ten

I humbly follow the tenor of the imperial writing. I will examine the origin
of the mind. I prudently discerned this and respond to you. I cannot express
my happiness in words, but I clap my hands and dance with joy.
I, your disciple Lu Lian, present this.

The Answer of Zhang Fan, Mounted Escort of Yangzhou
[I received] your gracious letter. I humbly looked at the Imperial Response
to His Subjects: The Examination of the Discourse on the Extinction of the
Spirit, in which the magniﬁcent purpose traces to the very root of a vital
point; [His Majesty’s] sublime words tally with the Way.
His Majesty’s innate intelligence is above those of the six [renowned] scholars, spontaneously inclusive of that of the one (i.e., the Buddha) above the
sages (i.e., bodhisattvas ) in the tenth stage [of enlightenment]. Regarding the
law of effects brought about by causes, his reason shines upon [the law of] the
three periods of existence. As to the signiﬁcance of observing the proper rules
for ﬁlial offerings [to the ancestral spirits], he follows the continuous line of
all kings. His sublime understanding is explained as easily as the ice melts in
the springtime. His supreme purpose is as bright as the autumn sky. [These]
are enough to change the [evil] minds of Devadatta, [who attempted to kill the
Buddha], and the icchantikas, and to inﬂuence the intentions of [the tyrant
King] Jie and [the notorious robber] Zhi. [His Majesty] has restored the faithless
style to [the faithful style] of ancient times. He causes the orderly, simple, and
sincere tradition to thrive. He has an outstanding reputation and excellent sincerity. Nothing more can be added to his [great] esteem.
You, Dharma teacher, are an outstanding man of virtue, well versed in
principles. You monopolize high reputation in the world. You have received
His Majesty’s ediﬁcation together with us, but you alone enjoy the spiritual
intelligence, deeply examine the profundity of the Way, and have insight into
the path of the ultimate law of nature.
I, your disciple, formerly heard a certain master’s view and became awakened to the tenor of the grand scholar [Confucius]. Today I encounter an era
of peace and justice, and follow the teaching that [the spirit] is not extinguished. [This teaching] truly shines upon me, clariﬁes my ignorant mind,
and washes away my deﬁlement. I prance and dance with joy. How could
language or symbols surpass [dancing in expressing such joy]?
I, Zhang Fan, bow.
125

68a

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

The Answer of Wang Zhenguo (d. 515), Commandant of the Left
of the Heir Apparent
[I received] your gracious letter. I humbly looked at the Imperial Response
to His Subjects: The Examination of the Discourse on the Extinction of the Spirit.
Regarding the immortality of the spirit, scriptures present explicit sentences.
When we talk about the issue in conformity with our minds, it lustrously
stands to reason. The discourse that the spirit is extinguished is really frightful
and lamentable.
His Majesty illuminates [the issue] deeply and rightly. His wonderful
tenor encompasses all extensively. [His composition] breaks the heresy and
propagates this model of teaching. This can truly cause [people] to clearly
realize the profound path, and it will be the chief support for a millennium.
I humbly read [the Imperial Response]. I am happy to sustain this personally and deeply forever. I will pay a visit to you one of these days. I look
forward to inquiring about this issue to you.
I, Wang Zhenguo, present this.

The Answer of Cao Jingzong (457–508), General of the Palace Guard
You deigned to give me the Imperial instruction responding [to the subject]
of the mortality of the spirit.
The reasoning [of this writing] encompasses eternity, and the purpose
includes the issue of the three periods of existence. Those who have been
confused in the six realms of existence for a long time will hereupon be
awakened forever. Those who have constantly been suspicious about the ﬁve
realms of existence will realize the truth, just as if being enlightened. Except
for [His Majesty], who thoroughly examines the eight kinds of meditation
leading to enlightenment (bajietuo), who shines as brightly as [the Buddha]
who is called by the ten epithets, who rejects what is not upright, and who
transcends the secular world, who else could be like this?
I will respectfully carry [the Imperial Response] with me and write it on
the end of the sash of my ceremonial gown. I will be sure not to disregard it
even while sleeping and eating.
You, Dharma teacher, have knowledge that goes beyond the realm of existence. Your learning has reached [the clear cognition of] nonarising (Skt. anutpattika-dharma-kṣānti). You praise and recommend [His Majesty’s composition],

126

Fascicle Ten

and this good deed of yours shines as brightly as that of [Zichan of] Dongli
(the eastern village).195
I opened [His Majesty’s composition] and appreciate it repeatedly, and
so I forgot about my illness.
I, Cao Jingzong, reply to you.

The Answer of Yan Shan, Chamberlain for Attendants
You deigned to distribute to me the Imperial instruction to ascertain the
immortality of the spirit in response to subjects, together with your explanatory
letter.
The grounds of the reasoning [of this instruction] are evident, and it is
wondrously inclusive of both sides. Consequently, [His Majesty] propagates
the intelligent insight on his own, praising both the boat and the bridge [by
which people cross over to the other side]. What cannot be seen with the
eyes may be blocked by a curtain or a wall, and what cannot be heard with
the ears may be obscured by distance. We cannot say there are no sounds or
objects simply on the basis of their not being heard or seen. If we intend to
ask about the Buddhist teaching now, we should rely on books of non-Buddhist
teaching. It is hereupon shown that books of the non-Buddhist teaching does
not differ from those of the Buddhist teaching. A book says, “The spirit in
its energy can go everywhere.”196 A Buddhist scripture says, “Nevertheless,
the spirit is not extinguished.”197 Since [the description in] the Buddhist scripture tallies with that in the book of non-Buddhist teaching, there is little to
question about the issue that the spirit exists. Those who doubt [the immortality
of the spirit and assert] its mortality are like an ephemerid that does not know
[what takes place between] the morning [it was born] and the end of the day
(i.e., transient life), or a [short-lived] cicada that does not know [what takes
place between] spring and autumn. How could they know the long life of
the tree called Dachun or the eternity of the sun and moon?198
His Majesty’s intelligence exceeds that of the ancient [sages]. He exquisitely and ingeniously penetrates the spirit. The tenor of the three periods of
existence has testimony. The principle of ﬁlial offerings [to the ancestral
spirits] is honored here. Ordinary people had dark and narrow views before,
but they have now become intelligent again. People of later generations will
fall into darkness and confusion, but they will be awakened.

127

68b

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

I, your disciple, planted [a good seed] in my previous life and thus encountered happiness [in this life], being able to participate in following and
enjoying the [Buddhist] Way. I present my mind to Maitreya Bodhisattva; I
sincerely and deeply take refuge in him with respect. I simply behave prudently and expect to have a relationship to [the Buddha] in my next life. I
keep in mind great joy, just like that of a wild duck among duckweed.
I, your disciple Yan Shan, present this.

The Answer of Shen Hong, Erudite of the Five Classics
I, your disciple Hong, lower my head to the ground and bow.
[I received] your gracious letter. I humbly read the Imperial Response to
His Subjects: The Examination of the Discourse on the Extinction of the Spirit.
I think that it is difﬁcult to understand the vital point, and an obscure
matter easily becomes confused. Except for concentrating one’s mind in
examining this, searching out what is deeply hidden and clarifying the reason,
how could we save deluded people from heavy mist (i.e., obscuration)? How
could we exercise our own views in [spiritual] darkness?
I personally think that the great sage [emperor] who manages the empire
manifests his superior virtue over the people. He bestows the Dharma clouds
[upon the people] in order to deeply beneﬁt them. He discloses sunlike wisdom
and increases its splendor. His profundity is comparable to that of the dark,
vast ocean, and his familiarity with the people is likened to theirs with a well
crib. Throughout the ages, who else [but His Majesty] could know this [principle]? There are parables found in the Buddhist scriptures, [such as] “After
a sparrow [that was in a vase] ﬂies away, the vase is still there” or “Even if
[the candle]light [by which one can read a writing] is extinguished, the writing
remains.”199 The [Book of] Rites says, “[The ancestral spirits] do not accept
offerings from those who are not their family members. When [their family
members] offer sacriﬁces to them, they send down blessings.”200 Moreover,
[a concubine of Duke Wen of Zheng state], after dreaming of an orchid, conceived the Duke of Mu of Zheng state.201 [The father of the concubine of
Wei Ke’s father’s] tied grasses together and fought Du Hui [on behalf of Wei
Ke].202 Generally speaking, there are many instances like these; it is impossible
to record them all.
Furthermore, we transmigrate in the ﬁve realms of existence, but we will
return to the same place [through practicing] the six pāramitās. All this is the
128

Fascicle Ten

evident testimony [for the existence] of the spirit and the profound meaning
of the immortality [of the spirit]. Xi Ke is simply a lame person [of Jin state].
How can he be compared in the way of walking with a man from Handan [who
mastered the art of walking]? How could Lu Ao, a swiftfooted man [of Qin],
be claimed as equal to Ruoshi, [a legendary wizard of the Northern Sea]?
Today [His Majesty’s composition] was bestowed on heavenly beings
above203 and reached even the icchantikas below. This is what is called the
simile of dispersing the dense fog by hanging two well-matched objects (i.e.,
the sun and moon), or coming out of a dark night and seeing [the light of]
Zhulong (the torch dragon).204
I attempt to draw water from a deep well with only a short rope205 and
examine the condition of the sea only by gazing at great waves in the distance.
I am really happy and pay respects to [His Majesty’s composition], which
is just like an invaluable precious jewel.
I, Shen Hong, lower my head to the ground and bow.

The Answer of Sima Jiong (d. 518), Arbiter of Jiankang
[I received] your gracious letter. You kindly showed me the Imperial criticism on the Discourse on the Extinction of Man’s Nature (Miexing lun; i.e.,
Shenmie lun).
I personally think that [His Majesty’s] benevolence greatly spreads out
like waves, his way is the utmost among those of all numinous beings, his
intelligence illuminates what is deeply concentrated, and his principle is
unmatched by those of all ancient sages. Therefore, the discernment of the
seven kinds of meditation (qichan) and the eight kinds of meditation leading
to enlightenment (bahui), and the subtlety of the three gates of emancipation
and the fourfold truths, are originally luminous in scriptures and they are
bright in [His Majesty’s] clear and logical instruction. Therefore an exposition
of the Dharma by the Buddha (Skt. udāna) says, “It is just like the case where
even if a hundred people were to praise the wondrous awakening in a chorus,
they would still be unable to express even one ten-thousandth of the praise.”206
When karma arises, reward or retribution springs up from it. When a cause
goes, an effect follows. Though the meaning is obscure, the event is apparent.
Moreover, even though the principle is profound the testimony is evident.
From what is familiar, we can understand what is profound. Through seeking
what happened in recent times we can discover what happened in ancient
129

68c

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

times. For instance, when the sun or moon rises in the sky, we do not have
to borrow the eyes of Li Lou, [a man of excellent eyesight, to perceive it,]
or when the sound of a bell reaches our ears we do not have to bother Ziqi,
[a man of excellent hearing ability,] to hear it. The advocate [of the Discourse
on the Extinction of the Spirit], however, makes himself dark, strays from
the right path, and has trouble understanding [the truth]. If he follows what
he has in mind, he will easily fall into a pitfall.
I humbly read His Majesty’s excellent purpose. His reason is wondrous
and his expressions are gorgeous. He achieves the apex and investigates what
is profound. He examines the most tranquil truth, and moreover he elucidates
it. He opens the profound path and at the same time he clariﬁes it. Even if
various sages were to ride stirrup to stirrup with each other, or a large number
of scriptures laid out the mysterious principles in a row, [the Dharma
expounded by the Buddha] with his golden mouth on Vulture Peak and with
his beautiful tongue near the Nairañjanā River cannot be sought and understood thoroughly after all without this (i.e., the Imperial Response), and if
we disregard this instruction we cannot attain the right path. Truly, this washes
away dust and dregs, like the waves in the Yangzi River or the Han River,
leads with virtue, sets ceremonies in order, and returns customs and ediﬁcation
to [the right path]. This is the reason why [His Majesty] is versed in both the
Buddhist teaching and the secular teaching. I will send these statements to
you. I precisely completed my statement.
I, your disciple Sima Jiong, present this.

The Answer of Qiu Zhongfu, Assistant Director of the Left
I humbly read the Imperial Response to His Subjects: The Examination
of the Discourse on the Extinction of the Spirit, in which His Majesty illuminates what is profound and includes the absolute and the relative reality.
His reasoning goes beyond the world of language. The meaning penetrates
a vast amount of knowledge.
I will study this marvelous plan intensively with respect. My humble joy
deepens. You kindly showed this to me; I appreciate your favor.
I, Qiu Zhongfu, address you.
End of Fascicle Ten of The Collection for the Propagation
and Clariﬁcation [of Buddhism]

130

Fascicle Eleven

Director He Shangzhi’s Case to
Glorify Buddhism, Responding
to Emperor Wen of
the Song Dynasty
On the ﬁfth day of the ﬁfth month of the twelfth year of the Yongjia era (435),
an ofﬁcial delivered the following report [to the emperor].
Xiao Mozhi, the magistrate of Danyang, respectfully submits a report, in
which he says, “Four dynasties have already passed since Buddhism was
transmitted to China. Buddhist temples and images in the thousands are everywhere. When we advance, we can connect our minds to [Buddhism], and
when we retreat, there are plenty of [monks and nuns] from whom we may
ask advice. Nevertheless, recently people esteem digressive matters. They do
not consider diligence and sincere faith to be supreme. Moreover, they place
value on competing for luxury. Dilapidated buildings have never been repaired.
Instead, they construct their several new buildings and proudly boast of it to
each other. The best-quality lands are nearly overloaded by mansions of
eminent people. Construction materials such as timber, bamboo, copper, and
varicolored silk are wasted limitlessly. Those who disregard a standard degree
and go beyond a [reasonable] limit should be given restraint. If we do not take
measures against this, its longstanding evil will not come to an end.
“I would like to request that from now on all those who wish to erect a
bronze [Buddhist] statue [must ﬁrst] go to a government ofﬁce and notify
[of their plans] in person. All those who wish to build a Buddhist temple or
a monastery [must] ﬁrst go to the governor-general of their local district207
and notify him of the relative scope [of their construction project]; according
to the matter, [the governor-general] will give a statement that is sent to the
main prefectural ofﬁce, [the petitions] must be approved, and [only] then
should the petitioners begin [construction]. If someone arbitrarily erects a
bronze statue or establishes a Buddhist temple or monastery the case should
be discussed, and under the law of failure to accept and exert the imperial
131

69a

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

69b

decree the bronze metal and all building and construction materials and tiles
will be entirely forfeited to the government.”
His report was sanctioned.
At that time, Śramaṇa Huilin, who falsely took up the position of a
Buddhist monk and slandered the [Buddhist] teaching, wrote the Discourse
on Buddhist Laymen and Clergy (Baihei lun). He Chengtian, the magistrate
of Hengyang, was in collusion with [Hui]lin, and they often praised one
another. [He Chengtian] wrote the Discourse on the Full Understanding of
Life (Daxing lun). They both adhere to one side and slander Śākyamuni’s
teaching. Yan Yanzhi (384–456), magistrate of Yongjia, and Zong Bing, Secretariat of the Heir Apparent, believe in the [Buddhist] Dharma. They reviewed
these two essays and respectively refuted them in writings of more than ten
thousand words. [Hui]lin and [He Chengtian] at ﬁrst corresponded with [Yan
Yanzhi and Zong Bing], but they stopped before stumbling. [Zong] Bing
accordingly wrote the Discourse to Clarify Buddhism (Mingfo lun) in order
to propagate his purpose.
His Majesty considered this to be virtuous and said to Palace Attendant
He Shangzhi, “I did not read [Buddhist] scriptures when I was young and I
have no free time recently. I have not yet thoroughly discerned [the law of]
causality of the three periods of existence. Nevertheless, the reason I do not
dare go against [the law] is simply because my precursors and you, contemporary men of outstanding ability who lead [the world], all respect and trust
in [this law]. Fan Tai (355–428) and Xie Lingyun (385–433) always say,
‘The compositions of the Six Classics were originally intended to save the
common people and govern them. If we must seek the genuine heart of our
spirits, how can we manage without taking Buddhist scriptures as guidebooks?’ Yan Yannian’s (i.e., Yan Yanzhi’s) refutation of the [Discourse on]
the Full Understanding of Life and Zong Shaowen’s (i.e., Zong Bing’s) criticism of the [Discourse on] Buddhist Laymen and Clergy deeply and extensively clarify the Buddhist teaching. They are very logical. In addition, they
are sufﬁcient to open and encourage people’s minds. If everyone within the
territory of my state is completely ediﬁed by this teaching, I will achieve the
great peace without doing anything. What is the matter with this?
“Recently Xiao Mo[zhi] requested me to draw up a constitution but I have
not ordered to let [the request] pass. That is to say, I have already shown [this

132

Fascicle Eleven

request] to you, and I will leave to your judgment the issue of whether it will
give proﬁt or loss. We must have a measure to correct and stop superﬁcial
dissolute practices. If [the request] has no harm in greatly encouraging [the
people], then you should write an order.”
Shangzhi replied, “People who have vague ideas mostly do not believe
in the Buddhist teaching. I am stupid and ignorant, yet I take charge of the
matter with my foolish diligence. I am afraid that my incompetence will
blemish the great teaching. Furthermore, I receive your great patronage but
[this task] is not one that I dare assume. Regarding a great number of wise
people of previous generations, they did not disobey brilliant imperial decrees.
The medieval period is already far in the past, and it is difﬁcult to know
[about that time] completely. After moving to the Jiangnan area, Wang Dao
(276–339) and Zhou Yi (269–322) are the most outstanding among the successive prime ministers. Wang Meng (309–347) and Xie Shang (308–357)
are models of the principles of human relationships. Chi Chao (336–377),
Wang Tan[zhi] (330–375), Wang Gong (d. 398), and Wang Mi (360–408)
are known either as being unparalleled or unrivaled. Their reﬁned and sophisticated vapors and their pure and chaste feelings are also beyond the secular
world. People such as Guo Wen, Xie Fu, and Dai Kui (326–396) all set their
minds to the ultimate of heavenly and human beings and raise their bodies
among the clouds. The late brothers of my great-grandfather (i.e., He Chong
and He Zhun) were exemplars of the world with their virtuous opinions. Wang
Yuan and the Lin brothers held premier positions in the court due to their
intelligence. Other people, roughly scores of men such as Fan Wang, Sun
Chuo, Zhang Xuan, and Yin Ji, were talented people of the time. Moreover,
all śramaṇas mentioned in [Zong] Bing’s Discourse [to Clarify Buddhism],
Bo[yuan], Tan[wuchen] (Dharmarakṣaṇa), and [Yu Dao]sui, are the next generation after them. They are compared and contrasted with Yu Yuangui. All
the gentlemen before [Yu Dao]sui, such as [Zhu Fa]hu (Dharmarakṣa) and
[Yu Fa]lan, are next to those gentlemen [who accumulate virtue within]. Moreover, they are unpredictable. When Buddhist clergy and secular people of
modern times are compared and explained, they are like this. If we take extensive examples both from foreign countries and China, and accordingly come
to examples from the Han and Wei periods, how could we be competent
enough to speak of geniuses and extraordinary virtuous people? Why should

133

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

69c

we vainly repress our spirits, abandon our family relations without doing anything, be submerged in and deluded by a counterfeit assertion, and on our
own initiative fall into an ediﬁcation that is unsupported by any evidence?
“Your Majesty’s thought penetrates beyond the world of creation and discretion and consideration is abstruse and subtle beyond the phenomenal
world. You investigate things deeply and attain what is profound. There is
no example to take from familiar cases. Hereupon, if we your subjects and
those under us can prudently infer things along with this example, lay
Buddhists are not few in the present time. How could [Confucius’ words] ‘A
man can propagate the Way’ be a false statement?208 Dharma Master Huiyuan
once said, ‘There is nothing negative in Śākyamuni’s ediﬁcation. Following
the Way indeed stems from the origin of the teaching. To save the world is
also an important task.’ If the ruler of the times can destroy mistakes and
falsity and encourage [the people] to examine reality, [Buddhism] will be
practiced equally alongside the ruler’s state affairs throughout the world, and
the unseen world and the manifested world will work in concert and jointly
enrich the common people. Why can it be said that only King Cheng and
King Kang [of the Zhou dynasty] and Emperor Wen and Emperor Jing [of
the Han dynasty] were extraordinary? If this [Buddhist] ediﬁcation were
practiced in concurrence with [these extraordinary rulers’ ways of administration] at the beginning of the Zhou and Han dynasties, it would have been
doubly fast that praise is made and punishment is terminated.
“Personally, I am inclined to think that this statement accords with the
essence of reason. Why? If ten people from a village of a hundred households
observe the ﬁve precepts (Skt. pañcaśīla), those ten people are all honest and
sincere. If a hundred people in a town of a thousand households cultivate the
ten wholesome acts, those hundred people are peaceful and generous. If the
instruction of this teaching is transmitted and spreads throughout the world,
then a million people among ten million households will be benevolent. This
is merely an example given for those who observe both [the ﬁve] precepts and
[the ten] wholesome acts. If those who observe even one [of the ﬁve] precepts
or one [of the ten] wholesome acts were all counted, the number would be at
least twenty or thirty percent of the population. If one can perform a wholesome
act, he removes an evil act. Since an evil act has been removed, one punishment
comes to an end. If one punishment comes to an end in a family, then in a state

134

Fascicle Eleven

ten thousand punishments will come to an end. It is not worthy to think that
abandoning four hundred prisons is difﬁcult. It would be doubly fast in reason
that the ode of the kingdom ya and the hymn of praise song rise. This would
be, namely, to achieve the great peace without doing anything, as Your Majesty
has said. Theoretically speaking, things should be like this.
“If we seek actual facts for this, I, your subject, will say more. A history
book of antiquity states that the people of the Western region all serve the
Buddha and respect the Dharma. Therefore, even if the population of a large
country numbers in the tens of thousands and that of a smaller country is in
the hundreds, in the long run they do not annex each other. After they were
subordinated to China, their customs worsened considerably. [The people of
the region] are, however, still very honest and gentle; they seldom ﬁght.
Moreover, the [Chinese] people have been in great misery since the time
when the ﬁve barbarian tribes from the North (i.e., the Huns, the Tungusic,
the Jie, the Di, and the Qiang) threw China into disorder. Countless people
were wrongly put to death. During these times, those who attained peace of
mind certainly relied on Śākyamuni’s teaching. Therefore, when Fotudeng
(ca. 232–348) entered Ye, cases of massacres carried out by Shi Hu (295–349)
were reduced by half. When the treasure pagoda of Minchi [in present-day
Henan province] emitted light, Fu Jian’s use of a mallet and a saw [to harm
people] stopped. [Juqu] Mengxun (368-433) turned against the one to whom
he was indebted; he was heartless, as cruel as a wolf or tiger. In his later years
he was inspired and enlightened [by Buddhism] and ended up becoming a good
man. [His understanding of] the Buddhist teaching matched that of Buddhist
monks. He possessed power as strong as that of ten thousand men combined.
When someone threw the region along the Yellow and Wei Rivers into disorder,
he was ready to risk his life and went to his teacher who was in difﬁculty. This
is due to nothing other than a respectful faith [in Buddhism].
“There is originally a reason for the fact that the Way of the Spirit helps
in ediﬁcation. It often happens that [people] are struck by lightning on a rainy
summer day. Regarding the incidence that the Zhan family shrine shook [from
being struck by lightning], it was written [in the Zuozhuan] that [the Zhan
family] had hidden guilt.209 In the reign periods of [King] Jie [of the Xia
dynasty] and [King] Zhou [of the Yin dynasty], those who were wrongly put
to death were too numerous to record, but only King Xuan of the Zhou dynasty

135

70a

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

and Lord Jing of the Jin dynasty incurred divine wrath for abusing [their power
to inﬂict] punishment. When we inspect reason based on the reward and retribution [in the traditional meaning], there are already examples that do not ﬁt
[this notion]. When we examine examples from ancient and modern times,
our suspicions merely increase. Scriptures and history books, however, record
such cases as evidence of encouraging [people to do good acts] and warning
[them against committing evil acts], and say that one out of ten thousand images
still bears its full fruit. It is better than a statement that censures Buddhism.
“[As for Buddhism,] in reason there is a purport that should be axiomatic
and believable, and in examining the fact there is also no fault of being perverse or absurd. Furthermore, familiar efﬁcacies bestowed by Avalokiteśvara
Mahāsattva all immediately manifest in experiences of one’s lifetime, and
the people see them together with their own eyes. In a family that offers
prayers, whatever [they pray for] comes true, one after another. This is the
reason to encourage [people to do good acts] and warn [them against committing evil acts]. Therefore [Buddhism] bears its full fruit. How can we talk
[about Buddhism] with that (i.e., Confucianism) in the same breath?
“Nevertheless, a cohort of ignorant people improperly proceed to slander
[Buddhism], neglect what is important yet die for what is unimportant. They
stick to trivial matters and miss out on what is important; they resent that
Buddhist monks and nuns cut off their offspring and hate that red and purple
paint is wasted on Buddhist images and pagodas. This is similar to the case
that people receive favor of Heaven and Earth yet they do not talk about [this
favor] in daily life, or that civil ofﬁcials suffer from their duties to conduct
ofﬁcial sacriﬁces and sometimes denigrate [the sacriﬁces]. The case of Huilin
and [He] Chengtian is probably like this, too.
“As for the system reported by Xiao Mo[zhi], I do not think this is entirely
wrong, but the worst people, who hurt and harm the Buddhist clergy and
laypeople, exist among Buddhist monks and nuns who do no religious practice,
and it is difﬁcult to sort them out based only on internal and external behaviors.
We have not yet been able to imprudently remove them. Even though more
and more gold, copper, soil, and wood are wasted [to make Buddhist images
and build Buddhist temples], this is assuredly what is brought about by meritorious deeds. It is also difﬁcult to promptly stop this. I was thinking to deal
with this matter seriously these days, but I had difﬁculty in settling my course

136

Fascicle Eleven

of action. Today I graciously received with respect [Your Majesty’s] virtuous
voice, and I am truly at ease.”
At that time, Yang Xuanbao, Gentleman of the Ministry of Personnel, was
present. He stepped forward and said, “This discussion surpasses the ultimate
of heavenly and human beings. How could this be something in which I
should meddle? I am personally afraid that when we discuss plans to build
up military power [just as] the states of Qin and Chu did, or when we make
an elaborate plot to annex other states [just as] Sun[zi] and [Wuzi] did, we
should take something from this [example].”
His Majesty said, “This is not a preparation for [war between states of] the
Warring States period, but the issue is truly just as you (i.e., He Shangzhi) said.”
[He] Shangzhi then said, “While a recluse is treated with due honor,
soldiers are treated coldly. When benevolence is valued, military esprit de
corps declines. If Sun[zi] and Wu[zi] are considered ideal and we engage in
gobbling up other states, then the Way of [the sage kings] Yao and Shun is
useless. Is only Śākyamuni’s teaching [useless]?”
His Majesty was delighted with [Shangzi’s statement] and said, “That Śākyamuni’s school has you (i.e., He Shangzhi) is comparable to that Confucius’
school had Jilu. It is simply a case of ‘Evil talk does not reach my ears.’”210

The Responses of Two Dharma Masters,
[Dao]gao and [Fa]ming, to Li Miao of Jiaozhou,
Who Criticized the Matter that the Buddha Does
Not Manifest Himself, and Li [Miao]’s Letters

[Li Miao’s Criticism]
The Way abides in purity and emptiness. The principle of the four that
are great is permanent,211 but there is the Dharma gate that wondrously goes
beyond a multitude of spheres. If it is said that beneﬁting the people with
efﬁcacy and delivering immeasurable [people] are what is taught [by the
Buddha], why doesn’t he make a true appearance in this world, why does he
give empty talk that lacks substance? I am now surely going to ask you about
the origin of [the teaching established] in the West. I am humbly solicitous
of you, Great Precept Master, to have compassion on me, take ahold of my
mind, and freely bestow upon me your marvelous words.
I, your disciple Li Miao, bow.

137

70b

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

[Daogao’s Response]
I, Shi Daogao, respond.
I received a question from you about whether or not the greatest sage
manifests himself. The taste of your principle is profound and extensive, and
the signiﬁcance of your words is luminous and clear. The more times I read
this, the more highly your virtue resounds. The fences and the walls of your
house are high and large, and this naturally makes it difﬁcult to ﬁnd the gate.
Then, I will try to exhaust my humble opinions and emulate Wangxiang,
[who was able to ﬁnd] a mystic jade [for the Yellow Emperor].212
There are generally three instances in which the Tathāgata responds to
the people. The ﬁrst is emitting light and causing the earth to quake, [which
are equivalent to] manifesting himself. The second is that the True Dharma,
which is equivalent to the Buddha, exists in this world. The last instance is
the ediﬁcation with the aid of an image [of a buddha], a model which closely
resembles [the Buddha]. The model which closely resembles [the Buddha]
corresponds to feelings of today’s people. The people’s feelings receive the
saving power from images [of buddha]. What else then do they want to see?
Therefore, the Vimalakīrtinirdeśa-sūtra states that [the Buddha] is able to
clarify the characteristics of existing things and know the faculties of sentient
beings.213 With regard to the three assemblies held under the dragonﬂower
tree at Kukkuṭārāma [in the city of Pāṭali in Magadha state, when Maitreya
descends to this world from Heaven], people perceive in their minds [Maitreya
Buddha’s present existence]. What is then hidden? Hence, the Lotus Sutra
states, “At that time I (i.e., the Buddha) appear together with many monks at
Vulture Peak.”214 It can be expected that the palace of [the wheel-turning king
(Skt. cakravartin)] Saṅkha, [who appears when Maitreya descends to this
world,] is lofty. [Nevertheless,] how is it that the origin [of the teaching established] in the West cannot be seen? Furthermore, many people of the world
who have such doubts say that the descriptions in Buddhist scriptures do not
coincide with reality. They have little inclination to rely on something obscure,
and so they all produce delusions because they have not seen [the Buddha].
We learn all about the Three Augusts, the Five Thearchs, the three ancient
dynasties (i.e., Xia, Shang, and Zhou), the Five Powers (i.e., the Qi, Song,
Jin, Qin, and Chu states in the late Zhou dynasty), the Duke of Zhou, who
established the system of propriety, and Confucius, who revised the Book of

138

Fascicle Eleven

Odes, in history books. [But] who actually experienced all these [events or
actually met these people]? Śākyamuni let the Dharma drum resound at the
Deer Park, and Confucius raised his virtuous voice in [his native land,] the
Zou region of Lu state. We cannot actually experience any of this with our
own ears and eyes; we believe them all based on written records. If you do
not believe in this (i.e., the histories and records of China), I am not troubled
by the fact that you have doubts about that (descriptions of the Buddhist scriptures). You are, however, able to understand [the histories and records of
China]. Why then do you stick so ﬁrmly only to [your doubts about Buddhism]?
If you, for whom His Majesty has deep consideration, clearly see [the law
of] the three periods of existence, hope for and seek the teaching [of the
Buddha, whose] life span is inexhaustible, take up, as a recent example, the
trace of Dīpaṅkara Buddha and Māṇava Bodhisattva,215 and infer, as an example from the recent past, the great assemblies of Mahābhijñājñānābhibhū
Buddha,216 then through these actions you will dispel many people’s obscure
delusions, just as the sun disperses heavy clouds.
My statements are superﬁcial and my expressions are poor. Although I
speak, I cannot articulate my thoughts. I simply hope that on the day we personally see each other I must speak of your criticism.
Stated respectfully [by Daogao].

[Li Miao’s Response]
I, Li Miao, bow.
I immediately examined your discussion. This is closely reasoned. Your
expressions are arranged beautifully, and there are many points with which
I happily agree.
As you say, [the Buddha’s Way] to reform the people varies according to
the time, and [the ediﬁcation by] the True [Dharma] (i.e. the Buddha) or that
[with the aid of] an image [of the Buddha] differs from people to people.
You illuminate Buddhism by invoking non-Buddhist teachings. You verify
facts by inquiring into writings. I respectfully take your purpose as a model,
with which I can ﬁnd no ﬂaw.
Nevertheless, the cause to attain awakening is assuredly based on examining by seeing [the Buddha]. To rely on something obscure produces doubt.
Doubt is not the foundation of awakening. If what exists in written records

139

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

70c

is uniformly understood by various different generations, we do not have to
wait for a sage to appear as our teacher after countless generations. If we
resign ourselves to [the Buddha’s] voice and trace equally, his words and
image are interdependent. Once the great justice is disregarded, the antagonism
just like that between Confucianism and Mohism will ﬂourish. Then not only
right faith will not be clear, but also slander and misunderstanding will
increase our sins. Is it impossible to obtain the testimony of [the Buddha’s]
manifestation and strengthen [our faith] with the seal [of the Dharma] and
signs [of the Buddha]?
With the wisdom of nonobstruction the Great Sage (i.e., the Buddha)
bestows benevolence without being asked to do so. Why does he have to
spare bright light, make his two xun-tall body obscure, cut off sentient beings’
hope after he entered nirvana, and cause them to commit sins prior to the
three assemblies [held when Maitreya descends to this world]? If straw dogs
are futilely displayed, are they able to awaken you? If ritual instruments and
images are pointlessly set up, are they able to cause you to have faith?
Regarding the [Five] Thearchs, the [Three] Augusts, the Duke of Zhou,
and Confucius, their teachings are limited to this world. Matters of the next
life were left intact and they did not discuss them. Therefore they did not
discriminate about hiding or appearing, declining or rising, expedient or
reality. The Tathāgata’s teaching completely threads through the three periods
of existence and his compassion universally proﬁts [sentient beings]. This
cannot be limited to the present existence. Since many confused people seek
liberation, he cannot consider nirvana to be the ultimate. Therefore, ediﬁcation
and salvation are not conﬁned to scriptures. The Buddha’s altruistic activities
are fully arranged, successively and innumerably.
I have a question. Where do “the Buddha’s altruistic activities” exist
today? If the situation is just as you say, then you believe in this (i.e.,
Buddhism) and testify to that (i.e., Confucianism). The Sage, however, does
not appear in the world. Confucius and Śākyamuni have different paths.
Speaking in touch with reality, there are all contradictions. How could this
be a testimony?
I cannot hold my tongue and refrain from [asking questions]. I have just
expressed my thought in words. I would be happy if you could further investigate in detail. I look forward to seeing your clear explanation.

140

Fascicle Eleven

[Daogao’s Second Response]
I, Shi Daogao, inform you.
I have again respectfully received your deep instruction. Your meaning
is splendid and the purpose is profound. I read it three times and thought of
it several times and I ﬁnally came to admire your profound meaning. The
wisdom of predecessors and the ultimate principle are not what a common
person can fathom, and sublime words and abstruse expressions are not something in which a lowly and ineloquent man is concerned. I will now attentively
act in accordance with an ordinary man’s indiscretion and roughly explain
what I have in mind.
A myriad of wholesome acts all become teachings. The means [for teaching] are not only one. Some people sit and meditate in a grove; some cultivate
meritorious qualities in the vicinity of the city; some bow and snap their ﬁngers; some sing gāthās and chant poems [to praise the Buddha]. All these
[actions] are comprehended through the ears and eyes. Actions are immeasurable. This precisely corresponds to the case that the ferry by which one
attains awakening is caused by relying on something obscure. Why is it
always the case that to attain awakening is based on examination by seeing
[the Buddha]? Why is it always the case that to rely on something obscure
produces doubts? Doubt is also the foundation of awakening. Please let me
discuss this.
When one has a doubt he seeks a resolution [of that doubt]. When [the
doubt] is resolved one is able to become awakened. When awakened, one
enters the Way. If this is not the foundation, then what is? Even though Confucianism and Mohism vied with each other in rising and the nine schools
discussed right and wrong, [this is as if] the torches have not been put out and
it is not that the sun and moon no longer shine brightly. Why do you anxiously
urge [the Buddha’s] manifestation and hurriedly return to the same point?
The present world is indeed in the last period of the [Decadent Dharma],
when there is no realization. It is also not incorrect to produce an effect in
order to prove sincerity. “The Great Sage spares bright light.” Those in the
world who have this doubt are arrogant and they do not see [the Buddha’s
appearance]. Subsequently they end up being long confused in a great dream
and perversely sink and drown in [the transmigration of] birth and death.
Scholars of the past and ancient sages have made old statements on this for

141

71a

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

the most part. There are not several traces of wheels on the [right] path. In
that case, I transmit [their points] but will not state [my own views].
If we efface ourselves and sincerely devote ourselves to [Buddhism], we
will assuredly sense [the Buddha]. When we sense him, we equally see him.
If we do not sense him, we do not see him. Those who have seen [the Buddha]
tell this to those who have not seen him, but those who have not seen him
certainly do not believe it. How could it be that the Sage does not exist? How
could it be that sentient beings do not see him?
People hear the sound of the Dharma and praise it as good. [This] does
not mean [the case of] “straw dogs are futilely displayed.” People see
[Buddhist] images and bow to them. Would this be the case when wonderful
ritual instruments [and images] are futilely set up?
The Duke of Zhou and Confucius tried to save decadent worlds. Their
strength was, however, not adequate to complete their task. How did they
have time to spare to instruct people about future existences? If Confucius
and the Duke of Zhou had been born [in the time of purity and sincerity,]
when knotting rope [was a recording method], they would have endlessly
clariﬁed [the law of] the three periods of existence. You asked me, “Where
do the Buddha’s altruistic activities exist today?” We bow our heads and join
our hands [in prayer]. All these are the Buddha’s altruistic activities. There
are, however, [various] methods to bring people to be deeply awakened.
Even though the paths may vary they all arrive at the same point.
Regarding what I referred to in my previous letter, that “having a doubt
in this (i.e., Buddhism) and believing in that (i.e., Confucianism),” this is
precisely because since people of the world do not see [the Buddha] and then
say there is no Buddha, I simply used the example of the Duke of Zhou and
Confucius, whom we have also not seen. This follows [naturally] even if we
remain indifferent with folded arms. How could this be called contradiction?
Your innate intelligence is perfect and original disposition is spontaneous.
You hold a rank in the place of the Imperial throne and plan with your great
resources. You roam in the park of philosophic principles and wander in the
garden of books. In spare moments from your busy duty, you enjoy carefree
time for a long day. Once your virtuous voice is given, there is no one who
does not listen to you attentively.

142

Fascicle Eleven

I have rough and shallow learning. I am deeply ashamed of my poor skill
in correspondence. I submit my absurd and coarse reply to you, [though]. I
fear that I will stain your glorious writing with particles of dust. My awe and
shame increase afterward and I am in an incessant cold sweat.
Stated respectfully [by Daogao].

[Li Miao’s Second Response]
I, Li [Miao], bow.
Your discussion clariﬁed that the ferry to reach awakening is accordingly
attained through doubt; to rely on something obscure is sufﬁcient [for awakening]; there is no need to examine by seeing [the Buddha]; and [actions such
as] bowing and reciting praises are all enough to reach [the Buddhist] Way.
The more I read this, the more I see what is profound and complicated [in it].
Nevertheless, you say that the Dharma of a [buddha] image departs from
the True [Dharma]. [In this case] your logic of seeking for awakening is
vulgar. [You say that] if people understand the tenor by making use of expedient, there is no need to avail oneself of [the Buddha’s] manifestation. This
is certainly why the Duke of Zhou and Confucius gave instructions and
emitted a brilliant light and why they taught the normative law. To take this
from secular books serves the purpose sufﬁciently. Why must [the Buddha]
emit light and cause the earth to quake without any reason? If right faith is
not conﬁned to merely bending and lifting one’s head, and the Buddha’s
altruistic activities are completely performed through body and speech, then
what the Great Awakened One depends on is his wonderful physical form,
which is the foundation at the beginning when one ﬁrst becomes involved
and seeks [faith]. Therefore, it is known that those who ﬁrst come to believe
in [the Buddha] certainly doubt [the Buddha’s manifestation] based on Confucian or Mohist [teaching] and even those who learn [Buddhism] still feel
sorry about a lack of testimony [of the manifestation of the Buddha]. There
is no trouble with the Three [Augusts] and the Five [Thearchs] even if they
spare bright light, but it is a fault of [the Buddha of] the ten epithets to hide
morality. Wouldn’t this be the case?
In addition, you say that the Duke of Zhou and Confucius were engaged
in relieving the decadent world and had no time [to discuss] the next life.
[You also say that] if they had existed in the time [of purity and sincerity,]

143

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

71b

when knotting rope [was a recording method,] they would have spontaneously
clariﬁed [the law of] the three periods of existence. This is not the case, either.
The future is included in the meanings spoken of in the Seven Classics. Issues
expounded and recorded in Buddhist scriptures are conﬁned to reward and
retribution based on causality. Therefore the Book of Changes says, “[The
family that] accumulates wholesomeness is certainly to have superabundant
happiness, and [the family that] accumulates evil surely to have superabundant
misery.”217 The [Vimalakīrtinirdeśa-]sūtra says, “There are no self, no one
who creates [karma], and no one who receives [reward and retribution], yet
good and evil karma does not perish.”218 This precisely indicates that the
teaching of causality (i.e., Buddhism) usually indicates being gradual while
the teaching that includes [instruction for the future] (i.e., Confucianism) is
very magnanimous. Could it be said that what [Confucianism] is engaged
in lies in this, and what it lacks lies in that?
Your discussion is beautiful but it is, from the beginning, merely speech
that goes around and around in circles. I hope that you will pick up new [elements] and expound something different in order to wash away the delusions
of all ages, make the level and easy way wider and smoother, and greatly
pierce through the accumulated hindrances. I deeply wish that you, Great
Precept Master, will graciously accept my clear sincerity.
Presented respectfully by your disciple Li Miao.

[Faming’s Response to Li Miao]
I, Shi Faming, inform you.
A great discussion has been bestowed on me here. I spent time to respectfully read this. This [discussion] is as fragrant as an orchid that blooms in a
dark gorge, and as clean as a gentle breeze. My caliber is not as sharp as
peaked frost, and my movement is not [as skillful as] that of chef Sheng.219
I am inclined to be contrary to reason and alone am frustrated by many doubts.
This is truly because my expression is poor and my point of argument is not
lucid, and [therefore] severe criticisms are ranged just as stars [in the sky].
I, a silly person, think that doubting something obscure, placing one’s
mind in what is wonderful, examining through seeing the [Buddha’s] manifestation, bowing and singing praises, and being moved by [the Buddha
who] mysteriously transforms are all guides to reach the [Buddhist] Way and

144

Fascicle Eleven

a happy occasion to cleanly ascend [toward the attainment of buddhahood].
Therefore, placing one’s mind [in what is wonderful] and examining through
seeing [the Buddha’s manifestation] may both be recommended, and both
doubt and veriﬁcation should be practiced. Would it be possible to give up
seeing the manifestation [of the Buddha], promptly forget the [Buddha’s]
brilliant appearance, [consider that the Buddha] equalizes the path with that
of the Duke of Zhou and Confucius, take [Buddhism] to follow the same
pattern as worldly instruction, and think that [the Buddha’s] emitting light
and causing the earth to quake are empty speech for nothing?
The dharmakāya is quiet and still and the wondrous physical form [of the
Buddha] is calm. Therefore he is able to hide and show himself in accordance
with the times, and his course of action is inscrutable. When he manifests
himself he appears taking advantage of thusness (Skt. tathā). When he hides
himself he is well gone (i.e., attains emancipation; Skt. sugata). When we seek
the purpose in conformity with these words, what mistake could there be
between [the Buddha’s appearance and disappearance] and the ten epithets?220
The glow after [the Buddha hid himself] shines brightly enough for the
decadent world. How can those who have faith [in the Buddha] be more doubtful about [the Buddha’s manifestation] since [the glow] is just like the [weak]
light of a ﬁreﬂy or candlelight? How can Buddhist monks who properly face
the [bright] morning sun stand shoulder to shoulder with Buddhist laypeople?
Buddhist pagodas, images, scriptures, and books are replete all over the world.
How can those who learn [Buddhism] feel sorry about a lack of testimony?
Furthermore, in the meanings of the Seven Classics to which you refer,
the future is included; [for instance,] “[The family that] accumulates wholesomeness is certainly to have superabundant happiness and [the family that]
accumulates evil is surely to have superabundant misery.” [In Buddhism,]
even though people are born and die one after another and successively
change into a new generation, it is impossible [for them] not to receive the
reward and retribution for good and evil karma [they have created]. This is
extensively clariﬁed in [the law of] the three periods of existence, which is
even clearer than the Seven Classics. I have inquired into this in writings
and inspected it in reality. Thus I accept what you say.
You say in your previous discussion, [however,] “Regarding the [Five]
Thearchs, the [Three] Augusts, the Duke of Zhou, and Confucius, their teachings

145

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

71c

are limited to this world. Matters of the next life were left intact and they
did not discuss them. Therefore they did not discriminate about hiding or
appearing, declining or rising, expedient or reality.” This seems to contradict
[your assertion above]. Which point shall I take in reason? “A man yields to
no one when he is doing what is right.”221 I humbly wish to hear your profound
opinion about this.
In my previous letter I gave a rough account of the appearance and latency
of the Highest Sage (i.e., the Buddha), but the signiﬁcance [of my argument]
is unclear and my expressions were vague. I will carefully make a further examination in detail. I would like to propagate the highest Way together with you.
Sentient beings enjoy a long sleep in the three realms of existence. Their
consciousness is eternally confused in the six dusts. They secretly move
[from one life to another] and become mere subjects to be preyed upon. They
successively go through the transmigration of birth and death. The body
serves as an inn and the spirit is equal to a guest who rests there on its way.
They suffer transmigration in the three lowest realms of existence. They have
hardships passing through the eight difﬁculties. Happiness and joy are temporary pleasures; anxiety and fear are unending. After the body dies and
decays they receive another body.
Even a person who is knowledgeable about worldly affairs and eloquent,
who peruses numerous books, who understands thoroughly [the studies of]
various schools of thinkers, who completely masters [the theories of] the
nine schools, who knows that “Birth and death have their determined appointment, and wealth and high position depend on Heaven,”222 from whom even
spiritual beings demand nothing, and about whose future sages and saints
are unable to predict, may not avoid the case of clouding his mind with wrong
views, disturbing his thought with suspicion, relying on sorcery, surrendering
to talismans and incantations, hoping for right by sticking to wrong, expecting
the truth by depending on falsehood, stupidly loitering between two different
thoughts, or hesitating [at the parting of] two ways. Even if [the Buddha]
were to emit light and cause the earth to quake, could [a person in such a
condition] see it?
Consequently, profound scriptures are circulated and expedients wait in
array for a chance to take action. When action is taken, [the minds of sentient
beings] assuredly sense it. After sensing it there is a response to it. If we let

146

Fascicle Eleven

our determination rest in the tranquil house and settle our moral fortitude in
the profound state, we will clarify that our life is as transient as the morning
dew and discern that [the law of the three periods of existence] is not
unfounded. We slacken the reins in the way of purity and tighten them in the
streets of evil and falsehood. If we plant virtue and remove weeds, virtue
will grow densely and luxuriantly. If we plant merit and pour [the water of]
right on this, [merit] will branch out with a thick foliage. If we cultivate
integrity and maintain it through hardships, competing for time even in a
very short period, if we keep ourselves free from immorality, vying with the
sun setting in the west, and if we embrace sincerity and hold aspirations,
then our minds will be consequently understood. How could we not be intimately illuminated by the brilliant luster [of the Buddha] and see his mysterious transformation?
Taking examples from what the ears and eyes perceive and what may be
seen in a dream, [there are the following cases]. Emperor Ming of the [Later]
Han dynasty awoke to the Sage (i.e., the Buddha) on the basis of a dream he
had. The great Dharma was thereupon transmitted [into China]. Monarchs
sincerely devote themselves to take refuge in [the Buddha’s] virtue. Outstanding persons adjust themselves and abide by the [Buddhist] ediﬁcation.
Śramaṇas stand shoulder to shoulder with princes. Buddhist monks and nuns
do not bow to emperors. Who considers the ninety-six [heterodox schools]
to be as lofty as [Buddhism]?
At the time Emperor Wu of the Song dynasty ﬁrst ascended to the throne,
he dreamed of a Buddhist monk, carrying an almsbowl to beg [for food],
who then addressed him, “You gave a bowl of food to Vipaśyin Buddha in
your previous life. [Because of this] you attained the throne in this life.” [The
emperor] dispatched a messenger to ask Eminent Huiyan (363–443) to prove
whether [what was said in the dream] was true or false. Eminent Huiyan
immediately sent the Sutra on the Seven Buddhas (Qi fo jing) to present [to
the emperor] for his perusal.
Sun Quan (181–252), a ruler of Wu state, was at ﬁrst doubtful of Buddhism.
He thought that as there was no mysterious efﬁcacy [the teaching] should be
stopped and discarded. Sun Quan subsequently obtained a relic [of the Buddha].
[The relic] cast bright light in his palace, it could not be broken [by hitting
with] metal or iron [rods], and it could not be melted through metallurgy.

147

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

72a

Jianchu Temple seen today in the capital was [built in connection with this
incident].223
In Wu County there was a stone Buddhist image that ﬂoated on the sea.
Daoist monks, sorcerers, and more than a hundred of their followers held
talismans and danced to the beat of drums but they were not able to move
[the image] even an inch. Five or six Buddhist monks and four men whose
family name was either Zhu or Zhang approached and respectfully welcomed
it. Then they succeeded in lifting up [the image]. [This image] remains now
at North Temple in Wu County. Among those who are extremely sincere
there is no one who does not have the receptivity [of the Buddha’s power].
The Zhu and Zhang families believe in Buddhism from generation to generation because they saw this miracle happen.224
Guo Wenju greatly worshiped the Three Treasures. His right faith was
ﬁrm and clear. He once groped for a ﬁsh bone [that was stuck a tiger’s throat].
He had deep discernment regarding what is safe and what is dangerous.
Eminent [Yu Fa]lan brushed off a heavy coat of snow from a ferocious
animal.225 Eminent [Zhu Fa]hu moved a dried-up spring, from which water
ﬂowed out in response.226
All [these people] were equally outstanding in lofty conduct and surpassed
ordinary people in pure spirit. They all exhibited extraordinary behavior
which was fully recorded by the people of the world. In addition to these
[there are more miraculous events], but they are too numerous to mention.
I have been lazy in studying since my youth up to now, when I have gray
hair. I feel solitary and uncultivated, with but little information. I simply tried
to show [my opinion] with sincerity. My words are impolite and my expressions are plain. It may not be necessary to take notice of [my opinion]. I am
afraid that this does not serve as [anything good]. I am humbled by shame
and awe as a consequence of [my criticism].
Presented respectfully [by Faming].
The Discourse to Clarify Buddhism composed by Layman Zong [Bing]
of Jingzhou says,227 “Bo Yi said in the Book of Mountains and Seas (Shanhai
jing), ‘In the country of Shendu the people are very dear to others and love
one another.’ In Guo Pu’s commentary on the book it is said, ‘The country
we formerly called [Shen]du is Tianzhu (i.e., India) where Futu (Buddhism)
originated.’” (The term futu is fotu, “the Buddha’s purpose”).

148

Fascicle Eleven

“Liu Xiang’s Biographies of Arrayed Transcendents (Liexian zhuan) states
that seventy-four [of the transcendents] are found in the Buddhist scriptures.
These are scholars’ [views of limited scope]. Again, it was not [during the reign
of] Emperor Ming of the [Later] Han dynasty that [Buddhism] began [in China].”
“The eminent Buddhist monk Fotudeng was a kindhearted sage at the
time of Shi Le and [Shi] Hu. [Fotudeng] told Shi Hu, ‘In the city of Linzi
county (in present-day Shandong province) there is the old site of Ayuwang
(i.e., King Aśoka) Temple where there is still a [buddha] image, and the dew
basin is buried in the earth more than twenty zhang under a big tree in a deep
forest.’ An envoy of [Shi] Hu looked for them, relying on the illustration,
and found everything [Fotudeng] had mentioned. Recently, when Yao Lüe’s
uncle was a king of Jin, he saw a bright light at the site of Ayuwang Temple,
so called by the elders, in Puban of Hedong. Seeking [the origin of the light,]
he had [his men] dig there and obtained relics of the Buddha in a silver case
placed inside a stone container. The brightness was extraordinary. Following
[Yao] Lüe, [the king of Jin] came out onto the bank of the Ba River to see
[the relics arrive]. Today bhikṣus live in a new temple [where the relics are
worshiped].
“From the observation of these facts, [we can see that] a long time has
passed since Buddhist practices were transmitted to the land of Qi and Jin.
The reason [the transmission of Buddhism] was not mentioned in the three
commentaries [on the Spring and Autumn Annals] (i.e., the Zuozhuan, the
Gongyang, and the Guliang) is similar to the reason why in the history books
written by Gan Bao and Sun Sheng (i.e., the Jinji and the Jinyangqiu) there
are no remarks about the Buddha. The subtle [Buddhist] ediﬁcation is, however, really obvious. During the Jin period [Buddhism] ﬂourished in the
Jiangzuo area (present-day Jiangsu province).”

The Letter of King Wenxuan Given
to Kong Zhigui, Palace Aide to
the Censor-in-Chief, in Order
to Dispel Doubts, together
with the Answer

I closely read your letter line by line. I have long worried that groundless
words always impair the right path and drastic measures harm purity and

149

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

72b

peace. The Mengzi says, “A monarch should not be fond of wisdom. A
monarch should not be fond of courage. Excessive courage and wisdom produce trouble and disasters. What he abides by is exactly that he should take
love and justice as the foundation.”228 Today, since studying Śākyamuni’s
teaching I have realized for the ﬁrst time from where this statement derives.
By pledging to and practicing [this statement], I would like people in both
high and low positions to equalize their good points. Furthermore, I will use
an illustration for liberation: “Nothing is gained and nothing is lost. The
small contains the large.”229 Regarding the phenomenal world, it does not
spontaneously deserve to be mentioned.
The goal of the teaching of the truth (i.e., Buddhism) and the secular teaching (i.e., Confucianism) is simply the same. Because those who practice
[either of the teachings] have not mastered this, inconsistent views arise
indiscriminately. You say, “One who accumulates karma stays in faith.” In
that case, this would mean that speech and action go against each other. Can
it be said to be great ﬁlial piety that while attending one’s parents a person
respects his parents on the one hand and injures or wounds [his own body,
a gift from his parents] on the other?230 I have never heard of such a thing.
The deeds of a person of virtue are not something to injure heartlessly but
something to increase his goodness. The moral conduct of an honest person
does not form his virtue through greed and theft. If things were like this, would
it be possible to reject taking refuge in the Three Treasures and observing the
ﬁve precepts even for a moment? Would it be possible to abandon the ten
wholesome acts and the eightfold holy path to enlightenment even for a short
time? I have not seen a case where the foundation is treated lightly while the
branches are valued. This is what is called “The root has already been inclined
and its branches and leaves follow it afterward.”231 Now you say, “The two
paths are separate and different from each other. How could it be possible to
follow [both]?” I see that this statement is merely superﬁcial talk. It is not
that you have not seen what is discussed in sutras and Vinaya texts. Why do
you incline your determination only to one side (i.e., Confucianism) and bury
the [common] path [to Buddhism and Confucianism]?
A person of learning does not usually leave the secular world to give
instruction. The teaching that conforms to the ways of the world can be understood. If it is said that this Dharma vainly consists only of deception and

150

Fascicle Eleven

falsehood, the doubts of [the people] increase and [they think] it should be
destroyed. I will, then, precisely state the cause. After all, how many people
who are ﬁlial to their parents and respectful to their siblings at home are there
in our numerous communities? Would it then be possible to reprimand various
instructions and admonitions for the reason that there are not many [such
good people], and to burn all the classics, history books, and admonitory
works? At present you are hesitant to accept Buddhism. How different is
[your case] from this example? Therefore, those who take refuge in the excellent Dharma originally do not show their minds with decorum and respect,
and those who respectfully admire and worship [Buddhism] do not, from the
beginning, forget other people and think only of themselves.
Today, those who courteously overcome their own desires are precisely
only your group of people. Together you now intend to leave behind arrogance,
remove haughtiness, restrain sensual desires, control greedy desires, cultivate
politeness and modesty, learn how to be respectful, admire benevolence and
righteousness, and deepen your ﬁlial piety toward your parents and respect
for your siblings. You impose [these practices] upon yourselves through
extensive charity, propagate them with philanthropy, praise them with outstanding talent, and promote them with wondrous capability. Why would
you then be ashamed of yourselves in the eyes of spiritual beings? To diligently
urge yourselves to carry out the practices is exactly seen here. Although I
am not able to respectfully follow [your opinion], I do not forget this in my
mind. [The jade that] glows in the night has not yet been thrown to you but
you have already stood up and placed your hand on your sword [for naught].232
Even though you seek to hope for morality together, don’t you instead feel
more ashamed? This must be because you have not seen the situation. Therefore you merely have expectations in ordinary faith. What I have in my mind
is not this. I often take it seriously that [my faith] is not yet great enough.
The Ofﬁce of the Minister of Education and Cultural Affairs primarily
exhorts the teaching of the ﬁve kinds of principles of human relationships.233
Together we earnestly perform these good acts in order to act in accordance
with freedom from desire and cause those who deceive and ﬂatter others to
reform themselves through merely viewing the gate [of the Ofﬁce of the
Minister of Education and Cultural Affairs], or cause those who make an
outward show without sincerity and who have loose morals to improve their

151

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

72c

behaviors only through stepping into the yard [of the Ofﬁce of the Minister
of Education and Cultural Affairs], equalize [the Ofﬁce of the Minister of
Education and Cultural Affairs] to that mansion which sets our hearts at rest
(i.e., a Buddhist temple), and make [the Ofﬁce of the Minister of Education
and Cultural Affairs] equal to the tower of freedom from desire (i.e., a pagoda).
Wouldn’t this be good?
First, we respectfully follow the benevolence bestowed by the emperor all
over the world. Second, we respectfully receive the affectionate wholesomeness
granted to us by the crown prince. Simply, what I am vigilant of morning and
night is precisely the concern that my feeling about this is not satisﬁed.
[People of the world] are fond of idly speaking on a great variety of subjects. They say they do so because they wish for wholesomeness. They have
not been aware of the important point of harming the ediﬁcation. Even if
someone tries to be loyal to his country and ﬁlial to his parents through deception, if he tries to show love and justice through ﬂattering and pleasing others,
if he tries to make the complaisance proper to the rule of propriety through
false actions, or if he tries to be irreproachable through pretense, if he can
overcome his own desires even for a single day all under Heaven will ascribe
perfect virtue to him,234 not to mention that if he were able to do so for more
than ten days or a month [the conditions] would be better than expected.
Frankly speaking, I certainly feel bitter about the fact that there are not
many cases like this in which wrongs have been corrected. If [you think that]
this trouble has not yet spread, I, an old vulgar shallow person, deeply regret
it. Certainly you must admonish yourselves to correct the contradictions and
develop what you have not yet mastered. Why do you think that [Buddhism]
hurts the basis of ﬁlial piety and damages the foundation of principles? Alas!
To have trouble in my mind is not something I wish for. If this issue can be
abandoned I would be happy to hear other good points.
Furthermore, you say that it is not necessary to exhort the people to observe
the precepts, and that instead we should cause those from the lower stratum
of the society to do good acts voluntarily. If a teaching is propagated in this
way without fail, Fangxun (i.e., Yao) should have waited for the four wicked
ones to reform themselves and attain sagehood [instead of banishing them
to the four distant regions],235 and Yu Shun should have waited for [his unworthy son] Shangjun to become wise and his virtue to become clear. Is it possible

152

Fascicle Eleven

to hope to fulﬁll wholesomeness in this way? Your intention like this should
have what is broadly corrected. In that case, we should question the frugality
of the earthen steps of Yao’s [residence],236 praise the beauty of a temporary
abode for an emperor on a tour, speak ill of the stinginess of Yu’s [residence
with its roof of] couch grass and thatch, esteem the distinction of the Efang
Palace [of the First Emperor of the Qin dynasty], feel ashamed of the correct
attitude of Ji An [in the service of Emperor Wu of the Former Han dynasty],
and honor Zhu Tuo’s obsequious manner.237 Regarding all other honorable
conduct, such as the virtues of integrity, purity, sincerity, modesty, and courteousness, we must change our ways and turn away from them. What practice
would we then be able to cultivate?
Generally, when we hear a speech we assuredly judge the [speaker’s]
behavior. When we see a behavior we certainly search for the reason [behind
that behavior]. If your reason does not contradict [the truth] and your behavior
does not transgress, please do not reach for strange doctrines. Truly different
paths arrive at the same goal. You need not be consistent in a minor point.
Recently there are many people who agree with you in this intention.
Today, I convey my opinion in this letter. Those who do not concentrate their
attention harbor doubt and delusion in their minds. His Majesty made this
known publicly and widely. I have brieﬂy expressed his thought but it seems
that nothing is clear. The issue easily becomes troublesome in a letter. I cannot
completely express my intention after all. I will meet with you one of these
days and make this clear at that time.
Everyone has a mind of his own, just as everyone’s face is unique. Could
it ever happen that every person’s face is the same and his or her intelligence
is equal [to that of others]? When we examine that there are differences in the
physical appearances of people, we fully see that their spirits are separate from
each other. Once this determination has been made, the issue is no longer something that requires further discussion. Once someone goes against the [right]
path, how could [his mind] be changed by explanation? When I saw you, even
though you clariﬁed the issue completely in your statement we did not reach
this point. This is truly because there was already a difference between the two
parties, yours and mine. It would be fortunate if each party could maintain the
same small difference [as there is now]. There is simply no need to fruitlessly
discuss right or wrong and slander each other without restraint.

153

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

73a

As for resting one’s mind and coming to have faith, it is not that the
virtuous people of former times did not have this determination. I consider
now that following wholesomeness is my happiness. Therefore I try to take
the conceit out of myself when meeting with people. If you think that your
virtue surpasses those of the ancient wise people, your sacredness exceeds
that of former virtuous people, your intelligence excels that of a large number
of people, and your rank is the highest of human nobility, then you can enjoy
a free and leisurely life outside the mundane world, edify people in your own
way, place your mind at a lofty level, have nothing more to seek, and be selfsufﬁcient. Moreover, if you step back and imitate the virtuous people of
former times, I am afraid that you will not be able to be far apart from them.
You vainly hold the two paths (i.e., Buddhism and Daoism) in hand. You
alone are separate from the wonderful Dharma.
If we were to meet each other in a leisurely manner I would not have said
anything from the beginning. My intention is not light; I simply show you
what is in my mind. I will see you one of these days and discuss all of this in
detail. Recently I wrote a two-fascicle work, the Explanation on Dispelling
Delusions (Shizhi). I think you may have already seen it at some other place.
I now send it and show it to you. If you have already read it, please send it
back to me. I would be happy if there is no need for you to further trouble
yourself [with it]. If you have not yet read it you should read through my
intention for my sake. Originally I did not hope that other people would change
their minds [by reading this]. It was written only to dispel my own doubts
and delusions. When you read this you will surely clap your hands in glee.
I, Xiao Ziliang, have thus written.

Kong Zhigui’s Letters, together
with [Prince Xiao’s]Answer

[Kong Zhigui’s (447–501) Letter]
I, Zhigui, explain.
I receive with respect your benevolent favor from early on. I have deeply
enjoyed the instruction given by you together with great mercy. Thanks to
your kindness I will assuredly complete my life. I dare to now show my sincerity and humbly pray to illuminate your mind.

154

Fascicle Eleven

My family has occupied a noble position for a long time, respectfully following [the teaching of] Li Lao (i.e., Daoism). We set our minds to become
void and calm and make our conduct pure and moderate. We tread upon all
the depths of wholesomeness in our behavior and expect for the abode of
the highest level of obedience in our minds. I revere and hold to the path my
ancestors followed and cut off [deﬁlement] even as tiny as a speck of autumn
dust. I still do not dare lose what my faith heads toward.
Regarding the brilliant teaching of the Great Awakened One and the right
origin of transcendental wisdom, these are what I have come to respect in the
course of my life. I have not been against them from the beginning. Usually
when I infer the ultimate principle, [all] principles come to the same point.
When I place them in the culmination of the ultimate law of nature, I see that
the culmination of the ultimate law of nature does not hold more than one.
Since the time I began to respectfully receive your instruction, I rely on
and come close to your style. You guide me through the right vehicle (i.e.,
the right teaching), and lead me with the universal precepts. You caused me
to promptly remove the six kinds of hindrances,238 and to precisely clarify
the ﬁve desires. I reformed myself. I bow with my head to the ground and
join my hands [in reverence]. I am willing to abide by this. I respectfully
take refuge in [Buddhism]. I have pure faith from early on. Regarding the
important precepts and minor articles, I have already observed half of them.
The reason I have not converted to the [teaching of those who hold the
three kinds of] robes and an almsbowl (i.e., Buddhism) and admire the teaching of the Yellow Emperor and Laozi is in fact based on my family profession.
It would simply be unbearable for me to one day suddenly give up [Daoism].
There is an origin in the world of my mind. I do not wish to conceal myself
with regret throughout the morning. Since the two teachings (i.e., Buddhism
and Daoism) are almost the same, I originally do not dare be unwilling to
transfer my mind [to Buddhism]. In fact, I truly praise the profession of my
ancestors and simply cannot bear to give up the determination of my family.
How could I not happily think of the Mahayana teaching and cordially make
up my mind to pursue [the teaching of] the One Vehicle? Needless to say, I
respectfully rely on you who equally govern propriety and morals. Furthermore, I must recite with reverence your pure faith.

155

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

73b

As to the preface to the Jingzhuzi (Jingxing Famen) that you wrote, you
clarify the hearts of ten thousand gates [of teachings] and propagate the profound tenor of a hundred million sections. Even though I think to say something against this, my mind is unconsciously infatuated with it. Further, I did
not foresee the greatness of your skillful guidance was so wondrous. Extensiveness and simplicity are arranged from point to point and the exquisite
light shines out. Even if I intend to stop this, I am still unable to do so. Even
if I did want to go against this how could I avoid facing it? Until now I was
not intelligent indeed but from now on I will make it my business to practice
your words.239
My silly mind just adheres to my family law. I dare not distinguish Śākyamuni from Laozi in my mind. For the ﬁrst time I made inquiries about the
past of my family. We once clariﬁed the signiﬁcance [that Buddhism and
Daoism are] related to each other. On one occasion, we taught this to Zhang
Rong, who then wrote the Discourse on the Way to Reach the Origin [of the
Two Teachings] (Tongyuan lun). His [pseudonymous] name is Shaozi. What
Shaozi clariﬁed [in the Discourse] is how to combine Daoism and Buddhism.
[Zhang] Rong’s comprehension of this derives from my family. Since my
family’s [view] is exactly so, how could I obstruct [that way]? In the beginning
I hesitated to take this trace but now I always respect both [Buddhism and
Daoism] from the bottom of my heart. On one hand, I have not vainly abandoned [the teaching of] the Yellow Emperor and Laozi, but on the other I
take refuge in [the teaching for] the right, perfect enlightenment.
I do not expect to suddenly attain great awakening one morning. [But if
I am able to attain] awakening, it will be entirely owing to your guidance. I
am extremely happy about this.
Sincerely yours.

[Kong Zhigui’s Second Letter]
I am writing to you.
Again, I have personally investigated how Daoism differs from Buddhism.
[The difference] simply comes from the fact that [Daoism] does not completely
discuss the ultimate. When Daoists discuss the ultimate they say that it exists
in all the heavens, but Buddhists despise this [assertion] and say that it does
not go beyond the three realms of existence. This is [the difference] between

156

Fascicle Eleven

the exquisite and the coarse, or between far and near. [If we see only from
this point, Daoists] would really feel ashamed of themselves in the great system, but when we examine it the Daoist teaching establishes a stratagem,
which is similar to the idea found in Confucius’ books, that the ultimate is
only Heaven and Earth. This probably comes from the fact that what common
people see are only the two polarities (i.e., Heaven and Earth).
Teachings are originally based on the mind and are adaptable to all people.
[Teachings] employ whatever people see, and then the people follow them.
On the point of [people] following [a teaching], both [Buddhism and Daoism]
make an exhaustive study of wondrous things. Therefore the “pair of bellows”
mentioned by Laozi and the “non-self” spoken of by Vimalakīrti match Heaven
and Earth in virtue.240 In the School of Changes there is the Grand Terminus.241
Based on the fact that people worship Heaven, this caused people to further
worship what is even more wondrous. Accordingly, if there is a ground at the
end of the ultimate, its profundity would certainly tower over Heaven.
Laozi also says, “There was something undeﬁned and complete, coming
into existence before Heaven and Earth.”242 This means that the Way already
exists beyond Heaven. Rather, [Laozi] does not take Heaven as the Way.
How is this different from the fact that in the Buddhist school an arhat is
indicated as one who has attained the fourth fruition and yet, just as in the
Shengman jing (Skt. Śrīmālādevīsiṃhanāda-sūtra), it is known that he still
has more steps [to cultivate for enlightenment]? Daoists’ worship of the
zenith of Heaven is similar to the Buddhists’ [notion of] the fruit of arhatship.
The Buddhist intention is not limited to arhatship. The Daoist [intention] is
not conﬁned to Heaven, either. Then and only then do I believe that what
Daoists consider to be the Way is deﬁnitely connected with the Buddhist
Way in origin. What my present mind relies on, then, follows the same direction as yours.
The Daoist school asserts abiding by wholesomeness. This is consequently
the same as the Buddhist school. In the points common to both [Buddhism
and Daoism] I do not carelessly abandon the Daoist teaching. In the points
where Daoism differs [from Buddhism], I follow and join your Mahayana
teaching. I beg you to dare not lay down a further difference [between
Buddhism and Daoism] today.

157

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

I truthfully keep [your instruction] in mind and stick to it. I have respectfully written of my sincere view. I humbly wish for you to take notice of the
penitence of an insigniﬁcant person [like me] and understand my initial position [as a follower of Daoism]. I will withdraw and repent of my initial [position]. I am in awe and reverence.
Sincerely yours.

73c

[Kong Zhigui’s Third Letter]
On the twenty-ninth day of the eleventh month, a man of the province,
Palace Aide to the Censor-in-chief Kong Zhigui explains.
I am very glad for a chance to completely express my thoughts. Originally
reason is not dual. People make their choice from many paths, discuss with
and criticize one another’s views, and so on. This is something I usually
deplore, sighing. It is, however, proper if one is led to Daoism in the beginning.
Those who are taught and learn [a teaching] cannot [understand this], but
since you have extensively proven various Buddhist scriptures, I am not concerned that you will fall into and remain in that path. I will meet you one of
these days and differentiate one from another.
[Prince Xiao’s Answer]
Prince Xiao’s answer says, “This letter from you is very good. You should
show it widely to those who have not understood the point.”

The Letters of Two Dharma Teachers, Daoheng
and Daobiao, Responding to Yao [Xing Zi]lüe,
the Usurper Ruler of the Later Qin Dynasty,
Who Exhorts Them to Give up the [Buddhist]
Way, together with the Letters of the Ruler Yao

The Ruler Yao’s Letter Given to Two Eminent Monks, [Dao]heng and
[Dao]biao
You are delighted with the tranquility of the essence of the Way. You keep
the Dharma gate in mind and stick to it. Your immaculate integrity is truly
commendable.
I, however, reign over the world and require talent to govern the nation.
I desire to summon [able] people who live in sylvan seclusion with satisfaction
and to search for [talented people] who live in obscurity at a butcher’s shop.

158

Fascicle Eleven

Needless to say, you two [Dharma teachers] seriously attend to [Buddhist
practice]; I am already fully aware of this. Each of you receives the ability
to manage the trend of the times, and yet hides yourself in a place to keep
yourself clean and pure. Does this indicate the most genuine feeling with
which I seek the wise and the deep interest by which you both propagate [the
Buddhist teaching] together? The ancient people had a saying, “There is a
very fast horse in the country but no one rides it, and the people only anxiously
search for it.”243 This refers to us.
Today I will make an Imperial edict to Director of the Imperial Secretariat
[Yao] Xian, in order to take up your meritorious minds of the two vehicles.
Wouldn’t it be great for you to glorify the times and beneﬁt the world through
the capacity of your spotless fame? If someone keeps the signiﬁcance of the
[Buddhist] Way in mind, is it necessary for him to be a monk or layman? I
hope you will understand my thoughts about this. You cannot make “to remain
faithful to your principle” a good excuse.

[The Letter of Daoheng and Daobiao, Responding to Yao]
We respectfully received the Imperial decree dated the twenty-eighth day
of the last month. You will make an Imperial edict to the Director of the
Imperial Secretariat in order to take the Dharma robes from us, Daoheng and
Daobiao. Since the moment we received the decree we have been sad in fear.
We have lost our composure and are ashamed and bewildered in every action.
There is nowhere to place ourselves.
We, [Dao]heng and [Daobiao], are truly stupid and incompetent in natural
abilities and endowments. It has not been long since we were imbued with
the Dharma. What we keep in mind is serious and our attachment to [the
Dharma] is also deep. We humbly received the favorable edict in which we
are praised above what we deserve. You make explanations, instructions,
and encouragement for us. Even though you speak and reason in every possible way, we really feel that we have no moment of ease.
We made a vow that throughout our lifetimes we will be under Dharma
robes. Concurrently, we have been learning the Buddhist Dharma since our
youth and we are not familiar with worldly affairs. If we vainly accept an
extraordinary appointment we will end up having made no special achievement. Even though we have a reputation for outstanding capability, we are

159

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

74a

useless to beneﬁt the times. Before seeing even a small amount of help there
would be a loss as large as a mountain. We thus do not accept [your offer]
for your sake, Your Majesty. Even Emperor Guangwu [of the Later Han
dynasty] could allow the recluse Yan [Guang Zi]ling to think freely,244 and
King Wen (i.e., Cao Pi) of the Wei kingdom kept Guan Ning’s moral principles
intact.245 [In either case] the monarchs controlled their lofty ideas and let an
ordinary person fulﬁll his triﬂing determination. Lenient with the masses,
[the monarchs] were content; not to mention Your Majesty who manages the
people by means of the [Buddhist] Way. You concurrently propagate the
Three Treasures, gather scholars of philosophical principles from all over
the world in the capital city, and circulate new and unfamiliar Buddhist scriptures in remote as well as near places. The great Dharma ﬂourishes and prospers upon this.
Now you certainly expound and propagate the magniﬁcent ediﬁcation,
assist in clarifying [the teaching], and arouse its brightness. You have inherited
the sound transmitted from Prince Jeta’s garden, and you fan the air that
remains on Vulture Peak. You have established a model for the coming one
thousand years as a path to guide future generations [toward enlightenment].
[Given all of this,] how could we, Daoheng and [Daobiao], alone submit to
this bright time and be unable to appeal to you for our ambition?
We humbly pray that you will examine our intention, especially bestow the
unrestrained principle which is understood by the less educated, grant a brilliant
decree again, and concede our insigniﬁcant thought. Then we will bear our
gratitude to you even in the underworld and appreciate your virtue, kalpa after
kalpa. We cannot stand trembling with fear. We respectfully report to you.

[The Ruler Yao’s Response]
I examined your report, in which you gave a thorough account of your
intention. The reason you have to submit to me now is because you are needed
by the times. Do not come to this [conclusion] through pushing your true
intention. Feel vexed about your politeness, expand your horizons, and respond
to my interest. I think you both always have an experience [like this]. I will
not grumble anymore. You are only expected to respectfully accept the current
government order and make efforts to follow the bodhisattva path.

160

Fascicle Eleven

[The Second Letter of Daoheng and Daobiao]
We, Daoheng and [Daobiao], recently presented [our intention], hoping
you would understand when you examined it. We again received your brilliant
decree. We are not favored by your sympathy and benevolence. We humbly
read it with sorrow and anxiety. We are nearly out of our minds. Your Majesty,
your benevolence is as great as Heaven and Earth, and you cause the people
to be delighted in their nature. We, [Dao]heng and [Daobiao], received training
in Dharma ediﬁcation when we were young. What our stupid minds hope is
that upon our oath, we will be able to complete our triﬂing lives in the Dharma
robes. Nevertheless, you bestow on us undeserved favor, kindly forget our
ignorance, and encourage us to propagate the bodhisattva way to save [all
sentient beings] without distinction. There is, however, a limit to our determination and power. This [appointment] is really something for which we are
not adequate. [Our intention] is not only to excuse ourselves from [the appointment] because we want to live [in a careless way] in our remaining years; we
personally think that we must live up to what we foolishly keep in mind.
We humbly pray that you will examine and excuse us for our wholehearted
sincerity, and will not blame us for being stubbornly biased, grant us a special
benevolent imperial decree, and accede to our triﬂing feelings. We repeatedly
invite your brilliant decree, and accordingly gasp for breath in fear. We are
overwhelmed by [the prospect of occupying] the highest [position] of the
common people.
We report with reverence to you again.

[The Ruler Yao’s Second Response]
I obtained your second report in which you give details. The situation is
just as I explained thoroughly in my previous decree. You must open your
minds and follow the current government order. Do not annoy me again and
again!

[The Third Letter of Daoheng and Daobiao]
In our previous petition presented to the throne the issues to which we, Daoheng and [Daobiao], hold with foolish intention have been thoroughly stated.
But since our purity and sincerity are wanting we were unable to move and
awaken Your Majesty’s mind. We repeatedly received an Imperial decree in

161

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

74b

reply [to our petition] but we have not been placed under your benevolence.
We are anxious and fearful in our everyday life and our minds are not [restful].
Your Majesty cherishes the Way, you efface yourself and accept everything,
and there is no limit to your support for the people. We pray that you will
reveal your kindness [as vast as] Heaven and Earth and allow us to accomplish
one-tenth of our determination. [We wish to be able to] keep the sincerity to
which we adhere without fail until we die. If we take part in the offense of
breaching an Imperial decree we will contentedly take responsibility for it
without resentment. We frequently asked you to listen to our winding [intention]. Consequently, we gasp for breath with fear. We cannot bear the feeling
of [committing] transgression [against you].
We report with reverence to you.

Report to the Throne by the Three Dharma
Teachers Senglüe, Sengqian, and Kumārajīva,
in Response to the Letters of the Ruler Yao,
who Tried to Suspend [the Monkhood of
Dao]heng and [Dao]biao, together with
the Ruler Yao’s Letters

The Ruler Yao’s Letter Given to Kumārajīva
Several tens of days have passed since I saw you last. My mind is carried
back to the day [we met]. It is gradually getting warmer and warmer. How
have you been these days? A petty savage tribe started hostilities in a remote
area and there is no way to deal with them. I am simply confused in my mind.
Everything is mournful. I need talented people in order to manage these things.
Recently I issued an Imperial edict to Daoheng and [Daobiao] and ordered
them to take off the robes for arhat and seek the bodhisattva’s trace. I think
that they are simply hesitating. The Way exists everywhere. You, Dharma
teacher, must persuade them. If I only mean to cause them to give up their
minds of seeking the Way, why would it be necessary for me to do this (i.e.,
summon them to join the administration)?
Please convey my best wishes to Holy Priest [Seng]qian. How has he
been since I saw him last? I do not know how Superintendent [Seng]lüe has
been, either. Since I have too many things to do I am not able to write in

162

Fascicle Eleven

detail. [Dao]heng and [Daobiao] may trouble all holy priests. Please persuade
them and cause them to advance in the bodhisattva practice.

The Ruler Yao’s Letter Given to Sengqian and Others
I examined what you have presented in your letter, which gives a detailed
account of each matter. I think that the virtue of self-righteousness is not as
good as the merit of saving both oneself and others, and to remain faithful
to one’s own principle is not as great as to deliver the people [from suffering].
[Yan Guang] Ziling emulated Emperor Guangwu, [Yan] Junping was arrogant
in a marketplace of Shu,246 Zhou Dang refused a stipend from the Han court,247
and Du Wei told Zhuge [Liang] (i.e., Kongming) that he was deaf.248 All
these people stubbornly esteemed righteousness. How sufﬁcient are they to
judge the essential points [and determine] whether to be silent or to speak
out, and to understand the tenor of loftiness and excellence?
At present China is not governed well and the common people have hardships.
Having little virtue, I alone try to deal with this bad situation. I expect to ﬁnd
many talented people with whom I might peacefully have the highest level of
administration. Even though you Dharma teachers have a quiet concentrated
mind in the Dharma gate, you also assist the world and propagate the teaching.
Even if you were unable to lead people, edify the times, encourage the people,
or manage the state, you praise Xu You, who refused the world in a remote time,
and esteem Xie Fu, who had disheveled hair [and resigned from worldly affairs]
in the recent past. If the nine tributary streams of the Yellow River overﬂowed
and all the people were to become ﬁsh, how could you Dharma teachers, who
assist the world and propagate the teaching, apply [your current way]?
Furthermore, for a long time Daoheng and [Daobiao] have kept the instructions of the Dharma in mind. Moreover, their talents are useful enough to
help accomplish worldly affairs. Therefore, I simply wish to remove their
determination against their will in order to assist my ignorance in administration. If there is a manifestation of meritorious reward [for good conduct]
and if the Buddha does not lie, then regarding the achievement of delivering
the world from an emergency and the honor of beneﬁting the times and peacefully governing the country, the merit exists here [in this existence], not over
there [in the afterlife]. You should instruct and explain this to each other in
order to meet my hopes.

163

74c

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

Report to the Throne by Senglüe, Sengqian,
Kumārajīva, and Others Requesting
[the Ruler Yao] to Cease Removing
[Dao]heng and [Dao]biao from
the [Buddhist] Way249

We hear that in the highest [governance] people are educated by means of the
Way and the people personally take this to be positive, and in the second best
a person of virtue governs the world. Therefore brilliant monarchs of ancient
times discerned that it is difﬁcult to govern if they go against nature, and they
became aware of the reason it is easy to let the people conduct affairs without
restriction. Thus, Yao freed Xu You in Mount Ji, Ling (i.e., Lord Wen of Wei
state) allowed [Duan] Ganmu to retire to his hermitage in Wei state,250 the
founder of the Han dynasty released the four bright men to Mount Zhongnan,251
Shudu (i.e., Huang Xian) was summoned for the government during the Han
dynasty and yet declined,252 Zai Kui of the [Eastern] Jin dynasty put on coarse
clothes in Shan county [in order to avoid the king of Wuling’s summon],253
and Xie Fu became a recluse on Mount Ruoye with disheveled hair. They
probably considered that following the nature of the wise is virtuous. Therefore,
there are a wise ruler above and those who wear a leather girdle (i.e., common
people) below. The manners of hermits give a lesson today.
Regarding Daobiao and [Dao]heng, their virtue is not perfect and prominent
now, and their lot lies in remaining faithful to their principle. Furthermore,
they learned the profound ediﬁcation when they were young and they keep
the Buddhist Way in mind and maintain it. They are earnestly sincere and
their determination is certainly ﬁrm, without agitation. As for expounding
the subtle Buddhist scriptures and studying what is obscure, they are sufﬁcient
to enlighten even children and to help edify [people] about merit. When one
can cause people to discern what is evil and what is meritorious, he has the
beneﬁt to deliver them from suffering. If the Buddha does not lie, [Dao]biao
and [Daobiao] are propagating the teaching [of Vimalakīrti] of Vaiśālī.
We personally heard that recently [Daoheng and Daobiao] often received
a favorable Imperial decree that aimed to take the Dharma robes from them.
This is like removing feathers from kingﬁshers perching upon a wintry tree
branch, or illuminating lotus ﬂowers under a thick ice. This indeed indicates

164

Fascicle Eleven

Your Majesty’s benevolence and friendliness; you spread kindness that is
uncommon in the world. Certainly we, [Seng]lüe and other monks, will remember this with tender feelings. We personally have a foolish thought: we think
that Your Majesty shakes the rope of morals in order to maintain the whole
wide world and spread the net of the nine kinds of virtues in order to catch the
world. You fan the profound air before the future millennium and mold love
and justice for countless future generations. Even beings outside the universe
are moved by your pure virtue and are widely ediﬁed [by you]. Within China
people make free use of the profound ferry [to enlightenment] and enjoy a free
and leisurely life. Ordinary people have no bitterness due to dying in the gutter
and widows do not lament stopping weaving [because of the lack of the] woof
[thread]. This is really why you bestow the good ediﬁcation within the country
and why [the people in the country] respectfully rely on you.
We, foolish monks, think that although [Dao]heng and [Dao]biao are
insigniﬁcant individuals and differ a little from others in maintaining their
views, they are originally within your net; that is to say, they are subjects for
whom Your Majesty ediﬁes the Way.
Formerly Bei assisted in governing the world for twelve years. We have
not heard that his Dharma robe was taken away and he [heeded] worldly opinions about his appearance.254 If a person is helpful for the times he will greatly
beneﬁt [the world] even if he wears a Buddhist surplice (Skt. kaṣāya). Why
is it necessary to take away [the Dharma robes from Daoheng and Daobiao]?
Buddhist monks and secular people differ from each other in terms of their
aptitude. In former times Chao[fu] and [Xu] You upheld their high principles,
both Yao and [Xu] You were lofty, and the four bright men [of the Qin dynasty]
did not surrender to [the founder of the Han dynasty]. [In these cases] the
ruler and the ruled are all equally good. This is the same principle throughout
all ages and has been the common manner for one hundred generations.
Moreover, [Daoheng and Daobiao] are not as virtuous as Guan Zhong.
They do not deserve having a magniﬁcent carriage [as Guan Zhong had] in
the Tangfu village.255 They are not as intelligent as [Zhuge] Kongming. Would
they be good enough to receive three calls at the thatched cottage [in the way
that Kongming was visited by Liu Bei]?
We pray that Your Majesty will bestow bygone favors on them and comply
with their triﬂing determination. If a ruler does not give too much kindness

165

75a

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

and the ruled do not lose their lot, the ediﬁcation of Emperor Tang (i.e., Yao)
will reemerge here and the guests near the Ying River and under Mount Ji
(i.e., Chaofu and Xu You) will appear again today.
We, [Seng]lüe and his fellow monks, are ignorant, yet we foolishly present
this petition of honest words [to the Throne]. We are afraid of offending your
dignity and we gasp in fear afterward.
Senglüe and his fellow monks speak.

The Letter of Dharma Teacher Huiyuan of
Mount Lu in Response to Huan Xuan, Who
Urges that [Huiyuan] be Removed from
the [Buddhist Way], together with
Huan Xuan’s Letter

Huan Xuan’s (369–404) Letter
The ultimate Way is far and remote. The Buddhist principles are subtle
and profound. How could this be what ordinary people, who spend time idly,
can learn and seek? A śramaṇa leaves behind his affection for his family
members of the six relations, disﬁgures his appearance, abstains from delicious
food, wears coarse clothes fastened with a rope belt, lives in a mountain
resting his head on rocks, separates from worldly affairs eternally, all in the
hope that he might have just a bare moment [to attain buddhahood] for a
hundred generations. [Nevertheless,] Buddhist monks of the present world,
even though they disﬁgure their appearance, have more [worldly desires]
than secular people. What they talk about is the boundary between the
Buddhist clergy and secular people. It can be said that they are similar to the
man who tried to learn the art of walking at Handan [but forgot his original
way of walking] and [ﬁnally] crawled back home from there.256 A sage of
former times had a saying, “While you do not know life, how can you know
about death?”257 [Buddhist monks,] however, torment their bodies and minds
throughout their lifetimes and seek the imperceptible happiness of the nether
world. This is all a narrow view. They have not mastered the great ediﬁcation.
If they get lost and yet recognize [the need] to return, they will not be far from
the right path. They have to consider this well. The movement of Heaven does
not let a person stay at a standstill. We will quickly become old [if we waste

166

Fascicle Eleven

time]. It is too late to try to recover [one’s youth]. I confer these few words
of the utmost importance for you. I will be happy if you can accept my words.

Dharma Teacher [Hui]yuan’s Response
The Great Way is profound and its principles are abstruse. I cherish this
lofty purpose, which is really as you say. Nevertheless, I have renounced the
world; accordingly I am a guest from outside this world. Even though I have
not fulﬁlled the virtue of ancient wise people, I am earnestly determined [to
seek enlightenment], remove worldly clothing and dress, decline fame, and
seek truth. If the other world exists I originally and certainly do not fall short
of secular people [in studying it]. [Judging from] my outward appearance, I
may seem incomplete [in my determination], but in my mind I have the
ﬁrmest determination that could cut metal. It can be said that even though
you see the appearance [of Buddhist monks] you have not yet come to the
truth [behind it]. How sad this is! How sad this is!
[Those who wear coarse clothes] fastened with a rope belt and [who live
in the mountains] resting their heads on rocks are [simply hermits]: they look
majestic but they are unsubstantial. They are people of a narrow view, not
worthy of envy. Even though they discipline their original nature in mountains
and forests, how different are they from trees and shrubs? The Way exists in
the mind but they falsely consider reﬁning the body to be the true Way. Bian
He wept aloud on Mount Jing because he was troubled by the fact that people
could not distinguish [ jade from stone].258 Formerly we heard the name [of
Bian He] and now we see a person [like this]. Therefore, Zhuangzi sighed
in lament and said, “Man’s life between Heaven and Earth is like a white
colt passing by a crevice, [brieﬂy glimpsed and then it suddenly disappears].”259 Examining this, who would be able to stay [in this world] for a
long time? Shouldn’t you make merit for your future life?
You mentioned that a person who learned the art of walking at Handan
had no achievement in the new [style of walking] and lost his original way
[of walking], so he employed a man of Handan and crawled back to his hometown. [You also noted] that in a hundred generations there is only a moment
[to attain buddhahood]. How can you mix these [two analogies] together to
lead to your point?

167

75b

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

I already go against worldly affairs. I temporarily place myself amid popular customs because among them I would like to edify those who have not
yet been ediﬁed. Even though one receives favors [from the emperor] and
becomes arrogant, how can he deal with doubt and deﬁlement [in his mind]?
[Temporal] glory of one’s lifetime is as momentary as a ﬂash of lightning.
Whenever things meet, they [eventually] come to part. It is not worthwhile
to be greedy. People of shallow views are confused on this point. It can be
said that “The scholars of the lowest class, when they hear about the Way,
have a great laugh at it.”260 They can really be said to be people who are confused and do not know how to return [to the right path].
My body is no better than others’ and my talent does not meet the requirements of the world. Therefore, I disﬁgure my humble appearance (i.e., shave
my head) and wear patchwork clothes (Skt. vastraccheda). In reason my
mind has been unable to deeply meet the profound ediﬁcation, but nonetheless
I keep the institution established by the Great Sage for a long time. How
could I give up my original ambition and realize your lofty instruction?
I am growing old with the passing of time and I have not recovered from
illness. You then graciously bestowed on me your brilliant consolation. I
have mingled feelings of appreciation and joy. Oh, our donor (Skt. dānapati)!
Your faith is deep and you serve as one to whom the great Dharma entrusts
itself. How could you cause even a single wound and damage the foundation
[of the great Dharma]? [Your statement] is not the words of Pāpīyas, [the
devil king,] who tried to distract [the Buddha’s determination]. My expression
is poor and I have little knowledge. I did my best to respond to your lofty
order. Now this is simply my intention to not go against [your expectations].

The Letters of Dharma Teacher Sengyan to
Decline the Provincial Governor of Qingzhou
Liu Shanming’s Recommendation for the
Official Appointment of the Cultivated
Talent (Xiucai), together with
Liu Shanming’s Responses

[The Letter of Dharma Teacher Sengyan]
I renounced the world in my youth and separated from secular affairs
from my early years. I enjoy myself with the Buddhist teaching in my mind

168

Fascicle Eleven

and in my determination I have turned my back on the Confucian teaching.
Even though I have not accorded with the place where the Buddhist Way is
practiced I am originally far from the instruction of [Confucius, who was
born near] the Zhu River. I am just now thinking to feed my body to a beast,
hoping to achieve the merit (i.e., the attainment of buddhahood) beyond nine
kalpas,261 and to share my ﬂesh to feed a dove, intending to ride on clouds
[beyond the four seas]. How could I let my wings hang down in the middle
of agricultural land, turn back the path [I have come] toward the place of
conﬁnement, give up the comfort of being in this path, and hold these nuisances of the Imperial court in my arms?
Moreover, ofﬁcials are [selected] based on [their good] ability, and good
talent is certainly necessary for ofﬁcial ranks. There has not been a case
where someone who is favored by an undeserved recommendation can maintain his glory to the end. Therefore, I respectfully return the order to you and
I pray that you will withdraw the excessive favor. Please do not cause me to
make you sigh in lamentation again, just as Lord [Cao, who lamented the
talented people who had declined his rewards], and do not make me feel
ashamed of myself once more, just as Wang Zhou did. The summons for
replacement of the Cultivated Talent is not something for which I am ﬁt.
I, Shi Sengyan, present this.

[Liu Shanming’s] Response to the Buddhist Monk Sengyan
The book Zhuangzi explains that it is a mistake to leave one’s native place
in his youth.262 A Buddhist scripture depicts the confusion of a poor son [who
does not know how to return to his father].263 Every time I read these books
I heave a long sigh.
It is important to respectfully care for our own hair and skin, to become
famous in future history, and to reverently make [the names of our forebears]
well known. I will humbly make [one’s family name] widely known. When
we seek sacred words far away, this teaching (i.e., Buddhism) is superlative.
When I apply the various familiar matters to me, the reality confuses my reason and feeling. If Gautama were to see this he would not oppose [my observations] indeed. Moreover, you possess skill in debating and arguing others
down over triﬂing points and knowledge to penetrate ancient and modern
times. If you tear my cap and do not doubt, or if you pull out my root and

169

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

75c

are not aware of it,264 [beings of] the nether world will be surprised and people
in both distant and near regions will be startled.
In ancient times Lü Shang (i.e., Taigong Wang) held a ﬁshing rod at the
age of eighty and set his mind on ﬁshing. This is because his time had not
yet come. You have not yet come to drown and perish. I simply hope that
you will be able to have as many good points as other people have. If you
do not do so, wouldn’t that be sad?
I am grateful to have been appointed to an ofﬁce in my native place, where
I hope to ﬁnd bright people who live in obscurity. I will recommend them
to the Imperial court. They will certainly put their talents and virtue to the
best use. Therefore I would like to lead those who have not been led and
cause those who have not risen [in the world] to rise. Many of the things you
said in your letter are contradictory to your true intention. If you were to
make an absurd statement would this be what I expect?
Formerly Wang Xiang [of the Jin dynasty] was a woodman at [Lin]yi and,
at the age of sixty, for the ﬁrst time he assented to a provincial order.265 Gongsun Hong [of the Former Han dynasty] pastured pigs on a beach. When he
already had gray hair he was only then recommended to serve in the central
government as a wise man from a local school. He ﬁnally attained the rank
of prime minister, had an audience with the emperor, and improved the situation of the world.266 His way was luxuriant in those days and his reputation
has been transmitted for a long time. What do you think about this? I respectfully declare my true thoughts and feelings. Please reconsider [my request].
I, Liu Jun reply to you.

Sengyan’s Second Letter in Response [to Liu Shanming]
You again gave me a gracious instruction!
An excellent purpose again descended upon me. You give the Zhuangzi
in evidence and invoke a Buddhist scripture. The basis of your theory is bright.
When I wish to yield to the principles [of the Zhuangzi and the Buddhist scripture] and argue with my feelings I merely have no ground. Even though lofty
righteousness appears as a phenomenon and subtle words enter into mind,
things in which my despicable mind persists can be still understood.
The reason is because one who knows people is wise and one who examines oneself is intelligent. I truly feel uneasy if I were to forget my lot and

170

Fascicle Eleven

rush on recklessly. Formerly Wei Zhi complied with an order and had the
humiliation of losing his reputation at last, and Zun Zu was invited for service
because of his ability and in the end he invited disgrace like that of the swan
who tried to perch on a willow branch.267 If I forget my lot and intend to
imitate them (i.e., Wei Zhi and Zun Zu) in order to follow the traces of Wang
[Xiang] and Lü [Shang], I am afraid that I will be like [the carp that failed
to ascend a waterfall and become a dragon,] exposed its gills at Longmen,
and injured its forehead many times. The ability [to steal] is the same crime
as [actually] stealing things. To recommend an incapable person results in
both the recommender and the recommended being simultaneously despised.
Shouldn’t we refrain from this?
Moreover, “They say, ‘It is according to the rules of propriety,’” but this
does not mean only gems and silk by propriety.268 Is the practice ﬁlial piety
limited to maintaining only one’s own skin? Therefore, even if [King Sivi] cut
his own ﬂesh [in order to save a dove], no one jeered at him in former ages,
and even if he had his hair cut he still had the chance to join [the administration
of the state] in the past. This likely means that even if one were to cut off his
own hand, if he preserves the rest of his body perfectly, what he has kept is
great [indeed]. Why is this strange? I pray that you will pardon my foolish persistence and grant a favor to allow me to achieve my humble ambition.
I, Shi Sengyan, present this.

[Liu Shanming’s] Second Response
I received a letter from you again. I see for the ﬁrst time your deep ideas.
Your clear realization can be said [to cause] both sides to look at each other
and smile. You have the knowledge to examine many currents [of teachings]
and the wisdom to embrace the innermost of principles. Every time you
investigate the source of the relationship between [people’s] receptivity and
[the Buddha’s] responsive activity, you look for a theory as thoroughly as if
you were sorting stones. Why don’t you always come to the point in every
sentence and clearly see the foundation of the principles? Furthermore, if
your humility makes you more brilliant, you go against the manner of yielding
a seat to the wise. You are just like someone who follows an overturned
chariot and has no regret about falling in its tracks.269 While it is not difﬁcult
to recognize this, it is not easy to practice it.

171

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

76a

Three years after a person leaves his country he is happy when he sees
someone who looks like a member of his family. Isn’t it sad that he left his
hometown such a long time ago? Today, if you make a vow to let go of the
heavy burden [as a Buddhist monk] from your shoulders and sit idly, you
will feel like giving up being a traveler and returning home. You will ascertain
good aspects of brotherly love and deepen good relations to the nine degrees
of your kin. You will go to the gate of your house joyfully and enjoy great
happiness. Moreover, this is a time when the civilization controls the movements of Heaven, just as when the Duke of Zhou and Lord Zhao mutually
helped in political affairs; thinking of wise people and praising the Way, they
forgot to take a meal until the evening came. If you use your talent, enlarge
your virtue, put on gems, make yourself known at the court, wear a luxurious
robe, and awaken the people of distant areas, then your achievements will
beneﬁt ways of the world and you will become famous after you die. How
is it possible to talk [of such merits] at the same level with the disgrace of
shaving one’s head and the suffering of being a bachelor?
We have worked sedulously in deﬁance of hardships; we have wished for
a long time to train our deep determination. If I hide a wise man like Zhan
Qin [of Lu state], I will be reproached for being as disloyal as Zang [Wen
Zhong].270 Therefore, I have done my best to quickly inscribe this in my mind
and explain it again in my response. I am in the last years of my life; time does
not wait. You should make effort; and do not end up with bitter regrets.
I, Liu Jun, reply to you.

Sengyan’s Third Letter
The issue I wrote about the other day should have somehow caused you
to have fun, and I did not think your favorable purpose was that profound.
I have often received a letter from you. Your kindness to encourage and
instruct me extends this much. Before I humbly read [your letter] completely
I broke into a cold sweat. My despicable determination is unimportant and
was expressed in my previous letter. Moreover, even in the prime of life I
was still not as good as others. Now I have already grown old. How can I
now do something [signiﬁcant]?
If an elderly man commands others and accomplishes tasks, he is given
special powers by the Green God [who takes charge of spring (i.e., rejuvenation)].

172

Fascicle Eleven

Someone who acts for him will fail the task. In assisting an outstanding
person who ascends the throne or helping a leader who overturns a dynasty
in order to establish his own dynasty, if you intend to place the shadow of a
farmer of the east land or an old water-drawer man of the west garden on the
side of the glory of former times and get them involved in following the
tracks of ancient people, then this would be no different from whipping an
old, worn-out horse’s legs in order to make [the horse] equal to Hualiu [which
could gallop a thousand li in one day], or from binding a pheasant of the
marshes in order to make a pair with a phoenix or crane. These are beyond
comparison. Do you need to wait to examine this deeply?
Formerly Zitai (i.e., Tian Chou) obeyed [Liu Yu’s] order and held his principle against Gongsun [Zan].271 Yu [Rang], who lacquered his body, took
revenge upon [Viscount Xiang of Zhao state] on behalf of Zhibo [of Jin state]
and had no regrets about ruining himself.272 My virtue that you excessively
praise today is as good as those of the two wise men. I really regret to say
that my time draws near [to the end just as the sun approaches] Mount Yanzi
[where it sets], and my life [is coming to the end] as quickly as the Meng and
Fan Rivers ﬂow. Swallowing charcoal [as Yu Rang did for revenge] or deserting
to the enemy camp [as Zitai did] are eternally far from my wish. Facing letter
paper, I felt sad. I did not know what to express. I would be happy if you can
stop your excessive favor of me. Please do not write back to me again.
I, Shi Sengyan, present this.

[Liu Shanming’s] Third Response
When you talk about Heaven and Earth your feelings are [as bright as] a
mirror. When you grasp a writing brush and write a letter, your wisdom and
thought enter [the letter] deeply. Nevertheless, you lost the root of reason
when you were young, and now move unsteadily, losing the course when
you have gray hair. I value highly your talent. Therefore I always sigh in
lamentation. Even though your mind is above the clouds your body remains
in a pit in the ground. Since you form a group with titmice I am afraid that
you will lose the beauty of a phoenix (yuezhuo). Therefore I acted in accordance with formal propriety in inviting scholars for service. Compromise
[your integrity] and comply with my recommendation for service in which
we have a relationship between guest and host. You deigned to write to me

173

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

76b

three times and I have replied to you twice. Even if you are modest and ﬁrmly
decline [my recommendation] with the excuse of your old age, I consider
your virtue to be exactly “penetrating (i.e., the assemblage of excellences)”
and great good fortune.273 If you are not able to lessen your determination
you should ﬂy around in the air, choose a perch, rest on a Chinese parasol
tree, and eat bamboo seeds indeed.274 Why is it worthwhile [for you] to
descend for a despicable order and an unimportant summons? I respectfully
defer to your clean breeze and reverently follow what you esteem. From the
beginning our intentions oppose each other. I decided [to give up the recommendation but] I am still ashamed of myself [for this decision] and concerned
for you.
I, Liu Jun, reply to you.
End of Fascicle Eleven of The Collection for the Propagation
and Clariﬁcation [of Buddhism]

174

Fascicle Twelve
[The Collection for] the Propagation and Clariﬁcation [of Buddhism] I have
compiled is a complete collection of discourses to protect the Dharma. Moreover, the reason I have cited written reports and petitions to superiors and
emperors is because the issues are serious.
When I make an inquiry, I see that once śramaṇas renounce the world
they are not bound by worldly dignities and emoluments. Since the time of
the Han and Wei periods successive distinguished sages (i.e., rulers) all
extended their greetings [to śramaṇas] and no ruler requested them to bow
before him. Nevertheless, Lord Yu [Liang of the Eastern Jin dynasty] monopolized power and absurdly gave rise to heterodoxy. Huan [Xuan] doubted
the brilliant [teaching] (i.e., Buddhism) and followed Yu’s groundless views.
If Lord He [Chong] had not said that [śramaṇas should not bow to kings],
the Dharma would have been hidden eternally. If Virtuous Master [Hui]yuan
had not argued about [this issue], practical works of the [Buddhist] sangha
would have suddenly come to an end. When I look at what has happened in
the past and have regrets, why shouldn’t I make a compilation [of discussions]
about [the issue that śramaṇas do not have to bow to kings]?
The section of gu lines (guyao) of the Book of Changes says, “not to serve
either king or feudal lord.”275 The “Chapter on Scholars’ Behaviors” (Ruxing)
of the Book of Rites says, “not to take the high ofﬁce of being a minister of
the son of Heaven.”276 Among the four classes of people (i.e., scholars,
farmers, artisans, and merchants) in the secular world, there are people who
do not bow [to kings], not to speak of those who abandon secular life and
follow the [Buddhist] Way. How can they be adomonished to pay the vassal
homage to kings? [This problem], therefore, does not exist during happy and
bright times, yet frequently emerges in a time of decadence.
Regarding [Dao]heng and [Dao]biao, who declined [Yao] Lüe’s [summons], and Eminent [Hui]yuan, who rejected [Huan] Xuan’s [offer], [the
actions of] all [these monks] were assuredly not to make a display of their
eccentricity but they are adequate to sincerely encourage [other Buddhists].
The Essentials [for Believing in] the Dharma and Sunshine are discourses

175

76c

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

to awaken secular people. The hermits’ three written appeals are also statements made in order to destroy devils.277 Therefore I also include them in
[this work].

Letter Given to Shi Daoan
by Xi Zaochi

On the ﬁfth day of the fourth month of the third year of Xingning (365), I,
Zaochi (or Zuochi), bow my head to the ground and worship (Skt. vandana).
I hear that you, the arhat, follow the right [path], you are smart and cheerful,
your merciful instruction shines upon us equally, and Buddhist clergy and
laypeople are equally indebted to you. Those who believe in emptiness realize
the tenet of impermanence, and those who preserve themselves in the phenomenal world master the expedient of having a transient body. The cool
breeze adorns China. The voice of the fabulous luan bird encourages [people]
all over the world. You have deep taste and a far-seeing plan. What is as glorious as these?
I, your disciple, hear that what causes rainfall throughout the whole world
before the dawn are the clouds that ﬁll the sky, and what spreads from the
source and moistens the universe are the four great rivers. The [clouds] simply
bring rainfall spontaneously and all things in the universe rely on its beneﬁts.
Even though this is originally an unintentional work, lands both high and
low receive moisture. Moreover, [the Buddha,] sympathizing with [all the
sentient beings of] the world, descended to this world and, feeling pity for
the times, was reborn. [All sentient beings] owe their beginning to him. [This
fact] is related with [his activity,] delivering sentient beings [to the yonder
shore]. Clarifying the Way lies in training secular people. [The Buddha] rides
a carriage free from suffering in order to go to an immensely far place. He
has the vehicle of a transient body prepared in order to respond to requests
from the ten directions. Moreover, he is able to obtain enough gems to embellish an entire mountain and enough ice to freeze a whole gorge. Even if [the
Buddha] obtains a view of Mount Langfeng (i.e., the immortals’ abode), he
does not desert the Buddhist rules of conduct. How could he be someone
who rejects this world and would not teach [people] the way to salvation?
Furthermore, it has been more than four hundred years since the great
teaching was transmitted to the East (i.e., China). Among feudal kings and

176

Fascicle Twelve

unemployed scholars there were occasionally those who believed in
[Buddhism], but traditional Chinese teachings were practiced in primeval
times before [the introduction of Buddhism]. Even though reason changed
with the lapse of time, not all people in the secular world were awakened.
Those who took delight in the great wave (i.e., Buddhism) were only scholars
of the lowest class.
Only Emperor Ming, Suzu [of the Eastern Jin dynasty (r. 322–325)], is
truly one upon whom Heaven bestowed virtue. For the ﬁrst time he respected
this Way (i.e., Buddhism). He drew the Tathāgata’s countenance with his
own hands and appreciated the purpose of samādhi by chanting. His practice
in compliance with the precepts he had received was more rigorous than that
of a hermit in a mountain cavern. His profound foundation reaches the state
of nonarising. Since the Great Mass [of Nature] (i.e., Emperor Ming) has
already chanted, just as myriad apertures began howling,278 all wise people
and gentlemen take refuge in the ultimate Way of nature (i.e., Buddhism).
Even though the sun and moon are far away, the light gets brighter. There is
no time when the practice of the [Buddhist] Way ﬂourished more than now.
Isn’t this like “Moonlight Boy (Skt. Candraprabha) will ﬁrst enter the tranquil
state and then be reborn in China”279 or “the mysterious bowl will move to
the east and suddenly produce an effect in this place”?280
In addition, I hear that three thousand monks who attained the Way are
all in Nanyang (present-day Henan province) and the bodhisattva of brilliant
learning (i.e., Daoan, 312–385) expounds words of mystic truth and ediﬁes
them. In the upper level I examine the instructions to attain the stage of a
sage, and in the lower level I survey the effects of Buddhist practice. Who
else but you could uphold all these profound sutras? I cherish the [Buddhist]
Way in my mind and make effort to practice the teaching. Who [except you]
would descend to lodge here? Therefore, all Buddhist monks in this region
admire you wholeheartedly. They rejoice to see the golden-hued auspicious
[image of the Buddha] and wish to hear the supreme admonitions. Both old
and young equally wish for this, and Buddhist clergy and laypeople think in
the same way. Their feelings of deep admiration are not expressed in ordinary
ways. If auspicious clouds move to the east, if a maṇi gem rotates and shines,
if you even once ascend the seat of the seven treasures, if even for a short
time you show the sage’s lamp, if you cause nectar to rain on the grass that

177

77a

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

grows thick, and if you plant sandalwood trees on a riverbank then the Tathāgata’s teaching will again be revered today and the profound waves and outstanding sounds will cleanse this generation once again.
I cannot hesitate any more so I decided to write and convey my thoughts.
How can I fully express what I have harbored in my mind?
I, your disciple Xi Zaochi of Xiangyang, bow with my head to the ground
and worship.

(Yu Chan’s preface to the Hymn for the Hall of Happy Wise People [Lexian
tang song] also says that Emperor Ming, Suzu, was very fond of the Buddhist
Way and copied a wonderful portrait [of the Tathāgata] with his own hands.)

The Letter of the King of [Nan]qiao
to Discuss Confucius
and Śākyamuni281

In Buddhism, in regard to evil acts and meritorious deeds, the relationship
between cause and effect is just like that between [a form] and its shadow
or between a sound and its echo. The sacred words are clear and precise and
cause the people to feel their blood run cold. Nevertheless, from ancient
times—the eras of the Five Thearchs, the Three Augusts, Emperor Wen (of
the Han dynasty), Emperor Wu, the Duke of Zhou, and Confucius—the Regulations (dian), Counsels (mo), Instructions (xun), and Announcements (gao)
have been completely provided. There is, however, nothing that gives a clear
account of the law of the three periods of existence or that clearly describes
reward and retribution. All of the sages [mentioned above] exhaustively
probed the very root of the truth, discerned thoroughly [every] nature, and
clearly understood what cause phenomena. How is it possible to see without
compassion that people are driven into or drowned in [delusion] yet be unwilling to help them, and to have never spoken even a single word to instruct on
the path to the ferry [to enlightenment]?
Furthermore, [Confucius] angled but did not use a net. He shot, but not
at birds perching.282 However, when fattened cows and sheep and plump pigs
are offered, the Supreme Thearch receives them. From this viewpoint, it is
probably difﬁcult to understand [the laws of the three periods of existence
and of reward and retribution]. I hope you will explain the gist [of these concepts] and relieve me of my delusions with clear evidence.
178

Fascicle Twelve

Zhang Xin’an’s
Response

I look again at your profound meaning, which is not a shallow teaching. I humbly
think I am still immature. I bow and offer this insigniﬁcant reply to you.
I personally think that to successfully reach [the Buddhist Way] is achieved
through one’s receptivity [to the Buddha’s responsive activity], and to cross
over to enlightenment is accomplished through availing oneself of [causes
and] conditions. If we are indeed weak in [creating] good causes we will
give rise to delusions as vast as the Milky Way.
From old days, to wait to be questioned is compared to a bell when it is
struck,283 and in order to awaken people we wait for them to be anxious to
explain themselves or eager to get knowledge. One who is awakened to what
is mysterious or who probes into the very root of the truth is a sage or deity
whose light shines throughout the eight directions. He can see the nine
provinces (i.e., China) in an instant. Nevertheless, we live at a time when
the human life span is only a hundred years. If what is profound (i.e., enlightenment) is myriads of kalpas away, isn’t it that the good conditions [for
enlightenment] have not [yet] been established and, accordingly, there is no
truthfulness in the ediﬁcation of karma? Therefore the holy spirits [of Confucianism] did not make the track and nothing regarding this issue was
recorded in the cause of truth. It is impossible to clearly seek for the ultimate
point of reason and indicate the ultimate principle. What is subtle manifests,
gently completes, and secretly moves to a far and high place.
“To be fond of life,” [as is said in the Book of History,] is the origin of
[the law of] the three periods of existence.284 The phrase “to accumulate
wholesomeness” [found in the Book of Changes] follows in the same wake
of [the law of] reward and retribution.285 The fact that [Confucius did not
use] a net [for ﬁshing and did not shoot at perching birds] shows his benevolence. [The expression] “[spring] hunting and [summer] hunting” [found
in the Zuozhuan] propagates honesty.286 Since the people have been gradually
imbued with these teachings and became familiar with them, stinginess and
deﬁlement has lessened day by day. Then the [Buddhist] Way reached the
brilliant Han dynasty. The teaching spread during the Yongping era (58–75).
The people had no doubt [about the teaching] and bowed to it just as grass
sways in the wind. We know precisely that in the age of Fang[xun] (i.e., Yao)
179

77b

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

and [Zhong]hua (i.e., Shun) [Buddhism] was still not clear, and [this teaching]
was not apparent in the time of King Wen and King Xuan [of the Zhou
dynasty]. It is not the case that [Confucianism and Buddhism] take different
paths because their purposes are separate from each other. Presumably their
doctrines are equal, yet both were frustrated.
Who can make a forced interpretation of your deep and profound thought
through a range of careless words? [Probably] I have absurdly made an erroneous statement because I am careless, ambitious, and too hasty.

Letter Given to Meditation Master [Huiyi]
to Discuss the Manner of Eating
while Squatting with Raised Heels
by Zheng Daozi

Sages’ instructions are [intended] to cultivate the basis and remove nonessentials. They establish teachings in accordance with people’s minds and ﬁt [the
teachings] for practical use on the basis of actualities. There has not been [a
teaching] that greatly ediﬁes the people while opposing human nature and
disregarding the human body.
Even though [śramaṇas] appear different from secular people and their
task keeps aloof from the world, regarding the rule of paying respect and the
courtesy of yielding politely, bowing with one’s hands folded in front: these
[actions] come from one’s most sincere heart and there is no difference
between Buddhist clergy and laypeople [in this regard]. Therefore, when
[Buddhist monks] perform puriﬁcation and give a series of lectures, they
prepare the Dharma robe. There is an order in worship and a system in
sequence. When respect ﬁlls one’s mind a person pays respects outwardly.
[The Chinese manner of] bowing with one’s head to the ground [is
approved of, while] the [Buddhist] manner of squatting with raised heels is
not. The [Chinese] manner of pulling the lapels of the garments together,
respectfully saluting, and bowing ten times is not something with which the
easy, informal sitting style practiced by Buddhists is concerned. [Śramaṇas,]
however, consider the manner of eating while squatting with raised heels to
be [advantageous] for mental function, and that abandoning [Chinese] deportment is [advisable] for teaching and leading ordinary people of the secular

180

Fascicle Twelve

world. Here, facts and reason go against each other. I do not see a common
aspect in them.
In the teachings of phenomena, each [teaching] has signiﬁcance. With
regard to the Banzhou [sanmei] (Skt. Pratyutpanna-buddha-saṃmukhāvasthita-samādhi), the body is tormented in order to maintain the [Buddhist]
Way. [A practitioner] dear to the [Buddhist] Way neglects his body. There is
a reason for practicing in this way and a basis for employing [this practice].
In the instruction on the manner of eating while squatting with raised heels,
there is nothing to propagate in reason. Even if we employ [this manner] it
is not [a practice] to torment the body. If we [practice] passively we pass on
contempt to the later world. One who sees the manner but does not reach its
essence loses his feeling to pay respect and expresses surprise and disdain.
Is this the principle that sages establish teachings on the basis of actualities,
and that the ceremonial caps [of the Yin dynasty] were not suitable for the
Yue region [where the people cut their hair and tattooed their bodies, and
therefore they had no use for a cap]?
When we examine from what [these teachings] arise we ﬁnd that some
derive from the characteristics of foreign lands. Some come from remediation
and indicate that there is something from which one is rescued. This is just
as when one suddenly falls ill and takes medication as an emergency measure,
but [the emergency medicine is] not intended to be used for a long time.
[In Buddhism] the form and the teaching ﬁt each other and the actualities
and principles are systematic. [Buddhists] have already set up the system of
the three robes and perform worship. They discipline themselves with the
Dharma drum and line up in accordance with their rank. When they squat
with raised heels in such an environment, how could this be seen as the systematic [manner] and rudeness going against each other? In the past it was
proper and appropriate for the situation. At most it is just a one-day-only
engagement; it cannot be an instruction for a long time. Reason is understandable. Therefore, many people ask about perfect virtue, which is the foundation
to return to propriety.287 Today [śramaṇas] meditate and reform their minds
but they adhere to this custom and never depart from it. This is already insigniﬁcant in reason and poor in function as well. Truly there is something I have
not understood, but I dare not [sufﬁciently] display what I have in my mind.
I, Zheng Jun, bow with my head to the ground.

181

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

Letter Given to Minister of Education and
Cultural Affairs Wang [Hong] and All
Others in Order to Discuss Buddhist
Monks’ Manner of Eating While
Squatting with Raised Heels
by Fan Bolun

77c

I, Fan Tai (i.e., Fan Bolun [355–428]), respectfully address the high-ranking
ofﬁcials and many wise people.
Śramaṇas of today have two different sitting styles, [formal and informal].288 It seems that this was not so at Qiyuan Temple in the past.
Even today foreign languages differ from our language and [the standard]
by which we adapt or reject something differs from theirs, too. Sages establish
laws complying with secular customs and propagate teachings according to
each region. We have not yet changed our language. Why is it necessary to
take the trouble to make our system the same as theirs? Nevertheless, a state
should not have two rulers. How can there be lack of uniformity in one hall?
At the present time, however, each person believes in biased views and
thinks that he himself is correct and [all] others are wrong. No one examines
the [original] intention of making, they only consider that echoing another’s
views is good. There is no master to control this. Consequently, the situation
has led to the present state. One who has no intention to disinterestedly receive
others’ [opinions] employs his mind to adhere to [biased views]. He does
not seek the reality of the ﬁsh and the rabbit and vies with others in attacking
the insigniﬁcance of [using] stakes [to catch ﬁsh] and snares [to catch rabbits].
If this trend is not reformed it will be difﬁcult to attain the Way.
The king of the [bodhi] tree, [Śākyamuni,] attained right, perfect enlightenment in the sixth year [of his cultivation]. For the ﬁrst time he clariﬁed
the profound teaching and personally expounded it while sitting on a raised
seat. All those in the audience sat with crossed legs; they did not adopt the
informal style of squatting with raised heels. Meditation aims at stabilizing
[the mind] and its meaning is not to squat with raised heels and wait for
someone to come. The good point of eating while squatting with raised heels
lies in eating not in order to be sated. This is entirely the easy, informal
method of one country and not the common system of the world.

182

Fascicle Twelve

In addition, there is no decorum for wearing clothes made of hemp rags
in cold rural areas, and there is no rule [that stipulates] wearing a [heavy]
felt garment in sunny southern regions. Based on this, considering the early
time when Great King Yu took off his clothes [to enter the country of the
naked people], we cannot say that they had no [decorum of wearing] ceremonial caps. I beg each of you to give up [your own views] altogether and
entrust the issue to gentlemen who have compromised their views.
I, Fan Tai, am an insigniﬁcant person. I positively hope [that the manner
shown] in today’s dinner gathering is equal. I am uncertain of anything before
and after this. Harmony is valued in [practicing the rules of] propriety.289 The
rules for Buddhist monks esteem equality.
Presently we ascend to the refectory (zhaitang) and face the sacred images,
as if spirits exist in them. As for the eight sages of the four stages of sainthood
[of Hinayana Buddhism], we have no different statement in principle. We
would rather temporarily try to leave behind our ego than be self-conceited.
When Eminent Shi [Daoan] resided in Xiangyang the easy, informal squatting style had already been introduced [into China], but he did not think to
change [the traditional Chinese way]. He must have had his intention for
this. Accordingly, he abandoned his walking stick and rode on the Imperial
carriage.290 The meaning for this lies in that [Daoan acted] in the same way
as did secular people. Recently, in Meditation Master [Buddhabhadra’s]
grand assembly at the [Jiankang] seminary, [Buddhist monks] adopted the
formal sitting posture. Isn’t this because major points are kept and minor
points are omitted, and it is not necessary in reason that [two different ways]
be practiced concurrently?
The formal sitting posture is taken regardless of time but the easy, informal
squatting posture is done at ﬁxed times. If one adopts the formal sitting
posture it is difﬁcult to continually adjust to a different way, but it is easy to
keep the same way when one experiences an unsual event.
Moreover, regarding the issue that a host humbles himself and pays respects
to his guest, there is a reason for this. I have inquired of Eminent [Hui]yi
about this but I have not yet been rewarded with any answer from him at all.
Therefore I respectfully address you, the people who agree with my opinion,
and seek a common opinion. I pray that you will kindly give me a surplus
of coughs and sneezes to cover my weak and cowardly mind.

183

78a

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

Shi Huiyi’s Letter in Response
to Fan Bolun

Fifty [monks], including Shi Huiyi of Qiyuan Temple, respectfully address
all our donors.
In the conventional way of śramaṇas we should precisely abide by the
sutras and Vinaya texts sincerely, and consider faith and obedience [to the
Buddhist teaching] as the foundation. If a śramaṇa intends to act contrary
to sutras and violate Vinaya [texts] and considers his own mind as his teacher
and that he himself is right, such a case is serious trouble for the great Dharma
and the worst in deﬁling the [Buddhist] Way.
In the precepts established by the Tathāgata there are [actions that are]
approved and [actions that are] prohibited. The approved [actions] are namely
those one carries out with no doubt, and the prohibited [actions] are those one
does not venture to violate. [For instance,] a precept prevents śramaṇas from
touching females with their hands and bodies and from being close to them.
[This led to the case that] when all those who observe the precepts met with
an accident in which their own mothers were cast adrift and about to drown
in deep waters, even if they could see [the danger of the women dying] no one
ventured to rescue them [because of the precept against touching females].
Thereupon people of the world said, “Śramaṇas have no mercy. In such a situation, where is the [Buddhist] Way?” So the Tathāgata, [in order to remove]
the ridicule and suspicion of people of the world, initiated a precept to counterbalance this, which allowed [śramaṇas] to rescue [women] from difﬁculties
[even if it means that they have to have contact with a female body].
The precepts established by the Tathāgata are in a uniform system and
we should positively follow them with faith and carry them out. How could
it be allowed that we arbitrarily revise [the precepts] from our own will?
Even scholars of shallow learning esteem to follow faithfully the expression
“the ﬁfth, summer (xia wu)” [found in Zuozhuan], and they dare not add the
Chinese character “month” (yue) to it.291 This is intended to seriously prevent
people from offering far-fetched explanations and to eradicate those who are
fond of new things and pleased with peculiar things. Moreover, the precepts
were instituted by the one who possesses the three transcendental knowledges
(the Buddha). How could we venture to recklessly adjust them [for our convenience]?
184

Fascicle Twelve

You, our donor Fan, intend to cause these monks to change from the easy,
informal [squatting] style to the formal sitting style, in order to seek harmony
without difference. Even if you wish for the beauty of harmony, if you do
not use the [Buddhist] Way to create harmony, this means to exactly seek
unity, not harmony.
From the time monks came to reside at Qiyuan Temple up to the Dharma
assembly [at this time], there have been two groups: those who adopt the
formal sitting style and those who take the easy, informal [squatting] style.
Since there is no testimony in sutras and Vinaya texts [about this matter], it
is no trivial matter if you suddenly intend to change the Buddhist Dharma.
Truly we dare not agree with you.
It has been a long time since the time this temple received the Mahāsāṃghika-vinaya (Mohe sengqi lü). Furthermore in this Vinaya [text] there
are clear descriptions altogether in eight items that stipulate the method of
eating while [squatting] in the easy, informal style. If there was originally
no establishment of eating while squatting in the easy, informal style, then
the full set of two hundred ﬁfty [precepts for bhikṣus] would not exist. The
descriptions include “Food cannot be placed on a bed [that is also used as a
meditation seat],” and “Food you wish to discard should be placed beside
your right foot.” It also says “You cannot squat with your knees apart and
put one calf over the other.” Aren’t these clear testimonies for eating while
squatting in the easy, informal style? Buddhist precepts (Skt. śīla) and the
Vinaya are [the mystical lore of the] śramaṇas. No one except the king can
participate in hearing them.
Today you, our donors, all have doubts about the two sitting styles, the
formal and the informal, and you wish to make [the formal style] ﬂourish
and reject [the informal style]. It is impossible for me to not weigh the signiﬁcance [of these two sitting styles]. I have brieﬂy given several articles in
order to show their basis. I will accept the burden of the sin of announcing
our precepts publicly.
The rise and fall of the Buddhist Dharma depend on all our donors. When
the Buddhist Dharma ﬂourishes we mutually attain the great achievement
of protecting the Dharma, but when it declines we all certainly incur the sin
of the destruction of the Dharma. I pray that you will think of this thrice and
not cause yourselves to have regret in the other world as well as in this world.

185

78b

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

[Fan Bolun’s] Response to
Eminent [Hui]yi

I reply to you.
My previous discussion already included all the statements I will make
here. You, Holy Priest, have a strong will and a brave spirit. [Consequently]
you simply did not seek [to understand my intention].
Precepts are for the prevention of evils. If there is no evil, why would
precepts be necessary? Thus I, an ignorant person, am confused about this.
The precepts alter rules in accordance with customs. In China originally
the informal sitting style, squatting with raised heels, was not practiced. We
follow the rules against collecting the remains and crossing one’s legs. Therefore, [the informal sitting style] can be omitted.
As for the precept regarding eating with the hands, there is no written
instruction for the use of a spoon and chopsticks. Why do you value the
precept for the easy, informal sitting style and slight the precept for eating
with the hands? According to the precepts [monks] cannot bring their hands
close to females, yet subsequently it is allowable for [monks] to rescue their
mothers from drowning [which requires them to touch their mother’s bodies].
This is a case that causes ordinary people to have doubt. As a matter of fact,
this was sufﬁcient cause to revise the precepts established by the Sage.
Increasingly we know that the two hundred and ﬁfty [precepts] are not spontaneous, permanent laws. If this is the case, ﬁrmly observing [the precepts]
does not mean to completely attain all [rules] and it is unworthy to be very
surprised if one takes his own mind as his teacher.
It is not doubtful for us to adhere to the rule for the omission in the phrase
“the ﬁfth, summer.” If clear and prudent views are understandable, how can
you be unsettled in minding other people’s opinions? As for the signiﬁcance
of squatting with raised heels, the intention lies in this posture being suitable
to move forward, but if one wants to act quickly [usually] things cannot be
carried out well. When one [who is familiar with squatting with raised heels]
formally sits up straight, he is uneasy in that posture. Sometimes there is a
haughty person, but this is originally not what decorum allows.
Regarding the two different sitting styles in the same temple hall, your
party is confused and no one seizes the drift [of the questions]. My party is

186

Fascicle Twelve

me alone, without companions. Why do I venture to deal with the great lines
of ﬁfty [monks]? Here I will employ the strategy of “being afraid of an enemy
and keeping silence.” I hope this is the best relief.

Fan Bolun’s Letter Given to
the Two Dharma Teachers
[Zhu Dao]sheng and
[Hui]guan

Foreign customs naturally differ from ours. When Saṃghadeva ﬁrst came
[to China], monks such as [Hui]yi and [Hui]guan all received his favor and
admired him with praise. [What Saṃghadeva brought] was, however, merely
the Hinayana teaching. [Monks] thought that this teaching was the ultimate
doctrine and said that all Mahayana scriptures of nonarising were the writings
of demons. The last time Saṃghadeva expounded Buddhist scriptures he did
not ascend to a raised seat.
Faxian later returned to [China] and the Nirvana Sutra was chanted for
the ﬁrst time. [Monks] then thought that [this scripture] consists of words of
eternality and the best of various doctrines, and that the ultimate fundamentals
of the transcendental wisdom entirely derive from this.
Inferring from this, [monks] have no subjectivity within themselves and
when they hear [something new] they always change [their thinking]. If we
compare this to shooting [in competition], the shooter who shot last was
defeated and divests the shooter who shot ﬁrst of the point. So we see that
foreign precepts are not ﬁxed laws.
[Monks of] the school that adopts the informal sitting style have no time
to sit in the formal style. When they expound the Dharma on a raised seat
they sit in the style of squatting with raised heels. The hands are mostly used
in the foreign manner of eating. In the precepts there is no mention of using
a spoon and chopsticks. Huiyi’s group of monks is aware of this but they
have never converted [to the practice of using their hands to eat]. Regarding
the informal sitting style, [however,] they have practiced this style for a long
time and feel no shame in being in conformity with it. They contradict themselves. Who can understand this [contradiction]?
I, your disciple, always think that making a mistake along with others is
wiser than being proud of my own [view]. To infer my mind and be delighted

187

78c

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

with aligning myself with others is not to venture to allow myself to seek
straightness. Today’s laypeople who revere the Dharma should never wear
foreign clothes. Why do śramaṇas seem to have a hard time in keeping the
rule of the informal sitting style?

Petitions Presented to the Throne to
Discuss the Manner of Eating while
Squatting with Raised Heels
by Fan Bolun

[First Petition]
I, your subject, speak.
Your Majesty (i.e., Emperor Wen, r. 424–453) acquires mastery of the
Buddhist doctrines and you are about to attain its highest perfection. With
your lofty aspiration you anticipate what is far-reaching. You examine the
essentials and go into details. I, however, regret that you do not enlighten me
as much as you did in former days, and it is not easy for me to respond to you
and enhance [Buddhism].
I have had faith in the great Dharma since the time I was young. I have
accumulated the practices for wholesome nature. I often hear additional discussions [of Buddhism] and somewhat understand the profound foundation
of the teaching. I formerly attended near the Imperial Throne and received
unmerited favor and guidance from you. My thoughts are vulgar and I am
slow of speech. So I could not help you understand issues that I tried to
convey. My regret for this will not come to an end in my lifetime.
I recently criticized Huiyi’s assertion of eating while squatting with raised
heels. This is because of my trivial thought to keep in perfect step [with
others]; it is not because I dare seek to be better than others. I strained my
ears in a lower seat and heard that [my criticism about eating while squatting
with raised heels] had already reached your ears.
I ask you to understand that this matter is a local manner of one country, and
not a universal, eternal system. Foreign customs are not the same as ours and
[foreign] languages differ from ours as well. Sages do not change their language.
Why must only [Chinese monks] trouble themselves to change their actions?
Language is a means to express one’s thoughts. When a thought has been
conveyed the language [used to express it] is forgotten. Deportment is a

188

Fascicle Twelve

means to keep respect. Once respect has been established, the form [of one’s
deportment] is discontinued. Therefore, sages establish the precepts in light
of actualities and change laws in accordance with customs. When one reaches
the Way it can be all right if he follows no regulation. I think that if preventive
measures become more numerous, to decide what to adopt and what to reject
depends on the current of the times, and to judge what to continue and what
to stop is simply up to reason. Isn’t it despicable [to stick to a ﬁxed idea, just
like] gluing the bridges [on a Chinese large harp], or waiting by a stump
[hoping that other hares will come by that spot because a hare was once
caught there]?
Śramaṇas of today guide people skillfully but they do not have a vital
point to their way. Each of them believes in his own views. Few monks can
accept another’s views without bias. Consequently, they vie with their fellow
monks from the same temple hall in asserting peculiar views and they do not
harmonize with the peaceful world. I personally feel ashamed of this; how
much more so do your other subjects who are more talented than I am?
Minister of Education and Cultural Affairs [Wang Hong (379–432)], who
is knowledgeable and whose realization is justiﬁed, does not consider my
assertion wrong. The celebrated people of the present day do not have much
sincere faith in the [Buddhist] Way. They have decided nothing beforehand
in their intentions. So they consider following both styles [of sitting] to be
good and remaining unsettled to be great. If we set up the system according
to this, would [the muddy water of] the Yellow River become clear?
Huiyan and Daosheng (355–434) originally did not squat with raised heels.
Huiguan appears to regret his initial standpoint [on this]. I humbly think that
you, Your Majesty, have already made up your mind. At present I do not hope
that you will issue an Imperial decree alone. However, if you give the gist of
the Imperial decree to a prime minister, the people below him will see this
and be educated. Who can say that he will not consent to this?
The august virtue of Your Majesty is about to reach remote areas. Writing
systems and the width of cart axles will be standardized. No matter how
trivial such minor differences may seem, they should not be allowed to continually increase. If we do not cut the fresh green plants now, we will have
to look for an ax later. Therefore it is proper to cause no one, from the people
close to you to those who are far from you, to think of disobeying you.

189

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

79a

When [the Jin dynasty] was restored in the Jiangzuo area (i.e., Jiangsu
province), [Śrīmitra, the Buddhist monk who expounded while sitting on] a
raised seat, came [to the capital]. He loved China and enjoyed his stay. He
did not say anything about this system (i.e., eating while squatting with raised
heels). Eminent Shi [Daoan] had the most sincere faith in Buddhism; he did
not suffer from the restriction [of eating while squatting with raised heels].
He knew of this style of eating yet he did not adopt it. It seems that he had a
reason for this. Kumārajīva was excellent, unrestricted, and immeasurably
[great]. He took the tonsure, but neither did he sit in the easy, informal style
nor eat while squatting with raised heels. Facts like these should also be taken
into account. When Meditation Master [Buddhabhadra] came to [Chang’an]
for the ﬁrst time, he visited the imperial palace and asked for an audience
with the emperor. He wanted to go into [the palace] with his meditation couch
and squat with raised heels. This was unacceptable in principle. Consequently,
he was not permitted to visit [the imperial palace]. Later, when monks gathered
at Dong’an Temple they surely did not eat while sitting in the informal style.
These are past events of former dynasties that I personally observed.
Humbly, yours.

[Second Petition]
I, your subject, speak.
Your Majesty, you recently made an Imperial visit to Qiyuan Temple,
where I insistently begged you for a eulogy to be inscribed on a monument.
I recall that it seemed to me that you had approved this. So soon after the
Imperial carriage returned [to the palace], paying reverence to you I precisely
engraved the three Chinese characters huang, di, and zan (i.e., the emperor’s
eulogy) on the monument. I will submissively accept a demerit for my arbitrary action. As for registering merit in the other world, I do not know how
to cultivate for salvation. If you bestow on me your writing of several Chinese
characters, I will die but my body will suffer no decay. With [your eulogy],
social mores will be greatly encouraged. There will be beneﬁts and no loss.
If you do not have time to do this because of your heavy workload, please
let your intention be known to your subjects who can assist you with this.
How could your vassal, the Left Scribe or the Imperial Guard, not have the
utmost sincerity to render service? Why then are the cases of Pi Chen, [who

190

Fascicle Twleve

made the rough draught of governmental notiﬁcations,] and Shi Shu, [who
examined and discussed its contents,] examples of remote ages?292 We should
not trouble your mind. This is also the intention of high ministers who wear
the ceremonial cap.
I left the service a long time ago and my days are drawing to a close. My
only petty concerns are in regard to my next existence. I receive deep and
signiﬁcant favor from you, as well as a generous salary. When I think of
myself, I have in the end no requital of your kindness to the world over which
you rule. I bow with my head to the ground, and with sincerity [equal to that
of the spirit of the person who] tied grass [in order to help Wei Ke in repayment
of his kindness],293 I pray that Your Majesty will take pity on me and will
not blame me for my statement.

[Imperial Decree in Response
to Fan Bolun]

The Imperial decree is here given.
I know that you have debated with Huiyi regarding the manner of eating
while squatting with raised heels. Recently I further heard a rough outline
of your opinion, which does not differ from the purpose of your report. I,
however, have not read Buddhist scriptures. There is simply no way to manage
this issue with my views. I have no idea what Huiyan thinks. Daosheng is
far apart from agreeing with [Huiyi]. Huiguan appears unwilling to repent
of his original standpoint [and amend his ways]. Can you yourself seek a
point of agreement with all Buddhist monks these days?
As for the eulogy for the monument at Qiyuan Temple, I do not recall
giving you permission. Since [making eulogies] is not something I have
learned and, in addition I have no time to do so, I am unable to grant your
request. I am terribly sorry about this.

[Third Petition]
I, your subject, speak.
I received with respect the brilliant Imperial decree, for which I am very
much obliged to you. It is unworthy to relate my narrow and biased view,
but since it has already reached you I would rather not keep silent. In the
Imperial decree of today you order me to further seek a point of agreement

191

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

79b

[with all monks]. Here, following my wild impulse, I will explicate a longcherished thought. I think that wherever principles exist it is fortunately possible to not harm an intention by a composition.
None of the Five Thearchs followed the ceremonies of his predecessor,
and none of the Three Kings adopted the music of his predecessor.294 In
reforming the world with the mandate of Heaven and following the current
of the times, the signiﬁcance is completely great. Zhuangzi compared ancient
times and the present time to a boat and a carriage.295 Mencius thought that
it would be better to be without books than to believe in them exclusively.296
Therefore, [the son who] testiﬁed [that his father had stolen] a sheep is not
upright.297 I have heard that employing these two ways causes the Great Way
to be pursued and the whole world to become one family.
My case is a triﬂing matter, simply the uniﬁcation of the system in one
temple hall. Moreover, [eating while squatting with raised heels] is a foreign
custom and a local system; it is originally not a reasonable teaching. [Hui]yi,
[Dao]sheng, and [Hui]guan attained favor and broadly make contact with
the Imperial will. If they have questions to ask me, I hope that I will respond
to them through relying on principles. [I also wish that] they dare not advance
themselves by trusting merely in numbers in order to outdo the other party.
The answers Huiguan gave me all lack a reasonable basis. He only praised
me excessively and disparaged me as having a thousand faults. Inferring
from this, I doubt if he is truly remorseful. He has not yet returned to wholesomeness and expressed words of submission. Your vassal, [Wang] Hong,
also says that my assertion is correct. The lines of Huiyi’s great troops have
already collapsed and the paths to ﬂee in retreat and hide are closed. He relies
on this [monk] (i.e., Huiguan) to rescue them but it is difﬁcult for him to
escape from there. Moreover, the virtuous person who is in charge of the
tallies is above them.298 Even if he explains everything away, he will know
that he has gotten into a scrape. I recently criticized Huiguan. I then submitted
a petition to the Throne again and gave evidence [for my assertion].
I am silly and petty. Though I have tried to be intelligent I have reached
an extremely old age [without achieving this]. Not only are my words unsuitable but I fear deeply that I am not aware of my own confusion. The Imperial
Guard retainers are really in high repute of the day, but they will not be able

192

Fascicle Twelve

to sympathize with my inclination and admonish my incompetent points,
either. These are all my faults that I invited onto myself.
I humbly pray that Your Majesty will accept my earnest sincerity and not
consider my poor knowledge to be a fault and become disgusted by my rudeness. I personally rely on my old age which, as the classic states, is not subject
to punishment.299

Report to the Throne Regarding the
Issue that Śramaṇas Should Not Bow [to
the King] by Director of the Imperial
Secretariat He Chong

[Preface]
In the sixth year of Xiankang of the Jin dynasty (340), Emperor Cheng
(321–342) was still young and Yu Bing assisted him in political affairs. [Yu
Bing] said that śramaṇas should bow to the king. Ofﬁcials such as Director
of the Imperial Secretariat He Chong said that śramaṇas do not have to do
so, and ordered the ofﬁcials of the Chamberlain for Ceremonials to debate
[the subject] at length. The opinion of the Erudite [of the Chamberlain for
Ceremonials] was the same as [He] Chong’s, but the Chancellery supported
[Yu] Bing and refuted [He Chong’s view]. [Therefore,] ofﬁcials such as
Director of the Imperial Secretariat He Chong, Chief Administrators Chu
She and Zhuge Hui,300 and Feng Huai and Xie Guang of the Imperial Secretary
made a report [to the Throne] that śramaṇas do not have to bow [to the king].

[Report to the Throne]
We, [He] Chong (292–346), Director of the Imperial Secretariat, Army Commander, General of the Paciﬁcation Army, and Chief Township Marquis; [Chu]
She, Cavalier Attendant-in-Ordinary, Left Supervisor, and Count of Changping;
[Zhuge] Hui, Cavalier Attendant-in-Ordinary, Right Supervisor, and Count of
Jian’an; [Feng] Huai, Imperial Secretary and Marquis of Guanzhong; and [Xie]
Guang, Probationary, Imperial Secretary, and Viscount of Chang’an, speak.
Shizu, Emperor Wu, reformed the world with the mandate of Heaven [and
established the Jin dynasty] with his abundant intelligence. Suzu, Emperor
Ming, who was quick in apprehension and of far-reaching intelligence, viewed
everything with a tranquil mind. Wouldn’t it have been easy for the śramaṇas

193

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

of their days to kneel [and bow to them]? [Both emperors,] however, regarded
the permanence of the [śramaṇas’] way of doing good acts (i.e., not bowing
to the king) to be a reason to facilitate the determination [of the people] of
the world. We humbly think that you should follow the historical example
of these preceding emperors, which is excellent in reason.

The Imperial Decree on Behalf of Emperor
Cheng of the Jin Dynasty Composed by
Yu Bing, Who Admonishes the Purport
[of the Report] Again and Thinks that
Śramaṇas Should Bow to the King

79c

All nations have different customs and the Way of the Spirit is difﬁcult to
discern. These facts are based in what they derive from. If we take a philosophic view of the object and closely understand it, there is really nothing
strange, not to mention the [issue of] saluting in the kneeling-to-worship
style. Why must anyone feel strange about this practice? We should trace
back to the original intention with which the preceding emperors esteemed
it. Were they simply fond of this style of bending one’s body and from their
seats meeting people circumambulating them [when they withdraw]? Certainly
this was not the case. Based on the respect between father and son, the order
between the king and his vassals was established, laws and institutions were
set up, and considerate treatment was honored. How can these be done meaninglessly? There is a deep reason. Since there is a reason, why must we
change it? If this is the case, when the teaching on morality and ethics (i.e.,
Confucianism) and the framing of ceremonies were established, was there
no reasoning behind them?
Moreover, does the Buddha exist, or not, as a matter of fact? If the Buddha
exists, his Way is assuredly magnanimous. If there is no Buddha, what signiﬁcance can we obtain [from kneeling to worship]? Following [his Way]
and believing that it is right is a matter for Buddhist monks. How could a
matter for Buddhist monks become something that people of the secular
world have to carry out? [Buddhist monks], however, deform their physical
appearance, avoid ordinary duties, change the statutes of ceremonies, and
reject the teaching on morality and ethics (i.e., Confucianism). This is something by which I am surprised.

194

Fascicle Twelve

The teaching on morality and ethics has a long history. It is not discontinued
no matter how many generations pass. [The inscription on the tripod of Chan
says,] “You may get up early in the morning and [study to] become greatly
distinguished, but in future generations [your descendants] will still become
idle.”301 Regarding the bad aspect that [one’s descendents] will become idle,
it is difﬁcult to discern the cause. If today we adore something that is far
away and uncertain, rely on something faint and undistinguished, reject our
proprieties suddenly, and discontinue the teachings of the present age, we
will cause ordinary people to haughtily go against the constitution. This is
also something by which I am surprised.
Even if [the Buddhist Way] is truly so [great], and even if [the Buddha]
actually exists, I will understand these issues with my intelligence and keep
them in mind. Rules, laws, and magniﬁcent models should assuredly not be
discontinued in the Imperial court. All these kinds of people (i.e., Buddhist
monks) are the nation of the Jin dynasty. Speaking of their intelligence, they
are only ordinary people, too. Nevertheless, because what they assert is difﬁcult to argue against, they avail themselves of outrageous costumes and
accessories, set up haughty decorum based on strange customs, and do not
bow down even before the emperor who commands ten thousand chariots.
This is again something I cannot accept.
You, gentlemen, are all people of talent of our country. When you hear
reasonable words you will survey what is obscure. When you speak of governing the nation you must honor national laws. If you do not do so, of what
shall I give an account?

Second Report to the Throne by Director
of the Imperial Secretariat He Chong
and Officials such as Chu She,
Zhuge Hui, Feng Huai,
and Xie Guang

We, [He] Chong, Director of the Imperial Secretariat, Army Commander,
General of the Paciﬁcation Army, and Chief Township Marquis; [Chu] She,
Cavalier Attendant-in-Ordinary, Left Supervisor, and Count of Changping;
[Zhuge] Hui, Cavalier Attendant-in-Ordinary, Right Supervisor, and Count
of Jian’an; [Feng] Huai, Imperial Secretary and Marquis of Guanzhong; and

195

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

80a

[Xie] Guang, Probationary, Imperial Secretary, and Viscount of Chang’an,
speak.
The Imperial decree is just as found above.
We are ignorant and witless. We do not deserve to glorify the Imperial
will and to propagate the great righteousness. We humbly examined the brilliant Imperial decree. We now tremble in fear and confusion.
Together we all promptly inquired into the details. The issue of whether
or not the Buddha exists is assuredly not something we can determine. Nevertheless, when we look into the scriptures that have been left to us and intensively study their essential points, [we ﬁnd that] the prescription of the ﬁve
precepts truly helps the king’s ediﬁcation for the people. [Buddhists] despise
actions that are taken obviously to seek fame, and they value the imperceptible
secret ﬁdelity. To practice virtue lies in forgetting oneself. To stick to one
principle (baoyi) is the purity and wondrousness of the mind. Moreover,
from the time of the Han dynasty [when Buddhism was] introduced [to China]
up to the present day, even though the Dharma has risen and fallen there has
not been any harm of weirdness and absurdity. The Way of the Spirit (i.e.,
Buddhism) has prevailed for a long time. There is no other case like this.
One who curses has loss, and one who prays must gain beneﬁt. From the
bottom of our hearts we truly wish that [Buddhist monks’ prayers, which
are] as insigniﬁcant as dust and dew, will increase [Your Majesty’s] benefaction, which is as lofty as Mount Song and Mount Tai, and that their unimportant prayers will enable [Your Majesty] to manage the most important
rules to govern the world. [Nevertheless,] if you even once order [monks]
to bow to you, you will consequently destroy the Dharma and cause the
custom of cultivating wholesomeness to be discontinued in your holy world.
If an [obsolete] custom becomes a common practice, an unhappy and fearful
situation will certainly occur. We are concerned about these things and our
minds quietly grow uneasy.
Even though we are ignorant, how could we dare confuse and misguide
Your Majesty’s ears with our biased views? We simply think that [Buddhism]
has prevailed through the three dynasties (i.e., Han, Wei, and Jin) and that
intelligent and enlightened rulers have appeared one after another. Presently,
even if we do not create a new law [mandating that śramaṇas must bow to
the king], there will be no shortage of the king’s law, and it is possible that

196

Fascicle Twelve

there would be no hindrance of the rules of the other world. For these reasons,
we again express our sincerity. We beg you to graciously examine this.
Humbly yours.

Emperor Cheng’s Second
Imperial Decree

I examined the report in which you fully explained your situation and intention.
The issue of the other world truly cannot be completely explained with allegories. The general idea [of the Buddhist netherworld] is, however, simply
that conventional rules between human beings and spirits are overstated and
classiﬁed examples are brieﬂy added to them.
In all cases, when various kings institute laws, even though they emphasize
substance or rhetorical embellishments that follow the tendency of the times,
it is unprecedented for foreign customs to be mingled with political affairs,
and for weird and absurd stories to be mixed into the ediﬁcation. Is it because
the sages of former times were not intelligent but sages of the later age are
knowledgeable?
Moreover, the minor good conduct outlined in the ﬁve precepts was roughly
drawn up and modeled after the [ﬁve] principles of human relationships [of
Confucianism]. Nevertheless, do [Buddhist monks] omit [all practices of]
decorum and homage for the ruler of the times? Decorum is important and
paying homage is signiﬁcant. The general rules of government administration
reach an extreme at this point. The emperor who commands ten thousand
chariots is superior not from [his own] choice, and the people of his territory
are his inferiors not by [their own] preference. Nevertheless, even if the difference between superiors and inferiors is not arranged, the king’s teaching
must be uniﬁed. If there are two [paths] in the king’s teaching the world
becomes disordered. This is why the sage kings of former times established
constitutions, and those who assume the responsibility of governing the country should not be misled.
People of all-around talent extensively collect [knowledge] and they often
study the principles [of Buddhism]. They may cultivate themselves [in
Buddhism] in private but not on the level of the nation and the Imperial court.
Wouldn’t this [therefore] mean to stay away from [Buddhism]? I examined
your statement. Sure enough, you have not been able to determine whether

197

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

or not [the Buddha] exists. Even if you know [that the Buddha exists], I still
say that [Buddhism] cannot be a part of state affairs, not to mention the case
of [the Buddha] not existing at all. Should we allow both [Chinese and
Buddhist decorum] to be practiced?

Third Report to the Throne Regarding the
Issue that [Śramaṇas] Should Not Bow [to
the King] by Officials such as Director
of the Imperial Secretariat He Chong
and [Left] Supervisor Chu She

80b

Even though we are quite ignorant and do not thoroughly understand your
profound intention, regarding the thought to follow assiduously, day and
night, your virtue and magnanimity, how could we hold fast to narrow biased
views and throw important [human] relations into disorder? Simply, from
the time of the Han and Wei dynasties up to the time of the Jin dynasty, we
have not heard that there were objections [to Buddhist monks’ decorum] and
there was no case in which the statutes of superior and inferior were damaged
even for a short time.
Today śramaṇas are earnestly prudent in observing the precepts and they
exercise decorum. This is simply the same as [our exercising Chinese decorum]. Regarding those who seriously observe the precepts, they do not spare
even their own lives. How could they then dare neglect decorum and homage
in order to be particular about [bowing] their bodies?
Every time we see [Buddhist monks] burn incense and pray, they assuredly
ﬁrst offer prayers for the country and wish for the prosperity [of the country]
with divine help. Their [earnest] feelings are boundless. They spontaneously
admire the king and honor obedience. The simplicity of their decorum is
probably because they concentrate their attention on abiding by the Dharma.
Therefore, in ancient times the former sage kings followed [the śramaṇas]
and did not change [their decorum].
“The meshes of the heavenly net are large, far apart, yet they let nothing
escape.”302 We consider with reverence that even if we do not have [śramaṇas]
bow [to the king], no damage is done to the laws of the land. If we favor
people according to what beneﬁts them, and if we cause none among the
wise and the ignorant to dare not exert his mind, then what we have above

198

Fascicle Twelve

will be an extensive government, just as “Heaven overspreads all and Earth
supports all,”303 and what we have below will be people who preserve one
principle and cultivate wholesomeness.
We have sincerely restated our fatuous and shallow [views]. We pray that
you will graciously examine [our report].
Sincerely yours.

[Epilogue]

At this time, Yu Bing’s opinion [that śramaṇas should bow to the king] came
to an end and [the requirement that śramaṇas’] must bow [to the king] was
not applied after all.

Letter Given to the Eight Executives
to Discuss Buddhist Monks’ Bowing
[to the King] by Huan Xuan

I, Xuan, bow twice and speak. I bow with my head to the ground.
The eighth day of the month is approaching.
Formerly śramaṇas did not bow to kings at all. Even though He [Chong]
and Yu [Bing] have already debated this matter and both presented their opinions, neither of them submitted to the other logically. Yu [Bing’s] intention
lies in respecting the ruler, but he has not completely established the basis
of his reason. Because of his strong inclination toward faith [in Buddhism],
He [Chong] consequently lost the essence of his name.304
Even though the Buddha’s ediﬁcation is endlessly vast and infers the
world beyond the visual and aural senses, respect is considered to be its foundation. On this point, there is no difference between [Buddhist] clergy and
laypeople. I assume that what they aspire for may differ but this does not
mean that respect should be abolished.
In the Laozi [Dao de jing], princes are considered equal to the three great
elements: [Heaven, Earth, and the Way]. When [we examine] why they are
considered to be so important, [we ﬁnd that the reason] lies entirely in that
they support [all things] to grow and [the heavenly bodies] to move smoothly.
[Otherwise,] how could they be referred to as equal to the two polarities,
[Heaven and Earth], only for the reason that sages occupy the throne? [As
the Book of Changes says,] “The great virtue of Heaven and Earth is called

199

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

life.” [The virtue] to make life all over the country and arrange all things lies
in sovereigns. Therefore, we respect the throne and we are gloriously courteous
to it. How could we vainly revere and value them? The signiﬁcance is simply
in the fact that sovereigns control [all things].
The reason śramaṇas are born in succession and live with support is also
that they are every day under government ordinances [made by sovereigns].
How could it be that [śramaṇas] enjoy the virtue [given by sovereigns] and
abandon courtesy [toward the sovereigns], or beneﬁt from [sovereigns’] kindness but reject [the propriety of] paying respect to them?305 Inasmuch as this
is not allowed in reason, neither is it tolerable in sentiment. For such a serious
matter to our generation, we must together seek an appropriate idea. Moreover,
we should thoroughly study this in a body. You should have a complete conclusion by this coming eighth day of the month.
I, Huan Xuan, bow twice, and bow down with my head to the ground.

The Eight Executives’
Response

(This piece of writing came from a historical fact.)

80c

We, Huan Qian, General of the Capital Army, Director of the Imperial Secretariat, and Dynasty-founding Marquis of Yiyang, and others, fearing the
death penalty, respectfully received your instruction to require śramaṇas to
bow to the king. [You say that] even though He [Chong] and Yu [Bing] have
debated [this matter] the issue has not been completely examined and, since
this is a serious matter, an appropriate conclusion should be made. Everything
is truly as you have said.
Nevertheless, the Buddhist Dharma and the teaching of Laozi and Confucius are separate from each other in tenor and entirely go against each
other in terms of ethical education. [Chinese] people consider their hair and
skin to be valuable, while [Buddhist monks] do not question shaving off
their hair. [Buddhist monks] renounce the world, abandon their parents, and
do not think that being respectfully attentive to their parents is ﬁlial piety.
They view their bodies [as being as insigniﬁcant as] a clod of dirt or a piece
of wood; they cut off desires and stop competing. They do not expect anything in this existence and seek for bliss beyond myriads of kalpas. They
keep away from all the things that are considered honorable in the secular

200

Fascicle Twelve

world, and in their intention they completely cut off what is valued in ethical
education. “The service due to a father is employed in serving a ruler.”306
[This phrase shows that] the relationship with one’s blood relatives is considered to be the most important [in ethical education]. [Buddhist monks,
however,] leave behind even love for their relatives. How would it be possible
that they would bow to the emperor who commands ten thousand chariots?
Taking the tide as it comes, they naturally cope with discontinuing [the
requirement to bow to the king].
Through the three dynasties (Han, Wei, and Jin) we have allowed [Buddhism]
to take its own course. This is because [the people thought that] spirits have
no set rules, and so they also did not control [what Buddhist monks do]. In the
world that is beyond the visual and aural senses there is probably a separate
reason. Even if today we require śramaṇas to bow [to the king], we fear that
we have to change many things [related to this]; the issue is not only about
bowing [to the king] with one’s head to the ground and then standing up.
Furthermore, the fact that the king deferentially follows the Dharma is
due to his own respect [for Buddhism]. It is incomprehensible that he would
believe in Buddhist doctrines yet want to change [Buddhist] deportment.
To conform [to the present situation] and allow śramaṇas to be as they are
is the magniﬁcence of “letting the people act freely and exercising forbearance.”307 Secretariat Director Wang [Mi] responded to your criticism separately.
Zhang Chang of Confucius’ kingdom is over there; I think you have already
inquired of his [group] face-to-face what they have in mind.308 All Buddhist
monks, including Daobao, deserve to requite your lofty purpose. We do not
know Buddhist doctrines. We have written here in accordance with what we
feel. We are ashamed that our statement is unworthy for you to read.
We, [Huan] Qian and others, are afraid of being sentenced with the death
penalty.

Letter Given to Secretariat Director
Wang [Mi] to Discuss the Issue that
Buddhist Monks Should Bow
to the King by Huan Xuan

Śramaṇas reject bowing to the Most August. I feel that this is an awkward
situation and a matter of grave concern of our generation. We should discuss

201

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

this fully together. I have already sent my letter to the Eight Executives in
the capital. Today I give this letter to you. You are the one who is capable of
managing this matter. I look forward to hearing your virtuous opinion.

Letter in Response to Huan
[Xuan] by Secretariat
Director Wang [Mi]

81a

Wang Mi, General of the Palace Guard, Minister of the Ministry of Personnel,
Secretariat Director, and Baron of Wugang, fearing the death penalty, respectfully received your instruction, which refers to the fact that Buddhist monks
reject bowing to the Most August. I read your letter, which was given to the
Eight Executives at the same time.
I fully understand your lofty purpose. Both the expression and principle
of your patient assertion are of the utmost. Recently I brieﬂy heard the impartial way but I have not yet completely investigated the issue. I examined the
two purposes of He [Chong] and Yu [Bing]. I also regret that they have not
fully [discussed the issue]. I think that these two [gentlemen’s] debate has
faltered in biased views. They have not pressed the point to make it clearly
understandable. This is truly as you have pointed out.
The Buddhist Dharma arose in and came from India. Its foundation is
deep and it is difﬁcult to express in words. Since [some aspects of the foundation] became doctrines, we can roughly speak of it.
I think that every place has its unique customs. Although what the people
are content with varies in each place, as far as the principles by which their
ruler reigns over the people are concerned, it is hardly possible that nothing
is the same.
Today, even though śramaṇas are deeply respectful [to the king] in their
minds, they do not consider bending their bodies [to bow down] to be a courtesy.
[Monks] are those whose footprints ﬁll this land and yet whose interest goes
beyond the boundaries of this world. Therefore, every king of a foreign country
humbly shows courtesy to them. This is really to value that the Way exists, not
merely to weigh the importance on account of a [particular] individual.
I think that it has been really a long time since the great Dharma began to
be circulated [in China]. It has been more than four hundred years and three
dynasties have elapsed. Even though our customs have changed and government

202

Fascicle Twelve

has shifted, there is no change in the fact that [the great Dharma] is propagated.
Wouldn’t this be because the teaching of splendid isolation is beneﬁcial for
edifying the people little by little in daily life, and the clean and simple style
[of Buddhism] does no harm to worldly prosperity and peace? Therefore kings
behave themselves prudently and do not feel sad about having fewer households
(i.e., taxpayers) [because Buddhist monks are exempt from taxation]. Śramaṇas
protect the truth and make no question of going against worldly affairs.
I heard that you said, “[The virtue] to make life all over the country and
arrange all things lies in sovereigns.” When I examine what it is to which
all principles return, it is really just as you have argued. I read your virtuous
letter three times and still cannot stop rereading it. Even though I wish to
respectfully reply to you, I have no words. I still think that one whose achievement is lofty is not rewarded, and one whose benevolence is deep is not given
grateful acknowledgement. Even if [śramaṇas] were to bow to [the king],
would this be enough for them to respond to the kindness with which he aids
and leads them?
With favorable consideration you did not forget me and asked me for my
vulgar opinion. I have arbitrarily and frankly expressed my foolish views. I
would simply not like to cause you to detest what I have reported. I pray that
you will not reject my words merely because they are from me. At the moment
I ﬁnished my statement, I felt restless.
I, [Wang] Mi, am afraid of the death penalty.

Criticism [to Wang Mi]
by Huan [Xuan]

You wrote in your letter, “Even though śramaṇas are deeply respectful [to
the king] in their minds, they do not consider bending their bodies [to bow
down] to be a courtesy.”
I criticize this, saying, “Regarding śramaṇas’ reverence, how could they
all neglect it in their outward form and keep it only in their minds? When
they repent and worship, they do so in a serious [manner]. Here, in regard
to this matter (i.e., extending one’s greeting), monks—from a teacher (Skt.
śāstṛ) up to a senior priest who supervises the ceremonies and services of a
temple—all [pay respect]. There is only a minor difference in their system
from that of people in general who bow with their hands folded in front while

203

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

81b

kneeling. Since they cannot forget the form [they follow] over there, why
then do they disregard the style of deportment here?
“Moreover, [in Buddhism], regarding the reason to become a teacher, they
consider awakening through helping others to be virtuous. The way of the ruler
is to make life possible throughout the country. Therefore, this principle should
lie at the foundation. How could the meaning of the three most revered people
(ruler, father, and teacher) not be the very pinnacle of reason and feeling?”
You wrote in your letter, “[Therefore,] every king of a foreign country
humbly shows courtesy to [Buddhist monks]. This is really to value that the
Way exists, not merely to weigh the importance on account of a [particular]
individual.”
I criticize this, saying, “It is not appropriate to compare [our king] to those
of foreign countries. In [the place] Buddhism originated we can see its tenor.
Isn't it the case that since the six barbarian tribes are disobedient and strong
and cannot be educated by normal teachings, therefore, by the great establishment of a mysterious and strange [teaching, the Buddha] aroused awe
and they then submitted [to the teaching]? Having already aroused awe in
them and gained their submission, the Buddha later caused them to follow
the rules. This is probably based on the fact that [the barbarians] were basically
fearful of the reward and retribution of spiritual beings. How can this be said
to be reverence for the profound and wondrous Way? You said, ‘This is really
to value that the Way exists.” [The reality] differs from your purpose. How
could it be possible that if one merely puts on a Dharma robe the Way [then]
exists within him? If the Way ﬁrst exists and only later is deemed valuable,
as you said, the way of sages would therefore be the culmination of the Way.
In the homage paid to a ruler by his subjects courtesy would be deeper. In
such a situation, how could it be possible that the reason śramaṇas do not
bow [to the king] is because ‘the Way exists’ is considered to be valuable?”
You wrote in your letter, “[Since the great Dharma began to be circulated
in China] it has been [more than] four hundred years and three dynasties
have elapsed. [Even though our customs have changed and government has
shifted,] there is no change in the fact that [the great Dharma] is propagated.
Wouldn’t this be because the teaching of splendid isolation is beneﬁcial for
edifying the people little by little in daily life, and the clean and simple style
[of Buddhism] does no harm to worldly prosperity and peace?”

204

Fascicle Twelve

I criticize this, saying, “The fact that [Buddhism] has not changed over
the duration of [the three dynasties] cannot be considered as a testimony.
Formerly there was almost no one among the Chinese who believed in the
Buddha. All śramaṇas and their followers were various kinds of foreigners.
Moreover, the [Chinese] kings did not make contact with [foreign śramaṇas
and their followers]. [The kings] simply let them practice their own local
customs without restriction. Presently His Majesty believes in the Buddha
and is on intimate terms with [śramaṇas] in Buddhist services. The [present]
situation is different from that of former times. Why, then, should we not
have ratiﬁcation of the Buddhists’ decorum? ‘[Buddhism is beneﬁcial] in
daily life’ and ‘the clean and simple [style]’ is helpful in teaching the people’—this is entirely as you have said, but this is likely the achievement of
the Buddhist Dharma, not a beneﬁt brought about by śramaṇas’ boasting. If
we are sincerely respectful to [śramaṇas] now there will be nothing more to
strengthen their help [in edifying the people].”
You wrote in your letter, “One whose achievement is lofty is not rewarded,
and one whose benevolence is deep is not given grateful acknowledgement.
Even if [śramaṇas] were to bow to [the king], would this be enough for them
to respond to the kindness with which he aids and leads them?”
I criticize this, saying, “The utmost degree of reason is not recompensed.
This is really as you pointed out in your letter. Nevertheless, in our sentiments,
when [the ruler’s kindness] is boundless our respect for him naturally follows.
This is why sages establish courtesy according to human feelings and lead
each person to that to which he entrusts himself. If gratitude is always to be
omitted when the achievement is deep and there is great benevolence, is
Śākyamuni’s virtue deep or shallow? If it is shallow, we should not throw
important [human] relations into disorder [in order to follow] his minor ways.
If it is deep, how could it be possible that [śramaṇas] seriously pay respect
among themselves yet reject bowing [to the king]?”

Second Response by
Lord [Wang Mi]

You criticized, “Regarding śramaṇas’ reverence, how could they all neglect
it in their outward form and keep it only in their minds? When they repent
and worship they do so in a serious [manner].”

205

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

81c

I reply, “The way of śramaṇas originally takes reverence to be primary.
Since [śramaṇas] are simply different from us (i.e., secular people) on the
path to ferry [beings to the yonder shore], they do not bow [to the king,]
according to what is right. Consequently, even though families and relatives
are important, the physical form of showing courtesy [toward one’s families
and relatives] becomes insigniﬁcant. The reason śramaṇas admire and respect
their teachers and senior monks is truly because when they share the same
goal younger monks give precedence to elders, and in their relationships
with [their teachers and senior monks] who support and lead them to [the
goal] their actions comply with their minds. Originally, although the Buddhist
Dharma is vast it does not abandon minor wholesome conduct. Reward complies with even small merit. ‘Many a little [bit] makes a mountain.’ The meaning of this is apparent here.”
You criticized, “The way of the ruler is to make life possible throughout
the country. Therefore, this principle should lie at the foundation. How could
the meaning of the three most revered people not be the very pinnacle of reason and feeling?”
I reply, “The way of the ruler is to make life possible throughout the country; that is to say, it is the same, in reason, as the Creator. [The Creator] makes
all things and spreads [life-giving] vapor all over, and its achievement is
magnanimous. Nevertheless, it has never been the case that those who receive
its blessings are thankful to [the Creator] for them. No one has felt obligated
to the foundation of reason (i.e., the Creator). Why? It is truly because the
foundation of profundity is quiet and remote and not something that can be
shown in physical and phenomenal objects. The principle of moving [Heaven
and Earth] smoothly is wondrous. How can we requite it through our poor
conduct? Therefore, Confucius says, ‘[The people] may be made to follow
[a course of action] but they may not be made to understand it.’309 That is
what this means.”
You criticized, “It is not appropriate to compare [our king] to those of
foreign countries. In [the place] Buddhism originated we can see its tenor.
Isn't it the case that since the six barbarian tribes are disobedient and strong
and cannot be educated by normal teachings, therefore, by the great establishment of a mysterious and strange [teaching, the Buddha] aroused awe
and they then submitted [to the teaching]?”

206

Fascicle Twelve

I reply, “[Sages] established their instructions in accordance with the Way
of the Spirit,310 which is really difﬁcult to discern in language. I think that
[the Buddha] shows [the law of] reward and retribution by the great establishment of the mysterious and strange [teaching]. This is the superlative
reason of the truth; [the effect follows the cause, just as] a shadow [follows
a form] and an echo [follows a sound]. This is the fundamental essence of
Buddhism. If we think now that [the teaching of] the three periods of existence
is false and absurd and [the teaching of] weal and woe [as the result of good
and bad conduct] is a threat, then what Śākyamuni clariﬁed has nearly no
standpoint.
“I usually think that the ediﬁcation of the Duke of Zhou and Confucius is
to rescue [the world] from a very harmful situation. Consequently, [the instructions] spoken by them are limited to a lifetime and do not explain the path
[of the principle of causality] for myriads of kalpas. Nevertheless, when we
deeply inquire about their purport we can also often ﬁnd [teachings similar
to those of Buddhism]. [Chinese teachings such as] being a ﬁlial child, showing
respect to one’s elder siblings, and being benevolent and righteous unexpectedly
clarify that [such teachings] are spontaneously the same [as those of Buddhism].
Compassion and mercy are certainly observed in [the Chinese law regarding]
the destruction of life according to the four seasons. Furthermore, [Confucius]
admonished and stopped Zhong You (i.e., Zilu) from asking [about death and
spirits].311 It also appears that he had a profound purpose [for doing so]. The
style of the teaching [of the Duke of Zhou and Confucius], however, differs
from [that of Buddhism]. Therefore these points are usually obscure. I calmly
looked into this issue. It is mostly so. It is nearly so.”
You criticized, “In the homage paid to a ruler by his subjects courtesy
would be deeper. In such a situation how could it be possible that the reason
śramaṇas do not bow [to the king] is because ‘the Way exists’ is considered
to be valuable?”
I reply, “I reexamined your lofty discussion. You think that the way of the
ruler moves [Heaven and Earth] smoothly and [that the ruler] is the same as
the three great elements (Heaven, Earth, and the Way) in reason. Regarding
this issue, I have already presented my vulgar opinion. I think that as far as
the way of the ruler and his people is concerned, I personally agree with your
lofty purport. Regarding the homage paid to a ruler by his subjects, the principle

207

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

82a

is limited to the teaching on morality and ethics (i.e., Confucianism). Today
śramaṇas are not the subjects of princes and nobles. Therefore [the requirement that they must] bow to them is abolished.”
You criticized, “The fact that [Buddhism] has not changed over the duration
of [the three dynasties] cannot be considered as a testimony. Formerly there
was almost no one among the Chinese who believed in the Buddha. All śramaṇas and their followers were various kinds of foreigners. Moreover, the
[Chinese] kings did not make contact with [foreign śramaṇas and their followers]. [The kings] simply let them practice their own local customs without
restriction.”
I reply, “The reason I wrote in my previous letter that [Buddhism] has
continued for many years is exactly that there must be a reason for [the kings]
to have allowed and supported the [Buddhist] Way. I did not mean that there
is never a reason to change anything that has been accomplished. This was
probably said by mere chance; it is not a point to which I stubbornly hold
fast. Foreigners did not make contact with [Chinese] kings. This is again just
as [you pointed out in] your lofty discussion. The reason the issue [of śramaṇas bowing to the king] was not discussed in former ages probably lies
in this [historical] fact.”
You criticized, “This is likely the achievement of the Buddhist Dharma,
not a beneﬁt brought about by śramaṇas’ boasting. If we are sincerely respectful to [śramaṇas] now, there will be nothing more to strengthen their help
[in edifying the people].”
I reply, “I respectfully examined the discussion in your letter. It does not
bring a false charge against Buddhist doctrines. The act of boasting merely
damages the great ediﬁcation (i.e., Buddhism). This is truly as you admonished; really, just as you admonished. I think that the way of śramaṇas can
be said to be peculiar but it is not [comprised of] such boasting.
“Presently, in these latter days, a thousand years [after Śākyamuni passed
away], simple and sincere customs and traditions have declined and those
who dishonestly wear [the Dharma] robe have become numerous. They are
unbecoming [to other śramaṇas]. How could I not feel ashamed of them?
“I simply think to control myself and keep silent now. I should put aside
speaking about other human beings and speak only of the [Buddhist] Way.
I wrote in my previous response, ‘[This is really to value that the Way exists,]

208

Fascicle Twelve

not to weigh the importance on account of a [particular] individual.’ My
humble intention lies in this point.”
You criticized, “If gratitude is always to be omitted when the achievement
is deep and there is great benevolence, is Śākyamuni’s virtue deep or shallow?
If it is shallow, we should not throw important [human] relations into disorder
[in order to follow] his minor ways. If it is deep, how could it be possible
that [śramaṇas] seriously pay respect among themselves yet reject bowing
[to the king]?”
I reply, “I think that the Way of Śākyamuni is deep, indeed profound, and
those who look up to him respectfully consolidate their respect more and
more. This is probably because those who reach the Way must rely on the
achievement of practice, and nothing is more esteemed than the virtue of the
achievement of practice. Just like this, accumulating practice is the base
cause, the key to one’s next existence. Moreover, it is still difﬁcult to restrain
[a śramaṇa’s] achievement [of the practice] of paying respect to his teachers
and seniors. Furthermore, in drawing the mind toward the ultimate, is it possible to neglect courtesy? Therefore, even if one were to bend or lift his head
[to show respect] for numerous kalpas, this does not mean that he expresses
his gratitude for the blessings [he has received].”

Second Criticism by
Huan [Xuan]

I examined your letter. I still have not settled some uncertainties. In accordance
with your letter, I once again roughly express my criticism.
How is it allowable for there to be two different principles for feelings
and paying respect? Everything is simply from the inside (i.e., feelings) and
inﬂuences the outside (i.e., actions of paying respect). Since we have already
entered the realm of beings who possess feelings and consciousness (sentient
beings), it is impossible to do without [respect]. If, just as you said in your
letter, “[The way of] the ruler . . . is the same, in reason, as the Creator. . . .
It has never been the case that those who receive its blessings are thankful
to [the Creator] for them. No one has felt obligated to the foundation of
reason (i.e., the Creator),” this means that [the ruler’s] achievement is profound, his reasoning is deep, and nothing is greater than this. How could the
Buddha’s ediﬁcation surpass this?

209

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II
82b

Nevertheless, you said in your discussion, “Since [śramaṇas] are simply
different from us (i.e., secular people) on the path to ferry [beings to the yonder
shore], they do not bow [to the king] according to what is right” and “[The
reason śramaṇas admire and respect their teachers and senior monks is truly
because] when they share the same goal younger monks give precedence to
elders, and in their relationships with [their teachers and senior monks] who
support and lead them to [the goal] their actions comply with their minds.”
If [the ruler’s] reasoning lies in his own foundation and his virtue is deep and
has reached culmination, then how is it possible to say, “[Śramaṇas] are simply
different from us on the path to ferry [beings to the yonder shore]” and “[they
do not] bow [to the king]”? What is their goal? If studies are considered to
be their goal, what scholars learn originally spring simply from the essential
qualities of Nature. If Nature exists [ﬁrst of all] and [what scholars learn] is
received from it, then it is easily known that Nature is the foundation. The
awakening that is attained by one’s teacher’s support and guidance merely
further illuminates its ﬁnal point. How is it possible that “actions comply with
the mind” applies here but does not [apply] over there?
Moreover, you said, “The ediﬁcation of the Duke of Zhou and Confucius
is to rescue [the world] from a very harmful situation. Consequently, [the
instructions spoken by them] are limited to a lifetime and do not explain the
path [of the principle of causality] for myriads of kalpas.”
When one ediﬁes the people by means of the mysterious, the teaching is
easily practiced. This is different from the teaching that urges [and encourages]
people to practice benevolence and righteousness, which is limited to human
affairs. Therefore, the followers of the Yellow Turbans who aroused people
with wild talk all advanced just as clouds do, [to ﬁght the enemy]. If this
[teaching] is the truth and is also easily practiced, why do sages reject the
practical way that is easily practiced and take up minor things that are difﬁcult
to carry out? It is also clear that this cannot be so. In edifying those of various
customs, the principle lies in salvation through expedient means. The purport
of exaggerated talk can be known [as a matter of course].
Furthermore, you said, “[Regarding] the homage paid to a ruler by his
subjects, the principle is limited to the teaching on morality and ethics. Today
śramaṇas are not the subjects of princes and nobles. Therefore [the requirement that they must] bow to them is abolished.”

210

Fascicle Twelve

Why is this so? Regarding the principle of respect, I have explained it in
detail in my previous letter. The homage paid to a ruler by his subjects arises
entirely spontaneously and is ﬁrm in the foundation of feeling in reason.
How could this be a matter of the teaching on morality and ethics? In my
previous discussion I said, “[As the Book of Changes says,] ‘The great virtue
of Heaven and Earth is called life.’ [The virtue] to make life all over the
country and arrange all things lies in sovereigns.” If what makes life possible
all over the country lies in these (i.e., sovereigns), how could it be possible
that [the sovereign] is not valued by Nature?
In addition, you said, “Those who reach the Way must rely on the achievement of practice . . . accumulating practice is the base cause, the key to one’s
next existence. . . . Furthermore, in drawing the mind toward the ultimate,
is it possible to neglect courtesy? [Therefore,] even if one were to bend or
lift his head [to show respect] for numerous kalpas, this does not mean that
he expresses his gratitude for the blessings [he has received].”
Please allow me to follow your purpose in your letter, avail myself of it,
and offer criticism. According to your letter, paying respect is the beginning
of practice, and sincerely paying respect is important. The achievement of
practice must be simply calculated based on the effort one has made toward
its achievement. How could it be possible that one merely reveres Śākyamuni
and then claims that there is nothing more esteemed than this [action]? Gratitude for blessings is beyond expression. This is something about which wise
people have no doubt. In reason, however, [homage paid to a ruler] is
extremely deeply rooted in feeling. It is simply impossible to go about without
respect. How could subjects’ paying homage to their king be [the same as]
showing gratitude for blessings?

Third Response by
Lord [Wang Mi]

I respectfully received your words, together with your gracious second criticism.
I accept your lofty purpose. The principle of this issue is profound and it is
extremely difﬁcult to discuss. Furthermore, it is a matter of grave concern for
our generation. We should thoroughly discuss this in detail before it is too late.
My talent is not outstanding and I particularly lack the ability for close
investigation and analysis. Moreover, your wondrous criticism is of an

211

82c

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

extremely advanced level. I become more uncertain and confused. Nevertheless, since your lofty purpose has reached me I dare not keep silent. In
this case I will again recklessly respond to your admonition in accordance
with my shortsighted view. Please pardon me if there is nothing [here] to
inspire you. I am merely restless. I pray that you will inquire of various
Buddhist monks and versatile scholars [about this issue] and remove my
imperfect points.
You said, “What is their goal? If studies are considered to be their goal,
what scholars learn originally springs simply from the essential qualities of
Nature. If Nature exists [ﬁrst of all] and [what scholars learn] is received
from it, then it is easily known that Nature is the foundation.”
I think that [śramaṇas’] goal is the highest Way toward which they are
heading. Studies are an expedient that we use daily. As we now intend to go
to the utmost degree there, it is simply impossible to advance without borrowing the expedient [means of study]. Therefore, we know that achievement
of [the expedient of study] that we are borrowing is not the utmost point.
One who goes to the utmost point [of the Way] through the accumulation of
learning certainly goes up coarse steps and reaches a wondrous stage. After
the ﬁsh is caught the bamboo ﬁsh trap (i.e., an expedient) is abandoned. This
principle is seen here.
You think that it is easy to edify [people] by means of the mysterious,
and difﬁcult [to urge and encourage] the achievement of benevolence and
righteousness. [You said,] “why do sages reject the practical way that is easily
practiced and take up minor things that are difﬁcult to carry out? It is also
clear that this cannot be so.”
I think that the Buddha’s teaching is absolutely different from that of the
Chinese sages. Since it is said that they differ from each other, they are not
on the same level as a matter of course. At present we are discussing Buddhist
doctrines. Therefore, we must establish our statements on the basis of its
foundation. Only then we can know in detail which aspect [of Buddhism]
goes smoothly and which aspect is blocked.
The reason I mentioned in my previous response about benevolent and
wholesome practices and the teaching of non-killing [of Confucianism] is
because they are similar to and can be seen to be the same as [Buddhist
tenets]. Therefore I simply cited them. Regarding your observation, I would

212

Fascicle Twelve

like to argue against it. What the teaching of the Buddhist precepts aims for
is assuredly too difﬁcult to be considered the same as [that of Confucianism].
Nevertheless, as far as my ignorant view is concerned, Buddhism is more
difﬁcult. Why do I say this? According to what the Chinese sages have now
clariﬁed, it is believed that when one sends forth his words, if they are good,
they will receive a response, just as a shadow [follows a form] and an echo
[follows a sound]; and if the [words] are evil, they will be opposed by people
as far as a thousand li distant.312 In this way, good or bad conduct soon
responds [to the one who performed the action], and fortune and misfortune
[as their results] appear before his eyes. Moreover, [as Confucius says,]
“Benevolent conduct is from a man himself.”313 If one broadens [his path]
it is good enough. There are, however, still those who reject right and comply
with evil, and those who go against the Way and follow [their own] desires.
Moreover, in Buddhism one’s lifetime is explained as of very brief duration,
like the time it takes to snap one’s ﬁngers, and reaching the essential destination is expected to take place after an eternal kalpa. It is said that mysterious
things have no ﬁxed status. Reward and retribution is provided [in the future,
even though] no indication of our existence is given. Isn’t it also difﬁcult to
accept these and believe [in Buddhism]? For this reason, even though the
ediﬁcation [of the Buddha] was introduced into China there are only a small
number of people who have become awakened. Therefore, the [Taizi ruiying]
benqi jing says, “Words that are strictly true sound paradoxical.”314 This is
what is meant.
You said, “The achievement of practice must be simply calculated based
on the effort one has made toward its achievement. How could it be possible
that one merely reveres Śākyamuni and then claims that there is nothing
more esteemed than this [action]?”
Please let me try to say more about this. I think that the Buddhist Way is
great and vast, and its doctrines are complicated. It may be believed that
there are more than one practice for training one’s spirit and attaining the
Way. In the case of someone who has no weariness in his mind and is able
to effort to do anything, to revere the ultimate is merely one of the achievements of practice. I said in my previous response, “Nothing is more esteemed
than this.” What I meant was that in drawing the mind toward the ultimate
Way, it is difﬁcult to esteem anything more than the principle. I did not mean

213

83a

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

that worship counts for nothing as a practice. As I am yet only in the unsettled
stage I cannot but hope that I might be led [to the ultimate Way]. Even if something is very insigniﬁcant, it is certainly what is needed for the closing period.
You said, “The homage paid to a ruler by his subjects arises entirely spontaneously and is ﬁrm in the foundation of feeling in reason. How could this
be a matter of the teaching on morality and ethics?”
I respectfully keep your valued discussion in mind and stick to this. It is
faultless. Therefore, I said in my previous response, “As far as the way of
the ruler and his people is concerned, I personally agree with your lofty purport.” My intention lies in this.
Regarding the homage between a ruler and his subjects, the issue is limited
to the decorum of bowing with one’s hands folded in front. Therefore I simply
took this to be [the decorum of] the teaching on morality and ethics (i.e.,
Confucianism). I did not mean that [expressions of respect] between [ruler
and subjects] is limited to this behavior.
Please let me explain again in order to completely express my humble
intentions. In the world of greatest antiquity a ruler and his subjects were each
in their own rank and they had a natural feeling of [mutual] love. Namely,
righteousness was apparent in the foundation of ediﬁcation. The forms to
show respect of that time are never heard [of today]. The way of the ruler was
openly carried out. Consequently, the operation in which [a ruler and his subjects] do not engage with one another was peaceful. The way of the subjects
was moved and inﬂuenced [by their ruler] imperceptibly. Therefore, they were
completely content with any aspect of matters. Inferring from this point, it is
almost clear that the forms to show respect have nothing to do with one’s
mind. Later, when [people] gave rise to love and praise [for their ruler], this
decorum developed. Can it be denied that [this decorum] was established by
a sage of later ages and developed in accord with the need of the times?
This logical sequence is abstract and extensive. It is truly difﬁcult to
explain this. If I am wrong, please let me receive your lofty words.

Fourth Letter by
Huan [Xuan]

Your counterargument is very beautifully written. It is particularly striking.
I thought it could dispel my doubtful points but it still has not come to [that

214

Fascicle Twelve

point]. Thereupon, we have attacked and criticized each other but we have
not come to a conclusion. If we now again consider the essentials, clarify
the principle of the three most revered people, and argue with regard to the
gravity [of the ruler and the Buddha], then the reason why [śramaṇas] do or
do not bow [to the king] can be understood. I think that the achievement of
closely investigating something subtle must lie in going through such trouble
and making a judgment.
The eighth day of the month has already come. I have now written to
Right Chief Administrator [Yu Heng] and ordered him to enforce [the custom
that śramaṇas must] bow [to the king] and revere the way of the ruler. I
caused no one in the world to not bow [to the king]. Even though the Buddhist
Way is the most respectable, can it be acceptable for [śramaṇas] to not have
complete good conduct?
Although this matter has already been put into operation no one should
hesitate to discuss this. We should investigate it exhaustively. I think that
there are some among you who have analyzed the issue more closely. They
may show [their views to Yin] Zhongwen (d. 407).

Additional Criticism
by [Huan Xuan]

The other day I received your letter and all the gentlemen’s discourses but none
of these have resolved our doubts. While we make criticisms about this issue
we merely change from one point to another. Today I will repeat what I previously thought and go into details. I hope that you will rein in a white horse
(i.e., stop quibbling) and simply understand that there are rules in debating.315
What is important in Buddhism is to completely value the human spirit.
For this reason, a teacher and his disciples mutually believe in this incomparable principle. Generally, each side of the spirit’s light and darkness has
its own part. There is the foundation from which each part receives its nature
when it arises. The teacher’s achievement lies in developing [his disciples’
natural abilities] and awakening them. This can be compared to the achievement of polishing a rough jade from Mount Jing until it becomes smooth
and glossy. If the real substance is not ﬁne jade [to begin with], what beneﬁt
can be expected if one were to chisel and polish it? This means that the good
and bad dispositions of people exist naturally. Profound virtue exists in a

215

83b

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

person at the beginning of his life. The achievement of polishing [his disposition] until it becomes smooth and glossy truly comes at the very end.
One holds [his virtuous disposition like] a jade within himself and works
on it in order to make [it as useful as a serving] vessel. Except for the way
of the ruler nothing prolongs and completes one’s life and leads one to devote
himself to the Way. This is why in [ranking] the importance of the three most
revered people, the teacher is at the bottom. How can this be said? It is because
the way of the ruler holds that of the teacher simultaneously, but [the way
of] the teacher does not hold [the way of] the ruler concurrently. To propagate
[the Way] through teaching and regulate [people] through laws is the way
of the ruler. Isn’t this so? How could it be possible for [the teacher, who is]
less important in the principle [of the three most revered people,] to deprive
[the ruler, who] should be more highly respected, of homage? I repeated this
reason three times. I have even greater suspicions [about your views] and I
am surprised by them.
The purport that [the sages] created [decorum] lies in that (i.e., the ruler),
but not in this (i.e., the teacher). When we mistakenly employ this the harmful
inﬂuence becomes more serious. I further hope that you will understand the
purport [that the sages created decorum], value this issue highly, and comprehend it, [just as Zhuangzi understood beyond the scope of words on the
dam] over the Hao River.316

Fourth Response by
Lord [Wang Mi]

Thank you again for your excellent instruction!
You said that the Buddha’s teaching values the human spirit; each side of
the spirit’s light and darkness has its own part; the teacher’s principle lies in
developing [his disciples’ natural abilities] and awakening them; and, regarding
the way of the ruler, it can prolong and complete one’s life and leads one to
devote himself to the Way. You indicated that the teacher does not have virtue
to lead [the people] inclusively, but the ruler holds the virtue of the teacher
simultaneously. You promote the grand decorum to venerate the ruler and
analyze the depth of the three most revered people. Everything is exactly as
you said. You are truly right, sir.

216

Fascicle Twelve

The reason I recently spoke of my humble views impertinently and corresponded with you is this: as inquiries [about this issue] gathered around
me and I was not allowed to hide them. Therefore, I further argued some reasons separately, but this is not a delusion that I have usually had.
I have already carefully looked again into your wondrous purpose. Your
reason is quite great and extensive. The phrase “Seeing clearly as if a ﬁlm
has been removed from my eyes” applies here.317
I was told that you had already ordered Yu Heng to enforce the custom
[that śramaṇas must bow to the king]. This issue has been settled just in time.
We, the people and I, feel very happy about this.
I look up respectfully to the meaning I understand, which lies in encouraging us to adhere to ﬁdelity [to the ruler]. As for your instruction [that we
should comprehend this issue just as Zhuangzi understood beyond the scope
of words on the dam] over the Hao River, I dare not accept your order.

Letter in Response to Huan Xuan Regarding
the Issue that Śramaṇas Should Not
Bow to the King by Dharma
Teacher Huiyuan of Mount Lu,
together with Huan Xuan’s
Two Letters

Letter Given to Dharma Teacher [Hui]yuan by Huan Xuan
As for the issue that śramaṇas should not bow to the king, this is already
not understood in my feeling and not clariﬁed in reason. It is a matter of
grave concern for our generation. We cannot make this establishment inappropriate. Recently I wrote to the Eight Executives. Today I show this to
you. Please explain why [śramaṇas] should not pay homage to [the king].
This custom (i.e., bowing to the king) must be put into practice. I will have
every single thing sent to you. I hope that you will certainly have explanations
for my doubtful points. Commandant Wang [Mi] seriously intends to take
charge of this matter. Recently I visited Xie Zhong along with [Wang Mi]
and consulted with [Xie Zhong] about it face to face. I differ from these two
(i.e., Wang Mi and Xie Zhong) in regard to the principles on which we base
[our arguments]. So we have not dispelled our doubts. I will order Guo

217

83c

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

[Changzhi], [the Regional Chief of] Jiangzhou, to accept your response.
Please deliver your opinion to him.

Response [to Huan Xuan] by Dharma Teacher [Hui]yuan
I carefully examined your proclamation in a separate envelope and the
letter given to the Eight Executives.
You ask me my opinion regarding the issue that śramaṇas are disrespectful
to the king. Your intention lies in revering the ruler and, in turn, establishing
the order of moral justiﬁcation. In order to prove it, you refer to Laozi and
take princes to be the same as the three great elements, [Heaven, Earth, and
the Way].318 Since the way [of the ruler] is what supports [all things] to grow
and [the heavenly bodies] to move smoothly, we must value the throne.
If we infer the foundation [of all beings] in order to look for its origin, all
beings receive the [yin-yang] vapor from the two polarities (Heaven and
Earth) and their bodies from their parents. That is to say, the way to perpetuate
lives and cause Heaven and Earth to move smoothly is magnanimous. The
principle on which we depend for our existence and which we employ every
day is great. Consequently, [śramaṇas] should not abandon showing courtesy
to [the king] as long as they receive his virtue. They should not reject paying
their respects to him as long as they beneﬁt from his kindness. This is the
foundation of your purpose, our donor, and I do not have a different thought
from yours. When I look into the issue from [the standpoint of] Buddhism
and seek the way of śramaṇas, [however,] the situation is not so in reason.
Why? According to what is clariﬁed in Buddhist scriptures there are two
groups [of Buddhists]. One group are those who stay in the secular world
and propagate the teaching. The other group are those who renounce the
world and pursue the [Buddhist] Way [as monastics]. For those who remain
in the secular world, the courtesy to serve the ruler, paying respect to one’s
parents, and the righteousness of loyalty toward the ruler and ﬁlial piety
toward one’s parents are found in compositions in Buddhist texts. The instruction [to value] the three most revered people is evident in the sacred books
(i.e., Buddhist scriptures). This is the same ordinance as that of the Imperial
system; they are just like a pair of tallies. This point is entirely what you,
our donor, have clariﬁed. A divergent view is not allowable in reason.
Those who have renounced the world are visitors from beyond the mundane world. Their way of life is beyond that of worldly people. The teaching
218

Fascicle Twelve

for them is to master [the fact] that afﬂictions are caused by having a body
and that afﬂictions are ended by not preserving the body, to know that [the
operation of] life after life is derived from receiving the principle of the mutation [of birth and death in the phenomenal world], and to seek the ultimate
law of Nature by not following the principle of the mutation [of birth and
death]. Since they seek the ultimate law of Nature by not following the principle of the mutation [of birth and death], they do not value the support of
[a sovereign who] manages the movement of [Heaven and Earth]. Since they
bring an end to afﬂictions by not preserving the body, they do not esteem
the advantage of [the sovereign’s] welfare [toward the people]. This means
that the principles and forms go against each other and monks and secular
people are contrary to each other. Accordingly, in general those who have
renounced the world live in seclusion in order to pursue their aspiration and
they become different from secular people in order to realize their way. Since
they are different from secular people, their clothing code must not be the
same as in secular rule. Since they live in seclusion they must follow a lofty
lifestyle. On this basis, they are able to save secular people who are drowning
in the deep stream [of the transmigration of birth and death], uproot their
deep roots [of karma] for numerous kalpas, profoundly lead [others] to the
ferry of the three vehicles, and open the broad path to the realms of heavenly
and human beings.
For this reason, while privately a śramaṇa opposes his family’s valuable
[attachment to him and becomes a monk] he does not go against ﬁlial piety,
and while a śramaṇa may lack the courtesy of paying respect to the ruler in
public he is not impolite [to the sovereign]. This kind of person makes a vow
for himself by taking the tonsure at the beginning, and his determination is
accomplished in his later years. If someone completes the virtue [of a monk],
the Buddhist Way diffuses [virtuous inﬂuence] over his family members of
the six relations and the beneﬁt spreads to all people. Even though [śramaṇas]
are not placed in the rank of princes, [their way] is certainly compatible with
the fundamental Way by which the emperor rules over the world, and they
provide extensive protection for the people. Their situation is just like this.
Do they receive the [ruler’s] favor by doing nothing and vainly beneﬁt from
his kindness in the same way as those wise people who receive a stipend
without ever rendering any service?

219

84a

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

You recently considered that there are [monks] who put on [Dharma]
robes, yet there is no one [who is qualiﬁed to wear the robe]. Therefore, you
put the situation in order by selecting monks and training them; you purged
and weeded out [unqualiﬁed monks]. Since the time this edict was issued,
all monks have increased their sincerity a hundred times over and their fulﬁllment has become much deeper. This is beyond all description.
If you further explain what Buddhist monks should be in order to propagate
the Buddhist Way, then those who are free from prejudice (i.e., Buddhist
monks) will follow [the Buddha’s] footsteps, and those who rinse their mouth
with the water of the stream [of the Dharma] will taste the remaining drops.
If, after purging and weeding out [unqualiﬁed monks], your mind is still
not settled, if true and false [monks] are mixed together in [the Buddhist order
(bhikṣu sangha)], and if you are unable to distinguish between [the muddy
water of] the Jing River and [the clear water of] the Wei River, then you may
remove evil monks by means of the [Buddhist] Way—however, you assuredly
must not abolish the [Buddhist] Way because of [such evil] monks. If you
remove evil monks by means of the [Buddhist] Way, it is appropriate to take
away their [Dharma] robes. Even if you abolish the [Buddhist] Way because
of [evil] monks you must keep the framework of [the Buddhist] ceremonies.
If the [Buddhist] ceremonies remain, the [Buddha’s] purpose for establishing
the [Buddhist] teaching can be sought. If the traces [of the teaching] (i.e., the
framework of the Buddhist ceremonies) are abandoned, there will be no basis
for the pleasure of accomplishing our determination.
Why do I say this so plainly? Even though the śramaṇa’s regulation of
clothing and Buddhist implements are not like those found in the rules of
the six generations,319 they are themselves the distinguished system for the
Buddhist school and they are excellent articles beyond the secular world. If
such excellent articles are mingled with [secular ones], phenomena go against
the foundation. If phenomena go against the foundation, the [framework of
the Buddhist] ceremonies loses its function. Accordingly, those who love
ceremony certainly do not damage such excellent articles. What you have
attained cannot be lost. There is a reason for this.
One who abides by the Classics of the distant past (i.e., Confucius) still
keeps the sacriﬁcial sheep connected with the inauguration of the ﬁrst day
of each month.320 If the sacriﬁcial sheep can still preserve the ceremony, how

220

Fascicle Twelve

much more so could the Dharma robe of the Tathāgata [preserve the Buddhist
ceremonies]! Inferring from this, I say that even if the [Buddhist] Way does
not [actually] exist we should certainly preserve the ceremonies. If the ceremonies are preserved the Dharma can be promulgated. If the Dharma can
be promulgated the [Buddhist] Way can be sought. This is common throughout
the ages and it is the immutable great law.
Furthermore, the Buddhist surplice is not the type of clothing [for monks
to wear] when they have an audience with the emperor at court, and [a Buddhist
monk’s] earthenware almsbowl is not a vessel to be used in the Imperial court.
The clothes [one wears to participate] in military affairs differ from those
[worn when one takes part] in state affairs. The customs of non-Chinese people
are not mixed with those of the Chinese. If [a monk] who shaves his head and
disﬁgures himself were to suddenly participate in various Chinese ceremonies,
this is a phenomenon in which two different kinds of things are mingled. It
is also something with which I am personally not content.
You, our donor, have an outstanding personality, towering over others
since the time you were young. Your reﬁned taste surpasses that of people
of the decadent world. You still call on and study with wise people of the
time in order to seek the truth. From this point I infer that you would surely
not ignore [good] words just because the person [who expresses those words
is ﬂawed].
I am in the evening of my life, just [as when the sun] goes down in the
west. I avail myself of my remaining time, awaiting my ﬁnal day. How could
what I value highly in my mind only be in order to keep my existence? If I
hold fast to my assertion without yielding, it is likely because I merely wish
to restore the Three Treasures in this illustrious time and honorably transmit
[the Buddha’s] bright virtue to the coming hundred generations.
If this issue [of requiring śramaṇas to bow to the king] is enforced even
once Buddhism will be ruined for a long time, the Tathāgata's immutable
law will vanish without a trace at this point, heavenly and human beings will
lament, and Buddhist monks and laypeople will change their minds [and stop
following the Buddhist Way]. How, then, could what I secretly and sincerely
expect also be realized?
According to the abundant kindness [with which you treat me], I have
frankly expressed here all of what I have in my mind. While writing this I

221

84b

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

felt sad and resentful. I was unaware as my tears and nasal mucus unrestrainedly ﬂowed.

Response [to Huiyuan] by Defender-in-Chief
Huan [Xuan], together with the Decree to
Stop Śramaṇas from Bowing [to the King]

I came to know that [śramaṇas] abandon their bodies because they are [visitors
from] beyond the mundane world, and therefore they do not value the beneﬁt
of maintaining their lives. [You said,] “Since they seek the ultimate law of
Nature by not following the principle of the mutation [of birth and death],
they do not value the support of [a sovereign who] manages the movement
of [Heaven and Earth].”
Moreover, you said, “While privately a śramaṇa opposes his family’s
valuable [attachment to him and becomes a monk] he does not go against
ﬁlial piety, and while a śramaṇa may lack the courtesy of paying respect to
the ruler in public he is not impolite [to the sovereign].”
If the situation is just as you describe in your letter and all principles
between father and son are originally not important, then we have nothing
to follow in extending a feeling of ﬁlial piety. If the task of [śramaṇas] has
nothing to do with the support and guidance [of the ruler], they need not
again have the signiﬁcance of extending respect [to him]. If you admit that
[śramaṇas’] feelings for the ruler and their own fathers have not come to an
end, why then do they reject [paying respect] to convey their feelings?
Worries exist in mental delusions, not from the form of bowing. Probably
the form of bowing is simply [the manifestation] of the mental function. If
in the basis (i.e., the mind) one rejects the form of bowing, this is again something I do not understand.
Furthermore, you said that Buddhism is propagated by two groups; there
is the teaching for those who stay in the secular world; there is also the teaching [for śramaṇas,] the beneﬁts of which spreads to all people of the world;
the way [attained by śramaṇas] diffuses [virtuous inﬂuence] over their family
members of the six relations; [the way of śramaṇas] is assuredly compatible
with the fundamental Way by which the emperor rules over the world; and
[śramaṇas] do not vainly beneﬁt from [the ruler’s] virtue.

222

Fascicle Twelve

Buddhism exists in acts. By each [act Buddhists] comply with circumstances.
There is the origin of cause and condition and there is surely a result, without
fail. If [Buddhism] is like this, how can those who follow the [Buddhist] Way
disobey [the doctrines]? Therefore Śākyamuni’s Way was not able to cause
his father, King Śuddhodana, to ride the ferry beyond [to nirvana]. Even though
[King Śuddhodana] did not attain the stage of entering the stream of the sacred
law (Skt. srotaāpatti-phala), originally this is simply the same as what his
people received. Just as you said in your letter, there is a reason for this. The
achievement of profound virtue is assuredly not what “those who should teach
[Buddhism]” (i.e., śramaṇas) of today can consider and deliberate.
I have not been able to seek the reason [of this issue] together with you
in your letter. I have only been greatly disappointed. Accordingly, I have not
yet clariﬁed the issue. I hope that you will become free from confusion and
the stagnant ideas that you have held for a long time, and not make a mistake
in employing feeling and reason.

Imperial Decree to Allow Buddhist
Monks Not to Bow [to the King] by
Huan [Xuan, Former King of] Chu321

My people! The Buddhist Dharma is too vast and unintelligible for me to understand. I infer your serious feelings for [Buddhism] and purposely join you in
your respect for it. Today [I have ascended the throne], so the issue [of whether
or not śramaṇas must bow to the king] is already at my discretion. If the issue
is not completely understood, I would sooner follow the course that [śramaṇas]
are exempt [from bowing to the king]. Everyone, do not force [śramaṇas] to
bow [to the king] any more, and let all the people know about this.

[Response to Huan Xuan’s Decree
by Bian Sizhi and Yuan Kezhi]

On the third day of the twelfth month, we, Palace Attendant [Bian] Sizhi and
Gentleman Attendant at the Palace Gate and Palace Attendant Yuan Kezhi,
speak.
The Imperial decree is just as mentioned above. The Way of the Spirit is
profound and obscure and the Imperial will is profound and remote. What

223

84c

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

Your Majesty propagates is great. This has accordingly reached Buddhists
who believe in the Buddha. Within the territory of your state all people are
Your Majesty’s lieges. Nevertheless, [Buddhist monks] place themselves as
equal in courtesy to the emperor who commands ten thousand chariots, because
they formerly began wearing the Dharma robe [and became monks]. We are
discontented with this. How can practicing the decorum of bowing [to the
king] with one’s head to the ground and standing up damage their way? The
important human relations between the nobles and the humble people should
not be discontinued at all. If you allow that those except Confucianists may
be excused from the deportment of bowing, please reject granting them an
audience immediately. This statement should be kept in mind.
Humbly yours.

[Decree by Huan Xuan]

What is the problem? You must follow my Imperial decree.

[Response to Huan Xuan’s Decree
by Ma Fan and Bian Sizhi]

On the fourth day of the twelfth month of the second year of Taiheng (403),
we, Director of Interpreter-Clerk Ma Fan and Palace Attendant [Bian] Sizhi,
speak.
We report to you. Again we received your brilliant Imperial decree. You
honor the highest degree of deep modesty and walk the way of glorious
humility. We are always concerned about you and we personally feel uneasy.
Even though there are various ways to govern the world, all principles
come to the same point. In revering one’s ruler and parents the Dharma teaching (i.e., Buddhism) does not go against [the Chinese teaching]. The four
that are great (i.e., Heaven, Earth, the Way, and the king) advocated by Laozi
are equal in nobility.322 Even though [the teaching] of which śramaṇas avail
themselves differs from [that of secular people,] their traces (actions) do not
go beyond this world. How could it be possible that they are not the same
as those whom Heaven made?
Your Majesty sincerely intends to promulgate [the custom that śramaṇas
do not have to bow to the king] above others. Nevertheless, the decorum
between the humble people and nobles is the statute to govern the world. We

224

Fascicle Twelve

think you must condescend and follow popular sentiment and uphold [the
custom that śramaṇas should bow to the king] as an eternal system for the
future. Please do as we have stated previously.
Humbly yours.

[Decree by Huan Xuan]

Leave this issue as it is! Let each person act in his own way! This is also to
love the nine schools without distinction and to let each fulﬁll his own way.

[Response to Huan Xuan’s
Decree by Bian Sizhi]

I, Palace Attendant and Libationer Sizhi, speak.
Again I was granted the Imperial decree, as mentioned above.
Your Majesty’s highest virtue is perfectly free from prejudice. You let [the
wind] blow so that each of the myriad [apertures] makes its own sound.323
Each of the nine schools shows its good point. Both the eminent and the dark
attain their summit. Your marvelous kindness secretly ﬂows. There is no one
who does not hold this thought in mind. This is why all people rely on your
support and guidance, and this is why heavenly and human beings feel comfortable together.
I have heard that Buddhism takes spiritual wisdom as the foundation and
reaching the goal as the achievement. Except for these points, this [teaching]
likely only has the function of edifying and leading ordinary people of the
secular world.
The mysterious principle is obscure. We seek it beyond the world of form.
If [Buddhist monks] respectfully bow [to the king] with their heads to the
ground and then stand up, there is nothing in this that will damage their observance of [Buddhist] precepts. If they practice the [Buddhist] Way without
losing respect [for the ruler], and if the laws of the land are equally revered
in the territory of your state, then both the [Buddhist] Way and the [king’s]
constitution will ﬂourish and Buddhism and the non-Buddhist teaching (i.e.,
Confucianism) will be entirely harmonious.
I was previously appointed to a post in a foreign land and I was rarely
informed of your words. Therefore I did not know about your brilliant discussion on this issue last spring. Recently I was directly granted the Imperial

225

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

85a

decree. I then frankly stated my silly thoughts, which I was afraid did not
meet yours. After returning here, I precisely saw the reality of this issue and
received your marvelous writings. Your purpose is boundless and your logical
analysis is profound. These are not things that I, an incompetent man, am
able to praise merely by clapping my hands.
In former ages it was already practiced that śramaṇas place themselves
as equal [to the king]. Today you, a great bright man, ascended [the throne]
and your ediﬁcation of the Way reaches all people without exception. In
order to rule the country there should not be any deﬁciency in important
human relations. As I previously stated, please keep control over those except
[Confucianists] and put this into operation.
Humbly yours.

[Decree by Huan Xuan]

Now that both Buddhism and the non-Buddhist teaching are promulgated
concurrently, why do you employ the principle of former ages? You are too
meticulous about this issue. Again, this is not praise for the way [of the ruler].

[Response to Huan Xuan’s
Decree by Bian Sizhi]

I, Palace Attendant and Libationer Sizhi, speak.
I respectfully received the Imperial decree again.
Now that both Buddhism and the non-Buddhist teaching are promulgated
concurrently, the Imperial decree is deeply understood and [Your Majesty’s]
way holds the premier position over those of a hundred kings. I humbly read
[the Imperial decree] and exclaimed with reverence. This is beyond my reach.
To revere the ruler and respect the law is the ﬁdelity of vassals. Therefore,
I diligently and incessantly stand on [the custom that śramaṇas must bow
to the king].
Your brilliant decree is transcendental and your profound strategy is eternal
and fair. I am ignorant, shallow, and illogical. As a result, I am ashamed of
myself. I will follow [the Imperial decree] and consign this [matter] to the
external bureau. I will propagate, regulate, and abide by this.
Humbly yours.

226

Fascicle Twelve

Presented on the twenty-fourth day of the twelfth month of the ﬁrst year of
Yuanshi (403).

Letter Given to Huan Xuan to Discuss
the Evaluation of Śramaṇas by
Huiyuan of Mount Lu, together
with Huan Xuan’s Decree

Decree Given to the Staff to Intend to Select Buddhist Monks by Regent
Huan Xuan
The Way of the Spirit is obscure. This is something of which sages do not
speak. Nevertheless, when we think about what their works promulgate, it seems
that we will be able to see [the sages’ idea regarding the Way of the Spirit].
What the Buddha treasures is wuwei (i.e., nirvana), and his cordial intention
lies in cutting off desire. These days, however, [his teaching] has fallen into
decadence and consequently these tenets (i.e., nirvana and cutting off desires)
are lost. In the capital city [of Jiankang, Buddhist monks] vie with each other
in having an extravagant life. Opulent [Buddhist] buildings are numerous in
the Imperial court as well as in the city. Because of this, public funds in the
Imperial treasury are decreasing. Rankings and the proper equipages [for ceremonies] have become wicked and corrupt due to this fact. Those who run
away from corvée labor gather together in every county. Absconders ﬁll the
Buddhist temples. Consequently several thousand [runaways and absconders]
gather in every county and form a lawless community. The drones of society
gather in groups in every town. In every place outlaws ﬂock together. These
people have already caused harm to the government and profaned Buddhism;
they assuredly exhaust both that (i.e., the government) and this (i.e., Buddhism).
They really corrupt the standard of customs and cultural inﬂuence.
We should immediately issue the following strict orders. Among all the
śramaṇas in every place, those who are able to explain the teachings of
Buddhist scriptures in detail and can ﬂuently expound the Buddhist doctrines;
those who orderly cultivate religious practices, who observe the precepts without deﬁciency, and who always reside in a hermitage (Skt. araṇya); and those
who live in the mountains to ennoble their aspirations and who are not deluded
by popular custom—all these are worthy to be in charge of propagating the

227

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

great ediﬁcation. Therefore they will show people what the Way is, propagate
the teaching, and serve as a model for the people. Fortunately they practice
Buddhism and the non-Buddhist teaching concurrently.324
[Buddhist monks] who do not fall within the purview of the abovementioned should all be purged from [the Buddhist order]. In each place where
an institution is located the registers [of the Buddhist monks] must be managed
and strictly controlled. This should be promptly decreed and, at the same
time, [the measures we take] should be listed and reported to me. Mount Lu
is the only place where virtuous Buddhist monks reside and it is excepted
from the investigation for this decree.

85b

Letter Given to Defender-in-Chief
Huan [Xuan] to Discuss the
Evaluation of Śramaṇas by
Dharma Teacher [Hui]yuan

It has been a long time since Buddhism gradually began to decline and became
obscene and odd. Every time I think about this, my heart ﬁlls with indignation.
I am always afraid that [Buddhism] will unexpectedly encounter bad times,
get mixed up [with evil], and altogether sink into ruin. This is why I lament
and worry from early morning until night without sparing myself.
I have read, our donor, your decree to put all Buddhist monks in order.
This truly conforms to my true intention. If the Jing River were separated
from the Wei River, the clear water will ﬂow separately from the muddy
water. If what is crooked is straightened by what is upright, those who lack
virtue will spontaneously disappear. Inferring from this point, I say that once
Heaven’s auspicious decree is put into practice we will certainly be able to
distinguish between the two principles (i.e., good and evil). Most certainly
[monks] who make a plausible outward show will cut off their false path by
themselves, and [those] who believe in the [Buddhist] Way and embrace the
truth in their minds will not be suspected of turning their backs on the secular
world. Thus, the [Buddhist] Way and the secular world will ﬂourish together
and the Three Treasures will again prosper here.
The reason I live in the Jiangnan area is because I wish to rely on the one
who practices the [Buddhist] Way in order to maintain the great enterprise

228

Fascicle Twelve

(i.e., Buddhism). The rise and fall of the [great] enterprise truly depends on
this person. I happened to meet in these years when you, our donor, [have
come to the forefront]. This is the best time for me to restore [Buddhism].
My secret feeling to rely on you was already formed in our former existences.
Accordingly, in letters I often sent to you I considered that relying on you is
the foremost point. Every time I ﬁnd that your letter comforts me, I keep
your favor in my mind and never forget it. I am simply afraid that as I grow
older and older with the change of times I will not be able to see your prosperous ediﬁcation through to the end. Therefore, I now confer with you about
several articles, as [outlined in] the attached paper.
According to what is stated in the teachings of the Buddhist scriptures
there are generally three classes [of Buddhists]. First is the class of those
who enter the subtle [state] through meditation; second are those who recite
and appreciate the scriptures left [by the Buddha]; last are those who perform
meritorious acts. These three classes are truly separate from one another but
they all make acts based on the Vinaya as the foundation. [The three kinds
of Buddhist monks] recently [identiﬁed by] you, our donor, in your decree
appear to be almost the same as these classes. There is no question about
these [three classes of Buddhist monks].
[Nevertheless,] among those who establish meritorious acts there are some
who do not violate the precepts in their minds yet live in a place other than
a hermitage; there are those who recite many Buddhist scriptures and chant
them continually, yet they cannot smoothly explain the doctrines; or there
are those who are already aged and do not fall under the three classes [mentioned above], yet whose essential nature is pure and virtuous and who do
not do serious evil. Generally, people like these are suspect. When I make a
thorough investigation on the regulation of your [decree] to banish [unqualiﬁed
monks] now, these people should not be targeted for interrogation; otherwise,
the people of the world will be anxious and confused [about your decree]
and no one will be able to feel peaceful. Therefore I clearly state this.
It is easy to examine outward appearance and manner but difﬁcult to distinguish truth from falsehood. Except for someone who has a deep ability to
examine and study, it is truly difﬁcult to clarify this. Śramaṇas who reside
in the metropolitan city and whom you, our donor, can [directly] see and

229

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

85c

hear assuredly have nothing that makes them suspect. If government ofﬁces
in the border regions are remote and [clear] information does not reach them,
and [the people in these ofﬁces] do not understand the purpose of your decree,
then they may take advantage of Heaven’s auspicious decree and unreasonably
include good people in [the purge]. This is my deepest concern. If an executive
ofﬁcial of each ofﬁce has no detailed idea [about the decree], and if at that time
there are no experienced and reputable śramaṇas who can make a correct judgment, please have the reports sent to the central government ofﬁce in order to
be examined by you. Then it will be great in reason. I think that you, our donor,
have wondrous thoughts and already understand this. This is merely my commonplace feeling. Therefore I could not stop speaking to you about it.
If among the sons of powerful families there are lineages that are originally
exempt from corvée labor, those [whose families] follow the great Dharma from
generation to generation or who are known to be intelligent by nature when
they are young and who wish to renounce the secular world, enter the [Buddhist]
Way, and strive to become a śramaṇa, then when I infer from the regulation [of
the decree] and think of the intention, it seems that [these cases] will not be
blocked from their pure path. However, you must confer and settle this point
and cause those who purify their minds and head toward the goal to have no
doubt about themselves. In former times many foreign kings applied their minds
to sacred [Buddhist] scriptures. Moreover, in accordance with the times, some
kings helped the propagation of the great ediﬁcation, protected [the Buddhist
Way] from danger, and saved it from disadvantage. Truly there are reasons for
this. Since you, our donor, often hope to equalize your frame of mind with those
of ancient [wise] people, I again brieﬂy state what I have learned.

Letter Given to Huan Xuan to
Discuss that the Provincial Office
Requests to Register Śramaṇas
by Dharma Teacher Zhi Daolin325

On the ﬁfth day of the fourth month of the third year of Long’an (399), we,
śramaṇas of the metropolitan city, bow with our heads to the ground and speak.
If there is the fundamental [principle] in the culmination of manifestation,
those who rely upon this will reach it. If the law agrees with what is supernatural and profound, we will more deeply receive favor. Therefore, Confucius

230

Fascicle Twelve

emptied his room [to travel around] and Yan [Yuan] forgot to go home because
of pleasures elsewhere. Isn’t it the case that they both had abundant morality
but simply forgot to return home?
Even though we have an ordinary personality and are frivolous in practice,
we respect the Three Treasures and cultivate ourselves with them. Our affection [for Buddhism] came from Heaven and we had faith [in Buddhism]
before learning it. As for the merit (i.e., enlightenment) attained by diminishing
day after day,326 however, we place our hands on our chests and increase our
lamentation. Throwing ourselves under the wings of sage rulers and sagacious
kings, we are personally able to further propagate the [Buddhist] Way. You
enable those who live in the mountains to have their own way in cultivation
and those who live near a city to be quietly proﬁcient in [the teaching].
Because the Imperial favor is broadly poured on us, even the decayed trunk
of a tree may be covered by lush vegetation.
Nevertheless, the status of śramaṇas in the world may be simply compared
to that of unloaded boats that converge at a great gorge. When they come
they do not think anything, and when they go they take advantage of tranquility. Somewhat to our surprise, there is no abode for them in this world.
If the country is in a troubled state they travel alone, shaking a walking stick.
When the [Buddhist] Way is diffused they gladly gather together. Therefore,
there is truly a reason for śramaṇas to come from distant places.
You try to raise great disciplines in the period of decadence and extend
sincerity for a hundred generations, but these days we are frequently requested
by the provincial ofﬁce to present the register of śramaṇas. The situation
has become acute and very urgent. We have not yet understood your lofty
purpose for this. Rustics easily become fearful and deeply anxious. Consequently, this causes people who meditate to lose their calmness and gentlemen
who practice diligently to discontinue their practice. We lose the essence and
vital energy and cannot sleep until dawn. We are uneasy and do not know
how to calm ourselves.
We humbly pray that our bright lord will raise the customs handed down
from [Tao] Tang (i.e., Emperor Yao) to a high rank and treat Buddhist monks
kindly under these conventions. Please allow those who hold the [Buddhist]
Way in mind to attain liberation and all those who have the noble aspiration
to achieve their goal. Their bodies will perish and they will exhaust their bodies

231

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

and complete their lives here. Your Majesty’s thought and judgment is extremely
far-reaching. Though we have not yet written everything, we respectfully
submit this to Imperial hearing. Having done so, we are humbly frightened.

Report to Emperor Wu of the Qi
Dynasty to Discuss the Issue of
the Inspection and Examination
of Buddhist Monks by Shi
Daosheng of Tianbao Temple

86a

I, Shi Daosheng of Tianbao Temple, report.
Formerly Confucius educated three thousand disciples. Among them, those
who studied astronomy wore a round cap and those who studied geography
put on rectangular shoes. Zhuang Zhou of Chu state visited Lord Ai [of Lu
state] and said, “I have heard that there are quite a few people who are well
acquainted with astronomy and geography in this country. Please let me test
them.” Lord Ai immediately sent out an ofﬁcial announcement through the
country, ordered those who were versed in astronomy to wear a round cap
and those who were learned in geography to put on rectangular shoes, and
commanded all to come to the gate [of his palace]. Confucius alone arrived
at the gate and answered all the questions. Therefore it is known that all the
other scholars adopted the [Confucian style of] dress arbitrarily.
Śākyamuni emeged into this world, expounded the Four Noble Truths
and the six pāramitās, and established various precepts and deportment. [His
disciples] such as Śāriputra all attained arhatship. Accordingly, it is known
that the great Dharma is not something that has no fundamental truth.
Nevertheless, from that time (i.e., the time when the Buddha resided in
the world) on people’s faculties have become dull and we have become far
removed from the [Buddhist] Way. Our minds are bound with deﬁlements.
If we can leave behind the thought [of desire] we will be in accord with the
precepts and codes of conduct. If not, we will be [like] those who arbitrarily
put on [Buddhist] robes.
I humbly pray, Your Majesty, that with your holy brightness you will
deeply understand this principle and not assume that [we śramaṇas are simply]
ordinary people who seek the Way of the Sage.

232

Fascicle Twelve

In ancient times Zichan of Zheng state was praised as a great wise person
but he still was unable to correct his faults and was jeered at by Shentu Jia.327
This goes without saying for bhikṣus of the present time, in the age of the
Decadent Dharma. How can they correct their faults? If one cannot correct
his faults he will certainly give rise to evil intentions. How can the three
administrative monks of the temple fulﬁll your order? There is criminal law
in the country. I pray that you will decree that the local government ofﬁce
should punish [evil bhikṣus] according to the offense [they have committed].
We would be happy if we do not confuse you [by doing so].
Illness due to old age rages within me, but I admire the complaints board
of remote antiquity328 and dare to express this. I bend down over the paper
and break into a cold sweat.
Sincerely yours.
End of Fascicle Twelve of The Collection for the Propagation
and Clariﬁcation [of Buddhism]

233

Fascicle Thirteen
Essentials for Believing in the
Dharma by Palace Secretary
Chi [Chao]329

The threefold refuge (Skt. triśaraṇa-gamana) refers to taking refuge in the
Buddha, the twelve kinds of Buddhist scriptures, and the Buddhist order.
You must always worship and repent your sins to the buddhas of the three
temporal worlds of past, present, and future in the ten directions [of the universe], the doctrine of the scriptures of the three temporal worlds in the ten
directions, and the Buddhist order of the three temporal worlds in the ten
directions. We must take refuge with an utmost mind in each part of [this
triad]. At the same time, we should think of all sentient beings with compassion
and benevolence and pray that they will all attain liberation.
What is called namo in the foreign language (Skt. namas) means “to surrender
oneself to” in the Chinese language. [The word] “buddha” means “awakened
one” and [the word] “sangha” means “a group” in the Chinese language.
The ﬁve precepts [for lay Buddhists] are: (1) not to kill, nor to cause others
to do so, and to always be sure to observe [this precept] ﬁrmly to the end of
one’s life; (2) not to steal nor to cause others to do so, and to always be sure
to observe [this precept] ﬁrmly to the end of one’s life; (3) not to commit
adultery nor to cause others to commit it, and to always be sure to observe
[this precept] ﬁrmly to the end of one’s life; (4) not to speak falsehoods nor
to cause others to do so, and to always be sure to observe [this precept] ﬁrmly
to the end of one’s life; and (5) not to drink intoxicants, nor to give intoxicants
as a gift or a treat [to others], and to always be sure to observe [this precept]
ﬁrmly to the end of one’s life.
When an intoxicant is used for medicinal purposes the dosage must be
weighed; it is important to stay within the limit of sobriety. Drunkenness
causes thirty-six faults and the scriptural teachings take this as a serious precept.
If there are no acts of killing [all creatures] can live a long time. If there
are no acts of stealing [the world] will always remain peaceful and safe. If

235

86b

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

there is no adulterous conduct, we remain clean and pure. If there are no
falsehoods people will always respect and trust each other. If there is no
drunkenness our spirits are clear and in good order.
After [mastering] observation of the ﬁve precepts, we then perform puriﬁcation for three periods every year and six days each month. The three periods
in a year for puriﬁcation are from the ﬁrst to the ﬁfteenth day of the ﬁrst,
ﬁfth, and ninth months. The six monthly days for puriﬁcation are the eighth,
the fourteenth, the ﬁfteenth, the twenty-third, the twenty-ninth, and the thirtieth
day of each month.
On all puriﬁcation days ﬁsh and meat must not be offered. We eat before
noon and must not partake of anything such as sweets and delicious food in
the afternoon. We cleanse our minds, keep our minds on the [Buddhist] Way,
take refuge in the three revered ones (i.e., the Three Treasures), repent our
sins, reproach ourselves, and practice the four immeasurable minds. We stay
away from the inner chamber (i.e., engagement in sexual relations) and do
not become attached to the six desires. We must not whip or curse others,
nor ride in an oxcart or horse-drawn carriage, and we must not carry weapons.
Regarding [lay]women, over and above these [rules of deportment] they
must abstain from adorning themselves with perfume, ﬂowers, and cosmetics,
correct their minds, rectify their thoughts, and strive to remain docile.
The puriﬁcation is extensively performed for the sake of one’s acquaintances and relatives, both those who have passed away and those who are
still alive, as well as for all sentient beings. Everyone will come to awaken
the aspiration [for enlightenment] (Skt. bodhicitta) on the basis of this utmost
sincerity. Once our minds have become inspired [toward enlightenment] we
will ﬁnally avoid the suffering caused by the sins [we have committed].
Therefore, loyal and ﬁlial people make effort and encourage themselves to
perform [puriﬁcation]. This is really for the merit of liberation of all people,
not simply for one’s own sake.
On the day of puriﬁcation we must devote ourselves solely to practicing
the profound contemplation and recite the words of the Dharma. If we are
unable to practice [the contemplation on] emptiness, we must learn the six
kinds of mindfulness (Skt. ṣaḍ anusmṛti). The six kinds of mindfulness refer
to: (1) mindfulness of the Buddha, (2) mindfulness of the [Buddhist] scriptures,
(3) mindfulness of the sangha, (4) mindfulness of donations, (5) mindfulness

236

Fascicle Thirteen

of the precepts, and (6) mindfulness of Heaven. What is meant by “mindfulness of Heaven”? The ten wholesome acts and the four immeasurable
minds are considered to be the acts [that lead us] to be reborn in Heaven.
Moreover, it essentially means to exert ourselves to the best of our ability to
save all sentient beings.
The ten wholesome acts refer to not committing the bodily sins of killing,
stealing, and adultery, not committing the mental sins of envy, rage, and
ignorance, and not committing the verbal sins of telling lies, engaging in idle
talk, being duplicitous, and using abusive language.
What is meant by “not killing”? We must always be compassionate toward
all living creatures, including vermicular animals. Even in desperate circumstances we must never harm them. Whenever sentient beings are facing a
disaster or danger we must devote all our energies to rescue them and return
them to the water or the land, according to wherever they used to live. In the
case where there is doubt whether [a living thing] was killed for our beneﬁt
(i.e., slaughtered for food) we must not receive [any beneﬁt from the killing].
What is meant by “stealing”? This generally means to take things that are
not our own possessions, regardless of size, as well as to become corrupt
when in an ofﬁcial position. These are all called “stealing.”
What is meant by “adultery”? All kinds of attachments are generally called
“excessive desires.” As applied to sexual desire, we must not engage in sexual
relations with anyone other than our ofﬁcially married spouse. In addition,
since [adultery involves having an illicit] secret [relationship with someone]
that cannot be made public, it is simultaneously a sin of “stealing.”
What is called “envy” is jealousy. When we see others’ good points, or
we see that other people are virtuous we all must replace [any sense of envy]
with great joy. We must not give rise to rivalry or thoughts of jealous hatred.
What is called “rage” is that the mind harbors wrath and keeps deﬁlement
within it.
What is called “ignorance” is to have no faith in the great Dharma and to
doubt the scriptural teachings.
What is meant by “telling lies” is to consider nonexistence to be existence
and to fabricate groundless assertions.
What is meant by “idle talk” is rhetorical embellishments and sweetsounding words, which may be beautiful but lack substance.

237

86c

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

What is meant by “being duplicitous”? This means to say different things
to one’s face and behind his back, and be self-contradictory.
What is meant by “abusive language”? This refers to reviling [others].
Some people say that abusive language also refers to speaking unwholesome
things and cause people to blindly follow [this speech] and commit sin.
On the whole, we must not give rise in the mind to any of these ten
[unwholesome] behaviors even for a moment. These are the ten wholesome
acts and [refraining from them is] also called the ten precepts. The ﬁve
precepts regulate bodily acts and the ten wholesome acts serve to protect
one’s mind from evil. There is a difference between crudeness and ﬁneness
in acts. Accordingly, there is a difference between light and heavy reward
and retribution [for these acts].
Generally, the relative world [where sentient beings transmigrate from
one life to another] is collectively called the three realms of existence, within
which there are ﬁve paths, those of (1) heavenly beings, (2) human beings,
(3) animals, (4) hungry ghosts, and (5) inhabitants of the hells.
Those who completely observe the ﬁve precepts will possess a human
form. Those who complete the ten wholesome acts will be reborn in Heaven.
Even those who complete only one [of the ﬁve] precepts will be able to
become human beings. There are differences among people regarding their
social rank or life span. These [differences] are due to how many precepts
one has observed [in his or her previous existences].
The opposite of the ten wholesome acts are the ten evil acts. Those who
have committed all ten evil acts will fall into hell.330 Those who are bellicose
and obstinate, who disregard sincere remonstrance, whose minds are full of
poisonous thoughts, and who deceive others to proﬁt themselves fall either
into the realm of animals or are reborn as snakes or vipers. Those who are
stingy and greedy, who monopolize proﬁts, and who always complain of dissatisfaction fall into the realm of hungry ghosts. Those whose sins are somewhat light but who often keep [their misdeeds] secret, and whose personal
feelings are not fair and clear, all fall into the state of spiritual beings (guishen).
Even though they may enjoy a little happiness they cannot avoid suffering
from pain. These [three realms] (i.e., hell, the realm of hungry ghosts, and
the realm of animals) are called the three lowest realms of existence (santu)
and also called the three evil paths (san’edao).

238

Fascicle Thirteen

Form, perception [consisting of pain (tong) and pleasure (yang; literally
meaning “itch”)], conception [consisting of thinking and recollection], volition
[consisting of arising and extinction], and consciousness are called the ﬁve
skandhas (Sk. pāñcaskandha). Generally all external things that have a shape
and are visible are called form. Losing this [form] and becoming sad and
distressed is [the perception] of pain. Having this [form] and being greatly
delighted is [the perception] of pleasure. Considering beforehand what has
not yet taken place is thinking, and looking back at what has already happened
is recollection. That mental functions begin to take place refers to arising,
and that recollection has ended and consciousness has been extinguished
refers to extinction. That which formerly was involved [in the mind], stored
there, and never forgotten is consciousness. Consciousness still germinates
in the mind after having passed through a succession of kalpas. Even though
its derivation is obscure it is deeply rooted [in the mind] and is secretly linked
to [other consciousness]. What is as small as a hair’s breadth in the beginning
becomes as large as a huge gulf or high mountain in the end. For this reason
those who learn [Buddhism] try to be prudent even in things in which they
are well versed.
The ﬁve hindrances that cover one’s mind (Skt. pañca-nivaraṇā) are: (1)
greed and excessive desire, (2) anger (hatred and resentment), (3) ignorance;
(4) holding wrong views, and (5) dallying [with someone of the opposite
sex].331 Speaking of each [hindrance] separately, the desire to seek something
is greed; extreme attachment to things is excessive desire; the external expression of [anger] is a hateful glare and smoldering [anger] is resentment; and
being bound by deﬁlements, offending the right path, and being perverse and
confused are ignorance. Ignorance is the foundation of the causality of birth
and death. All kinds of various attachments entirely begin with ignorance.
Painful torment in hell mostly results from anger. A sutra says, “The sin of
committing murder in an unexpected ﬁght is still light, but if one harbors
poison in the mind and conspires [to commit a murder] the sin coagulates
more and more through a succession of kalpas and the person has no time
for liberation.”332
The six feelings (Skt. ṣaḍ-āyatana), also called the six [elements of] decay
or the six desires [corresponding to the six sense organs,] are the visual perception of form, the auditory perception of sound, the olfactory perception

239

87a

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

of smell, the gustatory perception of ﬂavor, the tactile perception of touch,
and the mental perception of recognition. Recognition is consciousness of
[the ﬁve] skandhas mentioned above. I am inclined to think that the ﬁve
skandhas and the six desires [corresponding to the six sense organs] are the
origins of the transmigration of birth and death and [thus] the source of all
sin and suffering. The methods to remove and control these are set forth in
detail in numerous sutras.
A sutra says, “The mind makes one a heavenly being. The mind makes
one a human being. The mind makes one an inhabitant of hell. The mind
makes one an animal. Even those who attain the Way owe [this accomplishment] to the mind.”333
Whenever a thought is impelled by the mind, each and every thought is
subject to reward and retribution. Even if an action has not yet taken place
the hidden response is constituted in the unseen world. Thoughts arising from
feelings move swiftly and smoothly. They abruptly emerge one after another,
without cessation. The mechanism [of causality] very slightly moves but
then ﬁlls the universe. Fortune and misfortune [as reward and retribution]
and one’s physical form and destination (Skt. gati) [in the next existence]
entirely derive from [thoughts arising from feelings]. Good or bad luck,
repentance or regret, are determined in a moment. Therefore, those who practice the [Buddhist] Way must mentally exercise caution when alone to obviate
[evil thoughts] while they are still minor, to take the beginning [of a matter]
into account, to consider the highest doctrine to be like a city wall and moat
[that provide a barrier against evil], to manage the foundation always in order
to control the end, and to not rashly give rise to thoughts simply because any
action [arising from thought] has not yet taken place. How could they be
concerned only with “[Good] words expressed in a house are responded to
from a place a thousand li away,”334 or that one is prudent in his bodily actions
because “nothing is more visible than what is secret”?335
The second translation of the Sutra of Twelve Gates (Shiermen jing) says,336
“If one has a good point he should always hide it. If one has a bad point he
should bring it forth.”
A gentleman does not set his mind either for anything or against anything.337
If one has faults and does not repent [of his folly], certainly he will not feel
satisﬁed with himself. [Therefore,] he had better abandon the course of action

240

Fascicle Thirteen

within the circumstance he has been given. How can one worry about the
matter of whether [his actions] are known or hidden? If this is so, the application of the teaching lies in [our mental attitude] in ordinary [daily life].
When we examine the laws of nature working in evil acts and meritorious
deeds, we see that the more [an evil intention] leaks out, the lighter [the sin]
will be, and the more [an evil intention] is inwardly accumulated, the heavier
[the sin]. Once an [evil] act is set forth in the human world retribution in the
unseen world will certainly be lessened.
Moreover, boasting about wholesome acts and making a display of one’s
meritorious deeds are the grand reality of human beings. Covering up one’s
faults and speaking of one’s demerits in ﬁne language are common among
all people. If wholesome conduct is apparent, the achievement becomes
known. If the achievement becomes known, public praise centers on one
[who has made wholesome conduct]. If someone is concerned about stopping
[evil] and encouraging [virtue] in his feeling, and if public praise centers on
him from the outside, he will then harbor greed [to retain praise], which certainly ﬁlls him from within. Furthermore, a gentleman among human beings
is still a small man of Heaven.338 [Even so he is a gentleman,] not to speak
of one whose benevolence is immature and whose fame does not match with
reality. Such a person certainly deserves punishment in the unseen world.
Except for those who possess virtue, we all surely have some incompleteness. If one were to frankly expose [his transgressions] to everyone [his sin]
will disperse along with [his transgressions]. If he allows an unjust thought
to become imprinted on his mind, harbors it, maintains his honor outwardly
in order to avoid others’ reproach and win worldly fame, he then greatly
insults the laws of nature. The punishment of nature will be even heavier!
Therefore, Zhuangzi said, “If one does evil secretly and stealthily, spirits can
punish him.”339
Moreover, regarding human feelings, one does not feel shame before the
laws [of nature] yet does before the public. If his fault is revealed he will be
blamed. If he is blamed, he will be ashamed. If that feeling occurs and if he
compensates for [his fault], no further transgression will be accumulated.
[On the other hand,] if one presumes that [his fault] will not be revealed, he
will not reform himself after all. In addition, if heavenly blame [for his fault]
ﬁlls one’s mind and he fears that it will be revealed, he will inwardly worry

241

87b

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

about everything and take precautions even more skillfully. He will thus be
in distress for the rest of his life about this one matter. Disasters from Heaven
and the troubles of the human world will surely and suddenly visit him in
the end. This is probably because he did not refrain from giving rise to the
[evil] scheme at the beginning, concealed the fault, and did not praise what
is wholesome.
The Sutra on the Formal Puriﬁcation (Zhengzhai jing) says,340 “You may
simply speak of a hundred good things of others, but you must not speak of
even a single evil thing of others.” When we speak of others’ wholesomeness
we give rise to a wholesome mind. When we speak of others’ evils we give
rise to an angry intention. Even though [such a wholesome or unwholesome]
intention may be small at ﬁrst, it gradually grows by accumulation. For this
reason, a good thought produces an immense amount of wholesomeness,
while an evil thought produces a vast amount of unwholesomeness.
Ancient people said, “The prosperity of a military family does not last
more than three generations.” Chen Ping also said, “Because I have laid
many plots, my descendants will not become prosperous.”341 If we refer to
[these words] and take them as a teaching, it is truly worthy to propagate
[Buddhism in China].
Nevertheless, in [the royal families of] of Qi state and Chu state [whose
founders committed evil deeds], their descendants enjoyed [power] generation
after generation, while the descendants of [such virtuous people] as Yan [Hui]
and Ran [Boniu, who both died young], received no prominent reward. Since
it is already obvious in these cases [that the subject of reward and retribution
lies in oneself], this is not a matter that can be clariﬁed logically.
Moreover, Gun was put to death but [his son,] Emperor Yu, became prosperous. Xi and Fu were [both brothers of the Yangshe but they] differed from
each other in appearance.342 It has been a constant rule for a hundred generations
to punish the four criminals (i.e., Gonggong, Huandou, the chief of Sanmiao,
and Gun)343 yet not to blame [their families and relatives]. Even when sage
kings ruled over the world there was no unjustiﬁable [punishment]. How
much less so when the profound response of nature works without private
inﬂuence! Nevertheless, [if someone were to say that] reward and retribution
fall wrongly and good and evil are not made clear, then that person brings a
false charge against the laws [of nature]. This is also serious, without doubt.

242

Fascicle Thirteen

Furthermore, in the Qin dynasty the [practice of exacting] punishment on
three generations of family members along with the offender was instituted.344
They still took the offender to be the principal, but after the principal offender
was punished his kin were then also subjected to punishment. If a punishment
is not inﬂicted on the offender while disasters (i.e., punishments) befall the
offender’s kin, and if this practice is legislated, it would not only be allowed
in rules made by sages but would also certainly be rejected even by [penologists such as] Shen [Buhai] and Han [Fei]. Therefore, the Nirvana Sutra
says, “If the father does something evil the son does not suffer for his father.
If the son does something evil the father does not suffer for his son, either.
One who does good obtains a reward by himself, and one who does evil
receives retribution by himself.”345 How truthful this is! These words ﬁll our
minds and accord with the laws [of nature].
If we investigate [why] the worldly teaching [that ancestors’ good or evil
conduct results in their descendants’ happiness or misery] originated, isn’t
it because [people] feel that the way [of reward and retribution] does not
stop even after they themselves have been punished? The more widely [reward
and retribution] spreads, the deeper the people’s prudence and fear will be.
Therefore, [the sages who established the worldly teaching] conceal the truth,
just as if they were placing [a beautiful gem] in a case,346 and they often
explain this by [giving] a familiar example in order to teach and guide ordinary
people of the secular world. This way is not deﬁcient in punishing [evil] and
urging people toward [virtue], and it accords with that with which the people
are content. Those who have [the Buddhist teaching] in mind should leave
out events [they experience], know this point, and understand the profound
intentions. If one sticks to written words without understanding thoroughly
the expedient way, if one recklessly follows the teaching without reaching
the heart of the teaching, and if one measures himself by this [prejudiced]
way and tries to comply with the truth, aren’t such people misdirected?
Regarding evil acts and meritorious deeds in [the law of] right and wrong,
there are certainly reward and retribution without fail. If one is ignorant of
this truth he will have no ﬁxed position for right and wrong and his mind
will have no authority in which to trust. When we examine [the law of karma]
only in regard to the present existence, [we ﬁnd that] it is truly vague and
there is scant evidence. There is no mistake or unreasonableness in the law

243

87c

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

[of karma] but the actual fact is not constantly apparent. How could we not
consider it all to be due to conditions from our previous existences that extend
to future existences? Consequently, those who set their minds on the law [of
karma] ascertain the undeceivable [certainty of this law, just as] a shadow
[follows a form] and an echo [follows a sound], reject verifying [the law] in
phenomena, and rely on the unseen world. Because we understand that “The
meshes of the heavenly net are large, far apart, [but they let nothing escape],”347
we hope that nothing will escape. We realize that time continues without
interruption, see ten thousand kalpas to be the same as a brief space of time,
lump the three periods of existence together and take them all to be one, and
seek the ﬁnal result as that which inevitably comes. [If we think in this way,]
why should we reform ourselves depending on revealing or concealing [our
sins], or why would we have to change our thought depending on whether
[reward and retribution] will come slowly or quickly? This is the chief foundation for those who have the initial faith [in Buddhism] and something that
is deeply hoped for by those whose minds are bound by karma.
The Sutra of the Twelve Gates says, “Sometimes, if you think of yourself
that you are correct and good, you must then examine yourself [in the following way]. There is nothing in your body but liver, intestines, stomach,
lungs, bones, blood, excrement, and urine. What good things do you possess?
Moreover, when you observe other people’s bodies, [be aware that] their
impurities are all the same as these.”348 If stinginess and greedy intentions
arise, you must remember that all your property and jewelry and valuables
neither came with you when you were born, nor will they go with you when
you die. [Time] passes and [everything] changes; it is even impossible to
guarantee that [something that happens in] the morning [will be the same
in] the evening. Your body does not last long and nothing has a permanent
possessor. In the present existence we should bestow favor on others and
show kindness to them, offering money to the poor and saving the sick with
medicine. We must delightedly live all day long diligently watching over
others and providing relief to them. If an angry intention arises you must
deeply produce [a mind of] equality and concurrently observe the ten precepts.
The Kṣemaṃkara-paripṛcchā (Chamojie jing; i.e., Pusa shengdi jing)
says, “Among the bodhisattva practices forbearance is the greatest. If bodhisattvas are called names they keep silent and express no reaction. If they are

244

Fascicle Thirteen

beaten they receive [the beating] and never retaliate. If they encounter an
angry person they face him with compassion. If they are slandered they do
not think of the slanderer’s vice.”349 Furthermore, the Dhammapada (Faju
jing) says, “When you are disgraced, your mind should be [as ﬁrm as] earth.
When you practice forbearance, you should be like a doorsill.”350 The examples
of “earth” and “doorsill” are probably used because these are things that are
covered with dust, soiled with mud, and trampled upon all day long.
The Sutra on the Complete Accomplishment of the Light Samādhi (Chengju
guangming dingyi jing) says, “If a person inﬂicts the four kinds of [verbal]
transgression on you, you will be aware of the verbal faults. You should
respond to such a person with well-intentioned words and peaceful expressions. You should be greatly sincere and not ostentatious.”351 The four kinds
of [verbal] transgression refer to being duplicitous, engaging in abusive language, telling lies, and engaging in idle talk, as mentioned above. When
someone comes to you with evil and you respond with wholesomeness, if
his mind is not that of a senseless being he will be moved in reason. You
should be concerned only that you may not always cope with such a case in
this way and do not accumulate [merit] by developing this manner. If you
can keep forbearance in mind on every occasion, regret and stinginess will
disappear in this life and a happy reward will appear in the future.
The Sutra on the Virtue of a Wise Person (Xianzhede jing) says,352 “If
your mind is unstable, never bite at others.” Speaking in familiar language,
this is the way of magnanimity. If we infer this to the highest point, it is the
meaning of the four immeasurable minds. What are the four immeasurable
minds? They are benevolence (ci), compassion (bei), joy (xi), and protection
(hu).353 What is meant by benevolence? It means to feel pity for sentient
beings, to regard all beings as equal to yourself, to be merciful in putting
yourself in another person’s position, to pray to be able to provide for all
beings to be easy and comfortable, to extend your love [to all beings,] even
to insects, and to have a feeling of nondiscrimination. What is meant by compassion? It means to love others universally, to save [all beings] equally, to
let [compassionate] tears fall like rain, and to exhibit innate mercy. You must
cause a real achievement to reveal itself secretly. It is not [enough] to simply
have a mind [of compassion]. What is meant by joy? It means to be joyful,
happy, and gentle and to make donations without regret. What is meant by

245

88a

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

protection? It means to save living things, skillfully following the expedient
case by case, to understand the way to liberate people, and to strive and think
broadly of salvation for them.
Those who can practice the four immeasurable minds are the most
esteemed in the three realms of existence. However, if you are unable to
efface yourself in the state of no portent, then your fate is sealed to certainly
come to an end. Therefore, the [Taizi ruiying] benqi jing says, “Although all
heavenly beings have a happy time, when their merit is exhausted [their happiness] comes to an end, too. When you reach the apex of glory, the way to
Heaven is right across from [the way to] hell.”354 The Sutra on the Complete
Accomplishment of the Light Samādhi furthermore says, “Fortune has suffering, deﬁlement, vexation, and coming and going (i.e., the transmigration
of birth and death).”355 The Nirvana Sutra says, “In the ﬁve realms of existence
there is no peace. Only nirvana is pleasurable.”356
The sutras say, “Those who practice the [Buddhist] Way must ﬁrst reject
the eight worldly matters: gain and loss, slander and fame, praise and ridicule,
sorrow and joy.”357 [Those who practice the Buddhist Way] are neither pleased
when they hear about wholesomeness, nor fearful when they hear about
unwholesomeness. If one’s faith is spontaneously ﬁrm, neither encouragement
nor discouragement can change his will. Since the truth has become rooted
in him, objects of the external world cannot offend his thoughts. Moreover,
whatever he encounters in this existence must have been caused by conditions
from previous existences. Conditions caused in previous existences mysteriously keep moving, and their working is just the same as the operation of
the four seasons. It is impossible to guard against their advent or to stop their
passing away. Assuredly we must submit to this, be content with it, and
delightedly complete it. If we cordially enhance ourselves in the training of
Buddhism, expect various things and yet are unmindful of them, since the
retribution upon one’s body has ceased one will attain the great peace.
The truth is founded in the mind, and reward and retribution manifests
itself in a factual matter. [This relation] is compared to the fact that if a form
is upright then its shadow appears straight, too, or if a sound is peaceful then
its echo is agreeable to the ears. This is the profound response of nature.
How could there be one who does this?

246

Fascicle Thirteen

If this is so, those who harmonize their minds with the Way of the Spirit
should expect assuredly to lead their minds to the truth, strive to have the
far-reaching thought, efface their minds, correct themselves, and have no
expectation of obtaining help from others. They must neither be in contact
with vile and profane things, nor make demands according to their feelings.
These are the keys for those who hold [Buddhism] in their minds, and the
points to which those who learn [Buddhism] should attend.
Some people say, “If a thought surely brings reward and retribution and
this law is as inevitable as the relationship between [a form and] its shadow
or between [a sound and] its echo, then we should solely rely on ourselves.
Certainly this has nothing to do with what is dark and abstruse.”
When we investigate why the teachings of the scriptures were established,
we see that the reason is probably to make us aware of relying on ourselves.
In the way to rely on oneself, however, there is no awakening that is not
based on the teachings. If awakening is based on the teachings the merit [one
may obtain from relying on oneself] derives from the Way of the Spirit. If
exultation arises within the mind, [this feeling] certainly takes a deﬁnite form
in phenomena. It is just like when simply singing a song is not enough [to
express an exultant feeling], so one [also] dances for joy. If this is so, to
admire and respect [the teachings] is probably not necessary in reason but it
cannot be rejected in feeling. We should efface ourselves and master thoroughly the tenor of the teachings and absorbedly and joyfully think of [the
teachings]. We must place ourselves in sentient beings’ place in order to lead
them with our own bodies. Consequently, we can secure the ambitions of
new followers [of Buddhism] and cause them to have the determination to
consign their feelings to [Buddhism].
A sutra says, “Birth is suffering, aging is suffering, sickness is suffering,
death is suffering, meeting one’s enemies is suffering, separation from loved
ones is suffering, and not obtaining what one wants is suffering.”358 If you
encounter any of these types of suffering you should think that such suffering
is simply a result from what you have done in previous existences, and concurrently you should realize that this is an evil falsehood. You must awake
from [these delusions] through a farsighted view and enlarge [merit] with
the [four] immeasurable minds.

247

88b

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

Moreover, our brief lifetimes are as short as the time it takes for a white
colt to pass a crevice.359 Even though we all have different circumstances,
we all pass away in the end. The number of our successes and failures certainly
does not deserve counting. If you practice the several ways [mentioned above]
concurrently, this thought (i.e., counting up one’s successes and failures) will
naturally cease. Furthermore, if you do not enter the [Buddhist] Way, weal
and woe arise alternately. In the collecting and dispersing [of the vapor] (i.e.,
birth and death)360 or in going and coming (i.e., transmigration in birth and
death), both the wise and the foolish attain the same thing. Therefore, sutras
say, “If there is peace, then there is danger. If there is gain, there is loss. If
there is a meeting, there is separation. If there is birth, there is death.”361 This
is probably the common force of nature and the ﬁxed rule that inevitably
visits you. If you infer [this rule] and pacify [your mind], you will be at ease
in whatever you do.
The Vimalakīrtinirdeśa-sūtra says, “All phenomenal things take form following the workings of a mind.”362 If this is so, there is a sign of a [mental]
activity at the beginning and then a phenomenon responds to it later. A thought
arises and then there is [a phenomenon]. When thought ceases there is no
[phenomenon]. When your mind is stable you are at ease in whatever circumstance you encounter. When your feelings are hindered you are inactive
wherever you go. Speaking from this point, the cause of doing something
smoothly or being inactive lies within oneself, not in the external world. If
fear arises in the mind, a misfortune from the external world takes advantage
of [your fear]. When misfortune from the external world takes advantage,
fear increases in the mind. If you are anxious that you may lose something,
there is nothing to which you will not proceed.363 Therefore, a sutra says,
“When a person (zhangfu) is fearful, non-human beings (i.e., ghosts or apparitions) take advantage of [his fear].”364 If you are able to abide by the [Buddhist]
doctrines and the natural bastion is ﬁrm in your mind, other people and spiritual beings will have no chance to take advantage and the predetermined
response will spontaneously cease. In all phenomena there will be nothing
that can disturb you and no evils will be able to assail you.
The four types of impermanent things are (1) impermanence (Skt. anitya),
(2) suffering (Skt. duḥkha), (3) emptiness (Skt. śūnyatā), and (4) non-self
(Skt. anātman). The fact that our bodies change as we go from young to old

248

Fascicle Thirteen

or that a hill and a valley change places [as time goes on] is called impermanence. That arising and falling away alternate or that joy at its summit
certainly turns into grief is called suffering. That all phenomena ﬁnally end
in nothingness is called emptiness. That the spirit does not have a permanent
dwelling and transmigrates without cessation is called non-self.
A sutra says, “If you place yourself in delusive pleasure you will be aware
of [the truth that] there will inevitably be a response of suffering to this.”365
This is probably to regard changes as going and returning and to discern that
when pleasure departs, grief arrives. Therefore, even if you reside in peace
you still worry about danger, and if you enjoy a good reputation [during the
day] you become anxious [about losing it] in the evening.
To deeply concentrate one’s thought on suffering is called clarifying the
truth (Skt. dṛṣṭa-satya). This is to realize that having a mind means to have
hindrance, and having hindrance means that suffering exists. Even if one
were to become the noblest in the heavenly and human realms and concurrently have a high rank, the more signiﬁcant one’s position, the deeper his
arrogance. The greater one’s pleasurable feeling, the more suffering there
will be in the law [of reward and retribution]. Therefore, a sutra says, “The
three realms of existence are full of suffering; there is nothing pleasurable.”366
Moreover, [another sutra] says, “Sentient beings in the ﬁve realms of existence
are all in a large prison.”367 As long as your mind is bound to the world of
existence, weal and woe are linked together. This is why the three realms of
existence are collectively called a large prison.
The Buddha [once] asked his disciples what impermanence means. One
[disciple] answered, “[Life] is unwarrantable even for a single day. This is
impermanence.” The Buddha told him, “You are not my disciple.” Another
said, “[Life] is unwarrantable even for as brief a time as it takes to have a
meal. This is impermanence.” The Buddha said, “You are not my disciple.”
Another said, “One has transited to the next life before even his exhaled
breath has returned to him. This is impermanence.” The Buddha said, “You
are truly my disciple.”368
The evident testimony of impermanence is displayed before [our eyes]
every day, yet [people of] all generations continue to act in the same ways
and no one realizes [the reality of impermanence] after all. They have no
peace even for a moment and yet they make a plan for their whole lifetimes.

249

88c

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

If fear does not exist before [their eyes], they neglect to do everything. If
they try to improve their virtue in this manner, they will not have even as
small an achievement as overturning a basket [of earth].369 If they control
the mind in this way they will be indolent in what they learn.
Consequently, gentlemen who have a grasp of the Way pay heed [even]
for a few minutes and regret the passing [of time]. They continually strive
for improvement, lashing the laggards, and cultivate themselves through
competing with [the passage of] time. Because they do not have enough time,
deluded thoughts have no cause to arise and the conditioned response to
[these thoughts] has no derivation from which to arise.
The six pāramitās refer to (1) giving (dāna), (2) [observance of] precepts
(śīla), (3) forbearance (kṣānti), (4) diligence (vīrya), (5) meditation (dhyāna),
and (6) wisdom (prajñā). To be capable of giving away [money and property]
that you have accumulated in order to beneﬁt and save sentient beings is giving. To respectfully observe the ten wholesome [acts] and ward off evils by
sincerity is [the observance of] precepts. To not retaliate [for any outrage
you have suffered] and to always remain humble is forbearance. To practice
industriously what you have learned and never be idle, day or night, is diligence. To concentrate your thoughts, maintain your intention, and concentrate
multiplicity through simplicity is meditation. Generally, if these ﬁve matters
are practiced with thoughtfulness, this is called the worldly pāramitās, and
if they are operated with the [non-thought of] concurrently forgetting everything,370 this is called the wisdom of the Way, [the last of the six pāramitās].
The [Taizi ruiying] benqi jing says, “There are ninety-six different teachings. Each believes in what it serves. They all hope for peaceful living. Who
[among them] knows their own delusions?”371 To be delighted with gain,
hate losing, enjoy living, and lament over death are probably the ordinary
delusions of young wanderers (ruosang) and the common feelings of sentient
beings.372 However, once the unseen power secretly responds, no matter how
one may strive to attach to [these feelings] he cannot keep them. When the
[karmic] response arrives he receives retribution. How could [this process]
be controlled by intellectual functions?
Accordingly, those who learn [Buddhism] must unite their minds in the
foundation of transformation and understand and view the profound ultimate.
When one appreciates and values [the profound ultimate], all [worldly]

250

Fascicle Thirteen

thoughts spontaneously disappear. When [all thoughts] disappear, one has
[no thought of] forgetting [everything]. When one has [no thought of] forgetting [everything], causation is cut off. Retribution due to causation is
therefore already cut off and then one will enter [the state of] nonarising.
Since he or she is not reborn, he or she will not trouble to die. Therefore, the
Lalitavistra (Puyao jing) says, “There is no place from which things arise
and they arise everywhere. In all places they arise, there is no place where
they arise.”373 The Nirvana Sutra says, “When your mind and consciousness
cease, you neither die nor are reborn.”374 The mind is like a seed, actions are
like the soil, and reward and retribution are like the resulting fruit. It is just
as one sows each seed according to its kind. When the time has come [the
plants] sprout, and no one can stop it. The above section gives a minute
account of what kind of rebirth one will receive when the precepts of the ten
wholesome acts are planted.
In addition, when one plants the seed of the four abodes of emptiness
(sikong) in the realm beyond material elements through dhyāna, he or she
will receive the noblest position in Heaven. Several sutras dwell upon the
meanings of the four abodes and dhyāna. From the ﬁrst heaven up to the
twenty-eighth [heaven]375 merit gradually increases according to what one
has done. When one plants the truth of impermanence through meditation,
goes against the world of existence, and places himself in the world of nonexistence, he is able to enter the nirvana of the arhat. Not shunning the world
of transience, not being bound by contemplation on emptiness, uniting tacitly
with all principles, having no attachment, and depending on nothing results
in nothing planted. Since there is nothing that has been planted, one is not
subject to retribution. Being unprejudiced and profoundly extinguished is
the nirvana of the Buddha.
Nirvana is translated as wuwei (nonaction) in Chinese, and it also called
miedu (“liberation of extinction”). The Vimalakīrtinirdeśa-sūtra says, “Those
six [heretical] masters say their partial teachings are the Way. Those who
follow these masters are enmeshed in various [deluded] views, fall into prejudice, and end up in the eight difﬁculties. They are unable to leave behind
the way of birth and death.”376 Even though the profound mental state is
repeatedly practiced, if [your mind] moves even slightly you will also be
detained in [the way of] limited existence, just as the six [heretical] masters

251

89a

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

were. How much more so in the case of those who cling to existence, who
hold biased views, who have self-attachment, and who oppose the ediﬁcation
[of Buddhism]! Even if their merits go beyond mountains and rivers and
they are the most noble in the three realms of existence, fortune and misfortune
alternate with each other377 and return to them. They will fall into punitive
suffering in the end. How can they attain the great achievement of pacifying
their spirits [and enjoy] calm, restful, profound peace?
Living creatures inevitably have feelings. This is the natural course of
Heaven. If they do not settle in wholesomeness they will surely dwell in
unwholesomeness. Consequently, those who begin to practice the [Buddhist]
Way need something on which to rely. That on which this reliance is based
is invariably grounded on existence. That on which existence avails itself
invariably avails of tedious things. So a sutra says, “If you want to build a
mansion in the air, it is impossible to accomplish this after all. [Equally,] if
you want to take hold of the buddha lands it is not [possible only] through
[understanding] emptiness.”378 If this is so, the [ﬁrst] ﬁve [of the six] pāramitās
and the four immeasurable minds cannot be disregarded. [Beginners] simply
have to remove all malicious intentions [in applying those practices] in accordance with their practical use [in our daily life].
When you take refuge in the Buddha [you will realize that] there is no
emancipation [to be found] in the Buddha. When you take refuge in the precepts [you will realize that] there is no merit [to be found] in the precepts.
Then the truth [that is realized through] dhyāna and the ﬁve skandhas will
be deeply united. The function [of the precepts] as secondary and contemplation as fundamental will be equally complete. Even though numerous
practices may be concurrently arranged, this is originally only to practice
emptiness within emptiness.
Some people may think, “In emptiness there is nothing to practice. If it
can be practiced, then it is not emptiness. Since there is already practice,
isn’t it [instead] to lose emptiness?” Emptiness is a term of no-thought, not
a designation of [an actual place like] a government ofﬁce or a residence.
Nonbeing is truly nonbeing. If we existentialize nonbeing, we will completely
remain in the limited [world]. Being is really being. If we forget both [being
and nonbeing] then we will attain profound realization. If this is so, being
and nonbeing derive from the mind and they have nothing to do with the

252

Fascicle Thirteen

external world. Although physical objects and phenomena (i.e., being) are displayed in their practical use [in daily life], when sensations cease they deeply
unite with the principle (i.e., nonbeing). How could there be nonbeing after
the extermination of being? How could we reach exhaustion only by means
of gradual decrease? Speaking from this viewpoint, being is indeed not in itself
a hindrance. It is only because we are hindered by being that we go against
the ultimate Way. If we reverse the current, return to the origin, and entrust
ourselves to the foundation we will spontaneously be without limit.
Therefore, bodhisattvas’ profound practices unify [delusion and realization]
consistently. [Bodhisattvas] understand that all things in the universe are
always deeply united, they profoundly apprehend [the truth] availing themselves of what is consigned to them, they know that all things that come to
them are originally empty, they continually comprehend [all things] with the
same view, they realize that the four physical forms (i.e., the four great elements) are devoid of self, and they discard all things following ultimate truth.
Since they ascertain the nature of all things in the universe they see, they
leave no trace behind no matter what they practice. In the profound Mahayana
sutras the three periods of existence are always combined in one, and the
phenomena we see right in front of our eyes are usually not considered to
be existent. Accordingly, the purpose of “to practice emptiness within emptiness” is [clearly] seen here.

The Family Code: Clarification of
Two Issues by Chamberlain for
the Attendants Yan Yanzhi

[There are three methods] to discern that [Buddhism, Confucianism, and
Daoism] are equally wholesome and to become proﬁcient in divergent subjects. First is to speak [based on] the Way; next is to discuss [based on] the
mind; and the last is to examine [based on] reason. To speak [based on] the
Way is to talk in conformity with Heaven; to discuss [based on] the mind is
to argue on the basis of human beings; and to examine [based on] reason is
to take [reason] in phenomena. When we distinguish [the three teachings]
following [these methods], we separate them from one another and arrange
each by its path. When we summarize and understand [these three teachings
we ﬁnd that] they all reach the same point in the end.

253

89b

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

Things like profound and marvelous [Buddhist] scriptures and extremely
brilliant [Buddhist] doctrines all offer clues of these three signiﬁcances (i.e.,
the Way, the mind, and reason) and reach the highest point of nonduality.
The language [of Buddhist scriptures], however, originates in a foreign region.
Therefore [the Buddhist teaching] has been disliked by worldly scholars.
The teaching was established in [a place with] different moral principles
[from those of the Chinese]. So [Buddhism] is considered to be wrong in
Chinese common practice. In the Way bestowed by Heaven there is no difference between foreign countries and China. Whenever a person receives
the spirit [in his body], how could it be that [the spirit] is limited to a speciﬁc
place, either outside or within [China]? When we consider this, there can be
no arbitrary judgment.

[Issue One]
Those who practice Daoism are of the school that came out of the Way of
the [Divine] Transcendents. Therefore, reﬁning the form is considered to be
primary. Regarding those who worship the Buddha, the origin lies in enlightening the mind. Accordingly, controlling the mind is considered to be foremost.
Those who follow the school of reﬁning form must go to a deep and spacious
place, where they try to return to ﬂying spirits. They take cinnabar as food and
consume the essence of numinous mushrooms. Consequently, they become
rejuvenated, reject aging, prolong youthful charm, and preserve the bright
appearance of youth. They intend to unite their bodies with the light red clouds
and spread their traces all over the empty sky. These are their strong points.
If false [Daoists] practice this, [however,] they fear divine punishment,
force people to offer crude prayers, mix male and female together, and throw
evil and justice into disorder. In these points, they are consummate villains.

[Issue Two]
In the art of controlling the mind, people must part from their relatives
and wives, restrain themselves [from committing vice] in both body and
mind, revere the Pure Awakened One (i.e., the Buddha) as their teacher, and
believe in causality and [former] lives. Therefore, they return to nonarising
and are able to achieve the sacred enterprise; their intelligence is brighter
than the sun and their aspirations are [as extensive] as innumerable kalpas
are narrow. These are their distinguished points.

254

Fascicle Thirteen

If those who go against [the Buddhist Way] practice this, they take advantage of [the appearance of monks by] taking the tonsure, become overly
familiar with high-ranking people, attend those who have honor and fame,
and seek proﬁt. These are their severe deceptions.
In anything there is a case of not-so; in any matter there is nothing without
harm. Even if we measure something with a weight and check it every day, we
still worry about ﬁnding a difference. Moreover, the Way of the Spirit is formless
and assuredly something of which numerous matters avail themselves. If one
is not suspicious that there is no spirit before he is able to comprehend the spirit,
I think that this is because the nature of numinous beings is subtle and obscure.
We can understand [the spirit] by accumulating principles. Great change happens
abruptly [and cannot be seen by our eyes, but] we can rely on great conformity
(i.e., the laws of nature). [The Way of the Spirit] shines just as the clear sky
does, and it is as cautious as when one looks into an abyss. Those who can consider that principles and [great] conformity make a person can altogether say
that there is the spirit. If someone slanders the truth and blames [the teaching]
for its disadvantages, he has simply not yet developed discernment.

Sunshine by
Wang Gai

When I inquire [I see that] the scriptures of the highest Way (i.e., Buddhism)
explicate the origin of birth and death, indicate reward and retribution for
good or evil conduct, and explain that there is a ferryboat to take us beyond
this world. The instructions and precepts are clearly stated and fully enumerated, going into particulars. Nevertheless, “sincere words are not beautiful.”379
The compositions [of the scriptures] are complicated and the expressions are
vague. Profound [reasons] piled up one after another are extremely obscure.
Waves separate us from the deep pool [in which a pearl worth a thousand
ounces of silver is found].380 Therefore, those who learn [Buddhism] have
not attained its gate or they have not paid attention to it. When the profound
music of Xianchi [composed by the Yellow Emperor] is taken up even a little,
it accidentally becomes the common music heard in the streets. When we
avail ourselves of the small in order to reach the great, we may unexpectedly
come close to secular customs. To assist Heaven and to enhance brightness
is called sunshine.

255

89c

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

I was inﬂuenced by my pioneer leader’s (i.e., the Buddha’s) great admonitions, and opened a lock with a profound key at the numinous gate. I go
all around the Grand Void in order to look far into the distance, enjoying
myself. I investigate exhaustively what is magniﬁcent and do not come to
an end. I tread on an [expansive] terrain [as if walking on] a small piece of
land, and I wear the round sky [as if on] an overturned bowl. I see the boundlessness of the three realms of existence far in the distance, and I encounter
the vigorous yin-yang vapors. I seek the profound origin of the Grand Creator
and survey the deep root of Nature’s nourishing. Then [I ﬁnd that] the body
that avails itself of the four great elements will dissipate like foam, while the
spirit that is subtle among all things exists permanently. This is the state
understood by those good people. Consequently, [the transmigration of] birth
[and death] is sad and [the permanence of] the spirit is pleasing.
As for all living creatures, the spirit has no set pattern. Regarding the
species of wriggling living creatures, their disposition is impermanent. To
come [into existence] occurs as swiftly as ﬂowing water, and to entrust [one’s
life to this world] is [as brief as] a spark. [The spirit] follows and entangles
us. It alternates between withering away and spreading fragrance. It goes
and returns, appears and disappears. It is imperceptible and vast. It ﬂows
around in the great sea [of birth and death] and transmigrates in the great
change [of Nature]. It rides upon the waves and drifts far away. What stepping
stone does it have in order to cross [the stream]? It transmigrates in the three
lowest realms of existence and stagnates in the environment of the eight difﬁculties. It is pitiful that there is no hope to attempt to break [free from this
environment and escape]. It is lamentable that there are hired people (i.e.,
lowly people) who return to [the three lowest realms of existence].
We regard respectfully that virtue should be quickly exalted, and we consider that the accumulation of evils must be delayed. This is the easy point
to see the accomplishment of this undertaking (i.e., edifying people). The
mental movement of foresight is not weak. The ﬁve kinds of happiness arise
from performing correct things, and the six extreme evils are formed by following evils.381 It is natural to be moved by the truth. Imperceptible responses
take shape profoundly. Who creates happiness? Who launches disasters?
Water moves and makes a pool in a lower level. The way of human beings
hates arrogance. Sins are caused by the accumulation of wealth and blessings

256

Fascicle Thirteen

are brought about by the promotion of modesty. When even a child acts correctly, evil spirits run away. When even an adult man does evil conduct, the
mischievous spirits insult him.
When we look at the pair of a form and [its shadow], or of a sound and
[its echo], or when we examine a pair of signs such as weal and woe, the
principles exactly ﬁt our thoughts. With our own eyes we can see that the
traces correspond to [the principles], just as a round wheel holds a pair of
compasses or a carpenter’s ink string is attached to a straight rafter. The blue
dog, [a reincarnation of Ruyi, who committed suicide because Empress
Dowager Lü had murdered his concubine,] was begotten of his father, Emperor
[Gaozu, the founder of the Han dynasty].382 The yellow bear, [a reincarnation
of Gun, the father of Yu,] helped the sage [Yu in his work of building an
embankment].383 If they had transformed yet did not save [their relatives],
how could we say that familial relations are reliable?
To seek happiness sincerely lies in oneself, and to become a good person
truly lies in one’s own [actions]. Alas! Those who breathe have nothing permanent. We have no idea to where they arrive after suddenly departing. If
that (i.e., cause and condition) is not what people can accumulate, wouldn’t
there be something from which vapor begins? We sympathize with a young
beauty who dies at a tender age. She might return [to this world] reincarnated
as a pig owned by her former household. She was raised with great love and
care in her former life but in her current life [as a pig] she will be slaughtered
[as an offering] in a sacriﬁcial ceremony. The spirit subtly and continually
dwells within us but our bodies undergo changes and transform into other
bodies. Even before ten years have passed after our deaths we will be forgotten. We should sigh deeply and weep for this. This is not only what one
person does—we ignorant people all act like this.
When we investigate why intelligent species [usually] have a small number
of offspring and comprehend the reason that insects reproduce in vast numbers,
[the former] is compared to an incessant drizzle that is seen as a light rain,
while [the latter] is like overturning a full bag from which rice grains spill
out. The latter are restlessly proliﬁc, day after day. Who knows how to secretly
clear up the cause of this? It is not something I can surmise. I may be wrong
but I have learned as follows.

257

90a

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

People who turn things upside down and those who idly live in vain
abruptly and secretly go far away when rumors of war reach their ears. Even
though the Way of the Spirit is obscure, the law of spirits is particularly clear.
[The spirits of the dead] wander around in the intermediate state between
death and a new life (Skt. antarā-bhava), and they go to the iron city [of
hell] where Wang Shu (i.e., the driver of the moon) is terminated in the night
and where there is no sun in the daytime. The occupants [of that hell] are in
fetters. They have to pass through a yard of burning charcoal. On the mountain
of sharply pointed blades knives are piled up. The forest of swords that raise
up their sharp tips are awe-inspiring and exquisite. There is a vast expanse
of melted copper that gushes out like the sea. In a huge cauldron boiling
water undulates and makes a sound like thunder. King Yama supervises
inspections [of the dead], and beside him the wardens of hell hold prongs in
their hands. [The wardens] place their triple-forked prongs between the two
middle ﬁngers of their left hands, and once they wield [the prongs] myriad
things are piled up and arranged. There are venomous birds called zhen with
sharp beaks, bright and scintillating ﬁery carts, sharply pointed nails, pointed
spears, and dogs called jiao that bare their fangs.
Licentious people are burned on an illusory pole. Hungry convicts are
laid out to dry up on dirt and sand. Even though [the dead] avail themselves
of a light and clever numinous quality, they are easily subjected to more and
more pain and humiliation, tormented for a long time. [This suffering] lasts
for numerous kalpas. Is there anything crueler than this? It is impossible to
list all of the harsh punishments of the eighteen [hells]. There are a thousand
different severe [torments] and they cause diverse types of suffering. You
cannot go through it without gasping for breath. You suddenly arrive in [hell]
and forget your home. I have brieﬂy described [hell] in a short period of time,
but you will tremble with fear and be distressed until you die.
Thereupon, there are those who observe the ﬁve precepts without failure
and who are perfect in performing the way of the ten wholesome acts. When
they pass away, just as the evening sun sets, they fortunately ascend to the
nine heavens where they will see a dazzling holy palace hall and a stately
mansion built in the air. There are altogether a hundred beautiful buildings
and nearly a thousand clean households. The Gate of Gold shines as brightly
as crystal; the lanes made of gems sparkle as attractively as lapis lazuli; pearl

258

Fascicle Thirteen

trees line the streets and the fabulous birds luan and phoenixes sing in the
tree branches. Fragrant ﬂowers are digniﬁed, splendid, and elegant, and an
aromatic breeze blows gently, diffusing the aroma. If you merely think of
clothing, a beautiful garment is put on you. If you think of eating, fragrant
food appears in abundance before you.
Xi He (the driver of the sun; i.e., the sun and moon) goes on a long journey,
and one day [there] is as long as ten thousand years [here]. No one ever does
anything to offend his nature. [The inhabitants] are always naturally calm.
They look at the splendid ﬂower buds glittering. They narrow their eyes and
see that beings lightly ﬂy around. They master the highest level of music of
wonderful sounds. They go to the end of existence prolonging their lives.
They abandon this vulgar world and ascend. Accompanying their outstanding
peers, they ascend higher.
If this is so, delicacies are served daily in order to provide a feast for the
virtuous people of the past. This land is barren; agriculture cannot take place.
Even if there were a large accumulation of resources, how could they be
inexhaustible? Even if someone is blessed with longevity, his life will come
to an end at last. When the three disasters (i.e., ﬁres, ﬂoods, and windstorms)
arise even the palace buildings will be lost. When the seven symptoms reach
there384 the revenues conferred by the Lord of Heaven will cease. When the
great autumn season comes and [the plants,] having fulﬁlled [their growing
season,] wither away, there is no distinction between the legendary tree called
dachun,[whose life span is enormously long,] and a [short-lived] fungus.
Therefore, the Tathāgata, the Great Sage, clearly illuminates us with the
three transcendental knowledges, feels compassion for those of us who are
in trouble and ignorant, and explains clearly the essentials of the [Buddhist]
Way. He washes away [our deﬁlements] with skillful expedients and [leads
us,] sometimes broadly and sometimes subtly, just as the dark sea turns the
currents [within] or the sun bestows daylight on us. A superior person opens
wide his mind and forgets what he wished to say,385 but a mediocre person
tenaciously holds to his aspiration and sticks to the teaching.
The [Tathāgata’s] teaching has no ﬁxed pattern; it follows whatever people
do. [For instance,] if one is traveling on land he should go by a vehicle, but
when he is traveling on water he requires a boat. [The Tathāgata] lays down
various [expedients] and extensively speaks in numerous and abundant ways.

259

90b

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

The “Section on Pasture” (Jiong) [of the Praise Odes of Lu] does not comprise
all of the three hundred odes (i.e., the Book of Odes). The key point [of the
teaching] lies in one point: profundity. If we grasp the outline of all profundity,
put away minor matters into a fur bag, and extensively encompass the great
instruction, then we will develop our intelligence. There is nothing unequal
in the teaching but there is sharpness and dullness in individuals’ temperament.
He who goes to [the Tathāgata] empty will come back full.386 Each person
will be content in mind. The foolish and the wise are guided equally; dragons
and spiritual beings are ediﬁed together. Myriad paths come together and
return to one through transcendental wisdom. This can be compared to the
fact that one cannot cross the sea in anything other than a ship. If we urge
numerous people to move to a place where the Buddhist Way is studied, they
will complete wuwei (i.e., attain nirvana) and cease transmigrating [in the
cycle of birth and death].
Originally in the beginning, the three vehicles equally returned to one:
nonexistence. Each individual, however, differs in his or her natural abilities
and intelligence. So, for practical purposes, [the vehicles] are differentiated.
Arhats dismiss existence from their minds and seek emptiness. Consequently,
they are absorbed in emptiness and are peaceful and contented. Pratyekabuddhas understand troubles through knowing the minute (wei). Accordingly,
they move to a profound place and do not dwell [in a ﬁxed place]. Though
their subtle traces are lost again [because they have left the world of existence,
they still make an impression] as if they remained there. Bodhisattvas have
released all the things that may detain them and have nothing to which to
attach in their doings. How would they need to remove anything? They understand clearly before they examine. They keep [the truth] in mind and unite
it in their initial intention. Their principles are important and deep, beyond
words. Who else is able to clearly see and act just as they do?
In former times, when ancients met the Imposing One (i.e., the Buddha)
whose light shined upon them, they were able to personally receive the sacred
instructions. The people who adored [the Buddha] respectfully gave their
eyes and ears to him. Some were enlightened by the sound of a single cough
from him and some repented and reformed themselves on account of receiving
a single meal [he provided to them]. They were all ediﬁed on the basis of
language and there was not a single person who was not liberated.

260

Fascicle Thirteen

[The teaching of] one who has attained emancipation (Skt. sugata) extends
to today, even as the fortune of the [Buddhist] Way has begun to decline.
The great teaching still exists, but those who appreciate it are rare. Sandalwood
is considered to be as fragrant as smartweed or purple perilla. Moonlight is
considered to be as bright as a ﬁreﬂy.
Yu [Falan] transcended the secular world and realized the profound tenor
[of Buddhism]. He led the life of a recluse in the hills and valleys and his
benevolence moved even tigers and water buffaloes. Eminent [Zhu Fa]hu
was pure and peaceful. His morals were profound and good. When he chanted
in a feeble voice in a deep ravine water in the dried-up spring gradually arose
and increased. Elder Que [Gongze] ascended to the sky and Wei [Shi]du
belonged to the [Buddhist] path, but they were both indifferent to nonarising,
so they left their bodies and became immortals.
Today, Zhi Dun (314–366) is particularly outstanding. He understands
and grasps the profound symbols. His great enterprise is deep and pure and
his spiritual manner is clean and reverent. When he utters a single word the
obstructions people have collected [in their minds] disperse. When one contacts [Zhi Dun] time and time again, the serious obscurity of his mind becomes
bright. To see him is enough to wash away one’s stinginess. By hearing his
[teaching] one can leave behind arrogance.
[Zhi Dun] humbly cleansed himself in the stream [of the Buddhist teaching]
in order to depart from worry and suffering. He fulﬁlled his original [purpose]
and now enjoys composing poems on the eastern mountain. What kind of
deep appreciation must he have in order to live such a simple life and to consider that the great treasure is as light as a very tiny thing? [It is probably]
because the guidance of the Way instigates him to do so and he has reached
the deep state of enjoyment in untroubled ease. If no one has difﬁculties in
his talent, the wise is not valued. If the fool is not laughed at, sages are not
lofty. Profound music seems shallow to vulgar ears. Who [but Confucius]
could forget the taste [of meat] when he hears the Shao, [the music composed
during the time of the sage Emperor Shun]?387 Wherever we go there is the
Way. There are spirits wherever we go. There are exquisiteness and coarseness
in principles. There are able, virtuous people and people of the greatest sincerity. The great occupies the position of an exquisite lord and the minor
becomes a minister of great virtue. Winged birds follow the sacred bird called

261

90c

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

garuḍa. The creatures that have a shell belong to the asuras. The two polarities
(i.e., Heaven and Earth) take the Grand Terminus as their origin.388 All the
stars link to the North Polar Star.
Therefore, the ninety-six [non-Buddhist] schools abundantly spread their
branches, slight and abandon the important root, and rashly reject what is
tranquil and great. Their followers all claim that they participate in sacredness.
Each school arbitrarily operates in its own area. Some move to a mountain
and dwell near a stream, and some are short-lived. They command beautiful
beings who wear heavenly garments, howl at the savory odors in a numinous
kitchen, glorify the atrocity of the orderly returning troops, transform a pebble
into a ﬁne piece of jade, exhaust every means of transformation, and tower
above others in eccentricity. They regret that what they rely on has no perpetuity. These are pleasures within the limited world and they are not as good
as even the chaff and bran of the highest Way (i.e., Buddhism).
Regarding those found in the [Biographies of] Arrayed Transcendents
and those who [practice to] reﬁne the body, they pass their time like a [dormant] bear, stretch and twist [their bodies] like a bird,389 and breathe in the
Grand One. In the evening they consume the brilliant moon along with the
moisture of an elm tree, and in the morning they take the bright rosy clouds
together with the red sun. Chifu lived long by taking cinnabar. Juanzi ﬂew
into the sky by eating glutinous millet. An [Qisheng] enjoyed longevity by
eating pine resin. Fengren lightly lifted his body to the sky by eating nuts of
the cypress tree.
What the elixir imbues is enough to support life and sustain the body. Inwardly
they are not peaceful if they rely on their outward appearance. They vainly
climbed into the clouds, fell, and died. They tie up a sack in order to try to
strengthen the ground for resentment.390 As a matter of course, even if they all
go out of the same gate together they will not ascend to the hall of Yan [Hui]
in reason and will be eternally blocked from gazing at Confucius’ home.
It is esteemed to be able to ﬂy, yet even moths and butterﬂies can ﬂy high.
It is wonderful that one hardly grows old, yet even turtles and snakes live
long. While we make ourselves comfortable in this inn (i.e., this transient
world) only the mind should be treasured. Those who wish to sustain the
body are not worthy of discussing the spirit with us. Those who are familiar
with secular customs cannot talk about the Way with us.

262

Fascicle Thirteen

What is it that is called the Way? There is no method to ask or answer
this. Those who try to inquire about it are at a loss in asking, and those who
try to answer are conﬁned in themselves. To keep silent about it is to understand it. When it is spoken of, it is exhausted. As for the dark-colored pearl
(i.e., the essence of the Way) and the explanation of the Way, I would say
that [the former] has no phenomenon and [the latter] has nothing to say. If
we keep still and silent, there are admonitions in the profound response. Even
if we intensively investigate superﬁcial sounds we do not understand the
profound sound. The more we expect to know [the Way], the more mistakes
we make. The more we seek it, the deeper it sinks. Ever since a man of Ying,
[the capital city of Chu state,] died, who can serve as a chopping board for
the artisan [Shi]?391 (i.e., what can we do without those things on which we
have relied?) Even if one [has completed preparations to know the Way, just
as one] sets up a bamboo ﬁsh trap in deep water or sets a snare in a dense
vegetation, waiting for a ﬁsh in the river or a rabbit in the forest, if he attains
the meaning beyond what is spoken then as soon as he has seen it he should
abandon the mind.
Before no movement is observed [people] abruptly go and come back.
Wise people suddenly arrive and abide in this world (Skt. sahā-lokadhātu).392
A great number of teachers have educated people [in this land]. Now, for the
ﬁrst time, we can cross over [the limited world like] a die. Maitreya is now
glorious. We respectfully expect [Maitreya] to benevolently edify us. Who
could say in blame that[Maitreya’s ediﬁcation] is far from us? When you
catch a glimpse of it you will be dazed. Even though the divine reins move
swiftly, the mechanism of causality is unending. There is no beginning and
no end in it (i.e., the mechanism of causality), but there is a beginning and
end with oneself. People temporarily take steps [in the world as feebly as]
the end of a streak of bright lightning, and they breathe amid violent winds
that carry stones and gravel. They know to fear [the dangers of] a path and
to be terriﬁed of bandits, but they puzzle over the fact that the desires caused
by objects of the six sense organs have invited the foreign [teaching].
People neglect what is profound and superb yet covet what is familiar to
them. They think that luxury and frugality are both aspects of wealth. They
do not protect [trees] from becoming leaﬂess when there are violent sandstorms. After the strong winds have stripped [away all the leaves], they think

263

91a

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

to return to the beginning and try to make [the leaves] more beautiful than
before. Even if they feel regret myriad times, how could their [desires ever]
be satisﬁed?
Consequently, those who have made a great oath burn their ﬁngers and
bore through rocks [to create Buddhist niches]. They secretly expect to attain
[their goal] without [having the wish] to wait for it. They accumulate [good
conduct] for their aspirations, deepen the moat of intelligence, and raise high
the wall of wisdom. They draw the divine sword and brandish the halberd
of the [Buddhist] precepts. When [wild] thoughts are about to be harbored
in their minds, they exterminate [those thoughts]. When [vulgar] feelings
are about to arise, they sever and remove [those feelings]. They weed out
the six thieves (i.e., the six sense organs) from their minds and try to put an
end to an expedition (i.e., transmigration) in the ﬁve paths. Folding their
hands (i.e., not taking any action), they regulate what is internal in themselves
and completely have the decisive mind to attain Dharma wisdom (Skt.
dharma-kṣānti). The [confusions of] the three periods of existence will then
all be extinguished and their minds will become entirely open. Even if they
commit their ears to hearing what is not clear and consign their eyes to seeing
what cannot be relied on, deﬁlements will fruitlessly fall away following
[the causes] and impurity will futilely dissipate along with them.
The spacious and wonderful awakening makes everything true in the light
of expedients. It universally saves people and peacefully ferries them across
[to the yonder shore]. Who commiserates with great benevolence? People
entrust [their bodies] to the lodging house (i.e., this world) in order to [mingle
with the world by] tempering their brightness. They customarily ramble about
and abide in what is deep and dark. They act like Heaven [during their life],
and [at death] they undergo transformation just as [all] things do.393 They are
just like someone who treads water with no worry [of drowning].
If through the subtle wonders of supernatural transformation one regulates
miracles, he can lift up the trichiliocosm on his palm, cause a mustard seed
to contain Mount Sumeru394 and the four seas to be held within a single pore
of one’s skin,395 and make the seven treasures [last] longer than the period
of a kalpa.396 These can be believed but they cannot be sought; these can be
followed but they cannot be understood. These are not what are propagated

264

Fascicle Thirteen

through talking or chanting. How could these be revealed by writing on pure
white silk (i.e., paper)?
How good are the words expounded by the Buddha of his own accord (Skt.
udāna)! Even if the world were full of wise people and one of them had a
hundred heads, and one of those heads had a hundred tongues, and one of
those tongues explained a hundred meanings with sharp and outstanding oratorical talent, and even if all those people gathered and praised the [Buddhist]
Way, [the value of their praise] would still be less than one ten-thousandth
[of the real value of the Buddhist Way]. Only by the fact that awakened ones
sigh in wonderment [the value of the Buddhist Way] spreads out and manifests
itself entirely. Moreover, I, an ignorant bigot, respectfully give an account of
[the Buddhist Way] under the pretext of being ambitious and too hasty. Am
I one who tries to raise the brightness of the glow of a ﬁreﬂy and who intends
to increase the light of the sun in order to assist the sun?
Alas! The repository of numinous beings outside of this secular world is
excessively far and vast. Of all that is subtle and wonderful, the innermost
is immeasurable. People of minor attainment cannot walk in it. Those who
have great words unexpectedly lose [their words].
The virtue of Earth is deep. It contains all things. We are startled when
we hear about immense gullies. We are surprised when we see lofty mountain
masses. Chinese classical books carry [the virtue of Earth] in their grasp of
them. Foreign scriptures record this as if listing doors and windows. Zhuangzi
was already versed in [things] but he could not settle this. So he believed in
the lowly and disgraceful stories of the Qi Xie.397 He saw the bird called peng
and the ﬁsh called kun and indicated that they are large, but he did not see
the king of birds (Skt. garuḍa) or the mother of ﬁshes (Skt. makara).
Alas! Alas! Unusual and extraordinary things have accumulated but they
are too subtle and extensive to record. How could they all be described and
recorded? [Numerous things] are extensively arranged in the book Huanglan.
This book is worthy to search for what is profound or to learn singular phenomena. How can we shallowly detest [the record of the sword that can] cut
jade? Furthermore, why would we largely bring a false charge against [noncombustible] textiles [that can be washed in] ﬁre?398
Moreover, below these there is the tenor of the teachings bound together,
but these are the expedient baits of Emperor Yao and Confucius. I always

265

91b

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

devote myself to [the Buddhist Way] and abide by the law. I am afraid to
overstep what I am told, to completely reject reason in order to testify to
statements, to not understand meanings inferring in accordance with [similar]
categories, to vainly make things vast and scheme to complicate things, and
further to increase suspicion and invite fear. I realize that I have skillfully
made a display of my wisdom and astonished people. Therefore I will lay
down my brush and stop thinking. I put one corner (i.e., my humble view)
in my rough purport. I will wait for someone who has clear knowledge to
embody truthfulness.
End of Fascicle Thirteen of The Collection for the Propagation
and Clariﬁcation [of Buddhism]

266

Fascicle Fourteen
Written Appeal to Mount Tai
by Zhu Daoshuang

I, Śramaṇa Zhu Daoshuang, dare to address the Spiritual Government
Office and the messengers of the Overseer of Mount Tai, the Eastern Mountain [of the Five Sacred Mountains].
When the profound primordial vapor (xuanyuan) began its disintegration399
and the two polarities (i.e., Heaven and Earth) began to separate from each
other, the ﬁrst four stars of the Big Dipper were arranged above, helped by
the light of the sun, moon, and stars. The god of earth was placed below and
guarded by the Five Sacred Mountains. The yin and yang spread Nature’s
nourishment throughout the eight directions. All things were born in this
[environment].
Therefore, Mount Tai occupies the region of the blue dragon (east), Mount
Heng and Mount Huo are located in the body of yang (south),400 the mountain
of Huayang (i.e., Mount Hua) manifests itself in the area where the sun sets
(west), Mount Heng and Mount Tai line up near the place of the profound
turtle (north), and Mount Song juts out in the middle of the great river and
suppresses the banks of the Four Holy Rivers (i.e., Yangzi, Huai, Yellow, and
Ji). These [Five Sacred Mountains] receive pure vapor, make use of the truth,
and have no impurity of evil. They are the Way of the Spirit; they are spontaneous, digniﬁed, and not false. They follow the laws of Heaven and Earth.
They are sincere, honest, upright, straight, tranquil, calm, profound, and pure.
Advancing, they lead the beginning of the operations of the four seasons.
Retreating, they follow the essence of the teaching of the ﬁve kinds of principles of human relationships.401 They conceal the disposition to understand
what is subtle within and clearly show the brightness of the Way and its outﬂowing operation without. At the upper level they master absolute vacancy
and at the lower level they nourish the masses. They cherish virtue and secretly
understand it thoroughly. There is no place, no matter how far away it may
be, that they cannot penetrate. They roam around the nine cliffs (i.e., the
edges of the world) and ﬂy with a ﬂap of the wings to Mount Xuanque [in

267

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

91c

the north]. Consequently, it can be said that they do not have an exact beginning for their formation, that they breathe the yin-yang, grasp Heaven and
Earth (qian kun) in their hands, and walk all over the world.
The Eastern Mountain (i.e., Mount Tai) is the starting point of the east
and springtime, and the vapor of pure yang. It nurses, moves, and produces
[all things]. It is in the rank of king or father, just like the constellation Nanji
and the Big Dipper that are the central stars in the nine heavens, or the KingSire of the East (Dong wanggong) and the Queen Mother of the West (Xi
wangmu) who are the former rulers of the ultimate of nonbeing (wuji).402
[Mount Tai] ﬂies like a phoenix riding on vapor and goes to this subtle and
profound world, which is clearer and more still than the primordial substance,403 and in which human beings do not exist. All ﬁlthy things are cleansed
there. Its Way is spontaneous.
Nevertheless, why do you use apparitions and other prodigies or specters
under the pretext of the Way of the Eastern Mountain, or numinous beings
who dwell on the mountain, and mislead the ignorant feelings of secular
people on the basis of the wild deceptions of the wandering spirits of the
dead? You make books about deities and artiﬁcially erect images of them.
There is originally no record and in the end nothing to ascertain the truth.
In your appearance there is a poisonous vapor caused by destroying the
lives of living creatures, and within you a hundred evil spirits prevail. During
the day grains and cooked rice are greatly offered to you; during the night
numerous evil spirits haunt in the yard. These are all spirits of wolves and
snakes. Owls and pythons vainly cry out. From the time the Three Augusts
established the foundation up to the present time, when the tradition is transmitted, I have never seen such a divine message among what has been
respected for successive generations. Therefore, the Records of Minor Conquest (Lingzheng ji) says,404 “When the spirit is right, its light is hidden in
dimness. It goes up high above to the celestial bodies, and plays below at
Mount Xuanque [in the north]. It roams around in the clouds’ shadows and
soars like a dragon to the eight ends of the universe. A wind rises and rain
is distributed. Nature’s nourishment is [dispersed] just like thunder and lightning. Even though no lunch basket is provided, foods of numerous ﬂavors
are spontaneously offered. [The right spirit] bears benevolence and holds
the [primordial] substance in hand. [Consequently,] its kindness beneﬁts the

268

Fascicle Fourteen

masses. Its favor surpasses that of parents. Its kindness is as bright as the
morning sunlight. If you eat in accordance with Heaven, you will not destroy
the life of numerous living creatures.”
This is a subtle principle regarding the wonderful soaring and the Way of
the Spirit that is pure and free from prejudice. If the spirit is not right, it
offends all things. According to the circumstances or when taking advantage
of divine messages, [the wrong spirit] conveys to secular people things that
confuse them. [The wrong spirit] causes calamity, damages the simple nature
[of people], agitates their minds, squanders their fortunes, and leads to the
most atrocious destruction of life. The lives of numerous living creatures are
cut off, living creatures who are in the middle of their lives are unfairly killed
and their bones and ﬂesh are put on a cutting board [in order to offer them
to the wrong spirit]. The people’s minds then become scattered and their primordial energy (yuanqi) is painfully injured. How could the deity of the Eastern Mountain be considered in this way?
Therefore, the Zhenzhong jie (Admonitions on the Pillow) says,405 “Those
who bear vapor, those who wriggle, and numerous insects should not be
harmed.406 Never eat the eggs of birds. They have spirits within them. [All
living things] receive life from the primordial energy of Heaven and form
their bodies in the yard of Earth. At their origin they received [their lives and
bodies] from the two polarities (i.e., Heaven and Earth). How could these
lives be destroyed?” These acts are all against reason and go against the essential principle of the Way. Many people bear benevolence in mind, so they do
not kill others, obeying [the mandate of] Heaven. It is needless to mention
the taking of the lives of pigs and sheep and drinking their blood [for rituals].
From this, we can infer that [the deity you name] is not the [right] spirit.
Furthermore, the true deities of the Five Sacred Mountains are the symbols
of the spirits. They are modeled after the ﬁrst four stars of the Big Dipper
above, and they abide by [the laws of] Heaven and Earth below. They receive
the Way, so they are pure and free from prejudice. They have neither voice
nor sound. They take no pleasure in being respected and they do not feel sadness even if they are disrespected. They have no sense of beneﬁt or loss even
if they are praised a thousand times or slandered ten thousand times.
Nevertheless, you falsely say, “[The deities of the Five Sacred Mountains],
disguised as living people, become angry groundlessly and eat butchered

269

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

92a

[animals]. Those who follow them are granted favors, but those who disobey
them receive misfortune.” Your course of action is unjust and false. You eternally have no rule, as do the wise. You defame and disgrace the true deities.
It is not their Way.
Therefore, the section called the “Record of the Midst of Profundity”
(Xuanzhong ji) of the Huangluozi jing (Sutra on Huangluo) says,407 “One
who claims to be the deity of a mountain is most certainly a python or a
snake. One who calls himself the deity of a large river or the sea must be a
sea turtle, an alligator, a ﬁsh, or a freshwater turtle. One who represents
himself as the parent deity of Heaven and Earth is certainly a wild animal
such as a cat or raccoon dog. One who assumes the title of the deity of generals
must be a bear, brown bear, tiger, or leopard. One who calls himself the deity
of ofﬁcials must be a small or large monkey. One who refers to himself as
the deity of a household is most certainly a dog, sheep, pig, or cow.” Mischievous spirits incarnate themselves as categories such as a door, a well, a
furnace, or broken utensils. They all call themselves deities but they are only
vapor of vicious spirits that frighten people. The energies of obscene spirits
are all recorded in scriptures and clearly analyzed in commentaries.
More than six years have passed from the time you made the assertion of
fortune and misfortune. You invite people from remote places in the four
directions. There is no one who does not promptly respond to you. Those who
escort a sick person and come to you, [seeking your help,] are like a small
stream ﬂowing to the sea, but the grief of those who take their dead back from
you ﬁlls the road. A person with a severe illness soon dies; you then say that
that person has exhausted his life span. A person with a minor illness easily
recovers; you then praise yourself [for giving] your good fortune to him.
If it is difﬁcult for you to save someone with an advanced disease, you
have no favor. The disease of the ancient state of Zhongrong was not cured
by you.408 You had no efﬁcacy in these two cases. How can you render service
to [people]? You try to cause a large number of people to join themselves to
you and take refuge in you. Without a good physician and good medicine,
even those who take the tonsure (Buddhist monks) cannot subdue [the demon
of disease]. Even after ten days or a month have passed, there would be no
sign and response [in recovering from illness]. Inferring from this point, what
efﬁcacy do you possess?

270

Fascicle Fourteen

Furthermore, at the great beginning of the country King Huan was installed
as a feudal lord.409 He bestowed virtuous relationships on the six states,
restrained the assistance of the Three Communicating Agencies (santai), and
gloriﬁed the Imperial house. The masses were delighted with his benevolence.
Heavenly calamity, [however,] accidentally befell him and his body was
attacked by a minor illness. He thought that your god of the land (qi) could
reveal the mysterious virtue. Consequently, he propagated your virtue and
believed in your command. He visited your sanctuary, offered three kinds
of livestock (i.e., cows, sheep, and pigs), and gave an additional gift of rare
and precious things. If you represent the sacred Way, if you can communicate
with Heaven, and if you can achieve what is subtle, why is it that you could
not remove his illness and attain peace for him by informing the Nine Augusts
(the Great Bear and two assistant stars) above, consulting with the god of
the earth (houtu) below, gathering a hundred numinous beings, manifesting
a miracle, or utilizing the good assistants of the country? Since there was no
prompt efﬁcacy [in healing], [King Huan] suddenly passed away. We have
veriﬁed these kinds of falsehoods. Why are you [trust]worthy enough to be
believed?
Moreover, in ancient times the stones on Mount Tai stood by themselves
and the altar of the god of the land (she) moved. Divine spirits sent down
omens. This legend has been passed down for ten thousand generations. This
is a case where Heaven and Earth responded to [Mount Tai] and [the response]
manifested as auspicious events of the time. You claim the sacredness [of
Mount Tai] for yourself. You are not able to manifest supernatural virtue by
raising clouds and causing rain at all. You plot evil in order to damage the
true Way. Even if you are able to move chopsticks along the surface of a tray
and completely drink wine by lifting a cup, it is similar to performing supernatural magic. [These performances] are not of a real deity. Moreover, there
is no evidence that you do. What deity is there?
Furthermore, Mount Tai is ruled by King Yama. His domain is dark and
obscure, different from this world in its mysteriousness. The messengers of
the Overseer send down [good or bad omens] in the same manner as deities
do. One’s life span is laid down in the light of the great record (huangji),
and the register of life spans is examined at the heavenly ofﬁce. Myriad
evils are all recorded, even if they are triﬂing. Trivial acts of wholesomeness

271

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

92b

are unimportant but nothing is left out [of the record]. All spirits [of the dead]
are completely collected [in the heavenly ofﬁce]; it is not a government ofﬁce
with which living people must comply.
Nevertheless, why do harmful spirits falsely state this purpose, throw off
all restraint at will among human beings, and deceive and jeopardize people
in all respects? Among the trees of a dense forest or in a ﬁeld full of magpies,
they draw together or move around. They are enumerated in books of ceremonies from remote [times] to the present [time]. They assemble men and
women and plant earthly desires in their minds. Their foul vapor invites misfortune from the external world. The hooting of an owl spreads out into the
distance. Their poisons accumulate in the king’s territory, become harmful,
and increase exceedingly.
Clouds and fog cover the sky. Various kinds of evil conceal what is right.
Many things are harmed through your weird and peculiar means. Even though
I am but an insigniﬁcant follower, I fully step up to the rank of the Three Seasonal
Tailoring Groups (sanfu). I often read classic books and commentaries and now
I see these calamities. Inferring from ancient matters and examining present
matters, [I can say that] evil does not go along with good. I will wash away
impurity and brightly raise the sacred Way. I inform you that I will strictly investigate the faction of mischievous spirits and make them return to the graveyards
to roam about there. If they eat fruit and drink spring water, it is enough for
them to open a path to living. This then causes the masses to cut off the trouble
of exhausting their wealth and the birds and animals to not be killed in snares.
If there are still some spirits that turn their heads around, feel a persistent
attachment [to this place], and do not leave here, hoping for food, then I will
summon deities such as the divine king Vaiśravaṇa and Rāṣṭrapāla, to whom
I will grant vajra. I will station a military division of true [spirits] that are
brave and sternly powerful. They will rigorously move the trichiliocosm.
They are ﬁerce; [their enemies] are difﬁcult to endure. The mere posture of
couching their shining spears or drawing their bright swords can break a
mountain into pieces, subdue dragons, and bring demons to their knees. No
one among them does not bow with his head to the ground.
You are a minor spirit. If you dare to touch the sun, moon, and stars, you
will be like a swan’s feather that goes in charcoal [and is burned up], or like
a ﬁsh that swims in a cauldron of boiling water, or like a ﬁre that is extinguished

272

Fascicle Fourteen

by all the water of a large river, or like the morning dew dried up by the sun.
I think of benevolence and feel pity for you for what you do. When I warn
you of this danger and worry about you, my heart hurts. Quickly appear
before me and return to your original form! Go on a long journey myriad
miles back to blue waves on the seashore! Do not stay here any longer! Show
your submission and do as I have ordered!

Written Appeal to the Demon
by Shi Zhijing410

I, Shi Zhijing, repeatedly bow to you with my head to the ground.
O Brilliant General! Your Excellency and I have traveled on different
ferries in the profound path, but human beings and Heaven are uniﬁed. Even
though our most honored masters differ from each other, we are fundamentally
the same in terms of being in the three realms of existence. I often plan to
have a good meeting with you and speak various issues of long standing, but
what we profess is not yet profound. This therefore results in the separation
between you and me. At the present time the Dharma King manages the
world and everyone in the ten directions desires to follow him. The marvelous
net is precisely spread and the large rope of the net is seized completely.
There is the tide for the Great Pervader to prevail411 and the lofty assembly
will soon be held. I cannot stand up eagerly longing for it, so I am simply
writing this to make my intention clear.
The times that are blocked have a way to be opened. When a negative situation ends it becomes peaceful. A thousand sages hand [this belief] on from
one to another. A great number of teachers inherit this in succession.
In ancient times, our great founder, the heavenly king Ultimate Source
(Benyuan), embodied the functions of all changes and ascended the throne
in the original region [of his kingdom,] in accordance with an auspicious
omen sent down from Heaven. He relied on the expedient form and subjugated
all countries. He exerted the axe of benevolence and covered the whole wide
world. He powerfully washed away the four evils412 and cleansed the three
realms of existence. He duly stretched the majestic rope toward the whole
world and spread the marvelous net over the entire universe. He brought
calmness to the remote backward regions in the seven directions and paciﬁed
and uniﬁed the nine lands (i.e., China).

273

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

92c

Nevertheless, the profound laws of nature were not sympathetic to him.
His true appearance became tranquil. The double brightness [of the sun and
moon] stopped the luminosity and waves capsized an empty boat. Consequently, this caused evil [thoughts] to arise one after another, just as when
ants [swarm], and [wrong] views like an owl to develop ﬁercely. The true
path was dimmed and polluted. Pure people became stained and confused.
Cruelty accumulated among the masses. Poison ﬂowed for myriad kalpas.
Sentient beings who cherish the Way in mind have different thoughts from
one another but they come to anger in the same way.
Our Dharma King received the mandate [of Heaven, appeared in this
world] as occasion demands in order to rectify confusions. He was born as
an heir of a noble house of the upper level [of society], and charged himself
with numerous people’s minds on the lower level. He held in hand the star
called the Heavenly Banner (Tianqi) and encompassed the trichiliocosm. He
took a ﬁrm grip of the sacred chart and caused the great enterprise to prosper.
Clouds arose in the four palaces and the auspicious bird luan ﬂew to India,
when the spirit [of Śākyamuni] descended to Kapilavastu and made the moat
of time around the city. [Śākyamuni] paciﬁed the masses and nicely ease highranking ofﬁcials’ minds. He encouraged and led people’s minds and offered
comfort and instruction to the sick. He adorned his heart with the axe of wisdom, wore the wondrous armor on his body, sympathized with the eighteen
innocent people,413 and felt sad that the path to the three kinds of emptiness
was cut off. He was determined to relieve [even those who live] in the end of
the world and had to conquer many difﬁculties. All the people in the countries
of numerous regions respectfully bowed before his excellent ediﬁcation.
I have heard [the following] about you. You are unafraid that serious delusions may cover you; you are deeply attracted by silly thoughts; so you stick
to false views; like a wolf, you occupy a heaven of the realm of desire; like
an owl, you hoot at a mysterious watchtower; you betray and leave [your
allies] at national borders; you oppose the divine principle; and you think
that you are able to ascend the Throne and change great laws. Looking at
even just two or three of these issues causes me to draw a deep breath.
Formerly Mahābhijñājñānābhibhū governed the world and all regions
depended on him, just as a shadow follows [a form]. There was a deceitful
idiotic heavenly demon who did not observe the right principles, disobeyed

274

Fascicle Fourteen

the will of Heaven, and disturbed deities’ minds. Soldiers led [by him] ﬁlled
the empty sky, took temporary forms, and variously transformed. Their ﬁne
armor gleamed in the sunlight and their pointed spears wiped out the area.
Mysterious drums vied with one another in their loud pounding. [The drumbeats] went to the world beyond this world. [The demons] vigorously walked
about or ran around, thinking themselves to be strong and energetic.
Once King [Mahābhijñājñānābhibhū’s] army rose in force the group of
evil spirits was brought to an end. Many deluded beings reformed themselves,
adored [Mahābhijñājñānābhibhū] from a distance, and were subjugated by
him, just like a shadow [is subject to a form]. Needless to say, you are only
a single general and try to be valiant. Even if an upright person employs many
people, if he has no set rules he cannot form them into a brigade. Nevertheless,
you intend to go against [the Dharma King], usurp and oppress the splendid
capital city, seize the powers of the spiritual world, and ﬂy over the Supreme
One (i.e., the Buddha). If you disgrace truth with falsity, you are really wrong.
Today Śākyamuni governs the world. His Way has ﬂourished since the
time of the beginning of this kalpa. His subtle ediﬁcation is vast and his
supernatural net is stretched even in remote places. Intelligent people are
harmonious. They are counted as numerous as clouds; they cover the world.
Warriors [for Śākyamuni] leap like dragons. There are myriad troops of
archers. Arhats strategize together and their clever schemes are outstanding.
Consequently, they give orders [to the generals].
Sadāprarudita, Commissioned with Extraordinary Powers, Vanguard General-in-Chief, Commander-in-Chief of Jambudvīpa, and the Marquis who
Pledges Allegiance to Justice, you alone received the heavenly wonder and
ﬂew from the capital Mysterious Mirror [to this world]. Your spirit is as lofty
as Mount Sumeru. Your brave energy encompasses the world. You are skilled
in military affairs and you have completed literary arts. Your loyalty is famous
in the Imperial palace. Lead forty trillion people, collect your horse, and go
to battle!
Guru (Skt. nara-nāyaka),414 Commissioned with Extraordinary Powers,
General-in-Chief of the Subjugation of Remote Lands, Commander-in-Chief
of the Four Heavens, and Duke of Trāyastriṃśa, you are preeminent in military
skill and your literary skill surpasses great schemes. Your subtle thoughts
are beyond earthly affairs. Your mind stays outside of this illusory world.

275

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

93a

You are concerned about the times and forget yourself. You are determined
to save the world by all means. Lead a hundred trillion people and ﬂy like
the great bird luan to the thoroughfare of Heaven!
Vimukticandra, Commissioned with Extraordinary Powers, General-inChief of the Expeditionary Force Against Demons, Commander-in-Chief of
the Six Heavens, and King of Tuṣita Heaven, your subtle thoughts are very
profound, and you loftily walk outside of this world. Your strategy is on the
same level as that of [bodhisattvas] in the eighth of the ten stages (Skt.
kumāra-bhūta) and your merit is equal to that of [bodhisattvas] in the ninth
stage. You mournfully feel compassion for beings in the three lowest realms
of existence. When you become angry you go so far as to indulge yourself
in destruction. When you draw your sword you are impassioned by lamentation and indignation. You think to rise up in force, going around and around
just like a dragon [in the sky]. Lead four hundred trillion people and revolve
around the heavenly gate just as clouds do!
Vajragarbha, Commissioned with Extraordinary Powers, Proﬁcient in
Subtlety General-in-Chief, Commander-in-Chief of the Seven Heavens, and
King of the Four Meditation Heavens, your bright disposition shines and
reﬂects. Your golden face illuminates even remote places. Your kindness is
greater than the place where the sun rises. You have the physical strength to
overthrow mountains and seas. When you glance to your right, waves splash
in the Meng and Fan Rivers. When you gaze to your left, even the gleam of
the divine tree called fusang is diminished.415 There is no place that your
virtue does not illuminate. There is no one who does not submit himself to
your dignity. Lead seven hundred trillion people and glare ﬁercely, just like
a tiger, on Mount Sumeru!
Great Vimalakīrti, Commissioned with Extraordinary Powers, Garrison
General-in-Chief, Commander-in-Chief of the Nine Heavens, and King of
the Bodhisattvas of the Eighth Stage, your outstanding schemes are marvelous.
With the axe of the Dharma you invigorate [people] in remote lands. You
bear a lofty air. Your temporary manifestation exceeds myriad transformations.
When you breathe, all the people of the world follow you, just as the clouds
ﬂow [in the sky]. When you command, all people in the ten directions obey
you, just as trees and plants bend before the wind. You grieve for innocent

276

Fascicle Fourteen

people who have many hardships. Lead nine hundred trillion people and let
the horses drink water at a ferry of the sky!
Great Mañjuśrī, Commissioned with Extraordinary Powers, General-inChief of Illuminating the Coming Age, Commander-in-Chief of the Thirteen
Heavens, Military Supervisor of the Small Thousand Worlds (Skt. sahasraścūḍika-lokadhātu), and King of the Bodhisattvas of the Ninth Stage, you are a
descendant who has received the origin from remote times. Your body is as
bright as the sun, moon, and stars. You are descended from [the Celestial
Thearch of] the Palace of Purple Tenuity (the constellation to which the polar
star is central). Your mind is lofty and your physical body is great. In responding
to [the requests of sentient beings] you have a thousand paths to reach them.
Your profound schemes number in the tens of thousands. You feel various
kinds of movements upon yourself and [are able to] calm numerous worries
in one moment. You deeply hold benevolence in mind and possess all the four
methods of winning people over (Skt. catur-saṃgrahavastū) in your heart.
Lead people as numerous as particles of dust and soar up from this land!
Avalokiteśvara, Commissioned with Extraordinary Powers, General-inChief of Reforming the World with the Teaching, Military Supervisor of
Recording of Demons, Commandant Against Various Evils, and King of
the Middle Thousand Worlds (Skt. dvisāhasra-madhyama-lokadhātu), your
resources are profound. With the axe of wisdom you invigorate [people] in
remote lands. You clearly master the four ways to enlightenment (Skt. caturpratipadā) and brightly examine the three kinds of deﬁlements. You sometimes appear among numerous evil beings and rise with irresistible force to
perform a feat. You sometimes manifest yourself in temporarily transformed
forms in the eighteen [hells] and stop the direst distress in those places.
When you wave your hand the iron rocks of Mount Iron Surroundings (Skt.
Cakravāḍa) are smashed. When you exhale a single breath from your mouth
the drifting clouds [are blown and] break apart on a cliff. In all directions
you are able to be a friend who helps people without being asked to do so.
Lead people as numerous as a miraculous number, take up arms, and howl
like a tiger!
Great Maitreya, Commissioned with Extraordinary Powers, General-inChief of the Promulgation of Ediﬁcation, Commander-in-Chief of the Three

277

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

93b

Realms of Existence, and King Who Will Take Up a Buddha’s Place [in the
Next Life], you have an excellent body with which you cast the net [of the
law]. Your natural constitution is outstanding. Your body is stronger than
vajra and your mind encompasses the world beyond this world. Your brave
energy soars into the clouds and with the axe of wisdom you invigorate [people] in remote lands. The insight of nonarising (Skt. anutpattika-dharmakṣānti) revolves in your mind. With the wisdom of expediency you conform
to the outside of this phenomenal world. Regarding what you plan with your
determination, you are successful wherever you go. You exercise both power
and kindness and equally exert noumenon and phenomenon. Lead eightyfour thousand people and wait for our order, taking strict precautions!
The trichiliocosm is brimful of brave warriors. Vajra ﬁghters ﬁll the eight
ends of the universe (i.e., the entire world). They all wish to help in this military action and sweep across the world. They ride the honorable chariots of
all the pāramitās, guard the long eightfold holy path to enlightenment, sit
astraddle on the divine horses of the six supernatural powers, and control
the spiritual reins of the ultimate law of profound emptiness. They draw the
powerful bows of the four stages of meditation (Skt. catur-dhyāna) and shoot
the sharp arrows of a temporary manifestation (i.e., an incarnation of a buddha
or bodhisattva). Great horses neigh ferociously and their light hoofsteps are
strong and powerful. [All the troops] receive orders from the Imperial court.
They have never failed.
The guru of your domain has only ﬁve hundred distinctive people. You
should deeply examine the mandate of Heaven and come to submit to our
king’s ediﬁcation. His Majesty (i.e., Śākyamuni) will open his heart to you,
be moved by your intention to submit, confer ofﬁcial positions and titles of
nobility upon all of you, and award ﬁefs as well. Your achievement will be
considered equal to that of vassals of long service. Your reputation will spread
over myriad regions. Nevertheless, what frame of mind do you possess? You
unreasonably give rise to a peculiar plot. You are haughty in a deserted border
region and scheme to strengthen a permanent position. [Consequently] harmful
inﬂuence will break out among the masses and disasters will ﬂow eternally.
How sad this is! It is really wrong!
Formerly, according to circumstances, you were misled by [external]
objects. Your mind was unrestrained and confused. You plunged yourself

278

Fascicle Fourteen

into danger and escaped to the non-Buddhist teaching. If someone makes a
single mistake out of a hundred acts, even though he may be wise and virtuous
he loses his normal state [of mind]. I have said this for a long time. If you
become aware of this, turn back from ignorance, plead guilty to your sins at
the palace gate, restrain yourself, take the tonsure, study together with many
prominent people, and entertain yourself with the Way, honor and fame will
then be yours from beginning to end.
Why do you choose ignorance, cling to absurdity, and seek merely temporary ease in an evil position? You commit yourself to the mountain of ignorance and consider yourself to be lofty. You rely on the grove of wrong views
and rest in comfort. You indulge in the deﬁlements of the six desires, amuse
yourself with evil delusions, and please your spirit. You raise the standard
of arrogance aloft, lead the ferocious battle array of ignorance, stride along
a deserted path, and make light of the sacred treasures. You try to usurp the
heavenly palace and compete with the sun and moon. I am afraid that you
will not be successful.
[Regarding actions such as] reﬂecting back the light of the sun, moon,
and stars by raising the hands, or ﬁlling a huge ocean by grasping the earth,
even if you intend to do so, these are illusions and difﬁcult to carry out. You,
General, have planted merit at the profound ferry and I heard that it originated
a long time ago. Your splendid features are bright and shining and you are
the center of public attention. It is easy for you to ascend to the fundamental
[status] of the descendant of a respected family. Merit that you have made
from the very ﬁrst should be valued. You should reﬂect on your past conduct,
cultivate yourself for the future, and quickly submit to us. You should apologize for your faults at the red gate [of Buddhism]. When everything is set
in order by the Way, family and nation coexist, the sovereign and his vassals
are equally eminent, your body and fame are secure, you are able to understand
with a philosophic eye, and your dependents are peaceful and easy. How
good this is!
The [Dharma] King’s army now sets the time to take the ﬁeld. In the ten
directions the reins [of the horses] are raised. [Warriors] carry trumpet shells
in their hands. A group of sages dance in unison. The axe of the Way glitters
in [the corps of] the vanguard and mysterious drums roar in the rear guard.
Once the spiritual bell has been struck the ten directions will be overturned,

279

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

93c

the waves of the sea will splash, and lands will quake, just like a boiling
[spring]. At this moment, Mount Sumeru is enclosed within a particle of dust
and Heaven and Earth revolve within a millet grain. [The land of] Akṣobhya
is put in the left palm and [the lands of] wondrous happiness shines in the
right palm. Given that the supernatural power [of the Buddha] is like this,
how could you face it?
Our Dharma King who has mastered the Way is benevolent. He has scruples about easily attacking you, temporarily stops all military forces, and
collects the reins of divine [horses] for the moment. At the very moment to
go to the front, he had me send this letter to you, hoping that you will order
your deluded vehicles to about-face. You should decide soon what is good
for you, tie your hands behind your back, submit yourself at our gate, leave
your fate to our Imperial court, and enjoy untroubled ease in the profound
realm. Your gloriﬁed name will then shine within you and your freely moving
body will sojourn in the external world. Who else but you, then, could take
an ofﬁcial post of the celestial realm?
Wisdom is to clearly know a crucial point; intelligence is to value avoiding
calamities. To know to return at the time of coming to the end is what a gentleman considers to be good. This is precisely the best time to turn misfortune
into a blessing and a good opportunity to secure merit.
In ancient times, when King Jie of the Xia dynasty was a tyrant, King
[Tang] of the Yin dynasty subjugated him; when King Zhou of the Shang
dynasty was the principal of disorder, King Wu of the Zhou dynasty took up
arms against him. These are exactly [clear matters] that were divined with
stalks and tortoise shell, and they serve as comprehensible lessons for generals
[of all ages]. Even though you and I are against each other in these years,
our intellectual style in the sense of the [Buddhist] Way should be the same.
Human and heavenly beings are uneasy and troubled, but why is it worth
causing a separation between us [on this point]?
I would like to quickly send an order through this writing.
Why I secretly feel sad about these words and yet still send a letter describing all this in full detail is that I do not wish to cause a fragrant orchid to
wither in summer or cut its stalk until it is destroyed (i.e., I do not want to
cause you to come to ruin in the prime time of your life). Deeply think about
my statements! Make a good consideration by yourself! Do not cause yourself

280

Fascicle Fourteen

to fall into the three lowest realms of existence! Do not cause the six heavens
[of the realm of desire] to raise worthless grass! I feel anxious when I take
a quick sidelong look at your situation. I send you this letter on the verge of
taking the ﬁeld. I am confused with various feelings in my mind so I cannot
fully express my thoughts in words.

Written Appeal to Destroy Demons
Composed by Shi Baolin

On the ﬁrst day of the month when the ﬁve deﬁlements vigorously arise, just
as water in a cauldron boils up, and the current life span of people is a hundred
years, in the year of the minutest particle of the trichiliocosm in the Auspicious
Kalpa (Skt. bhadrakalpa, the present cosmic period), your vassal Vajragarbha,
Commissioned with Extraordinary Powers, Commander-in-Chief of All Military Affairs in the World of Gaṅgānadīvālukā, General-in-Chief of an Expeditionary Force Against Demons, Regional Inspector of the Pure Province,
and King of the Bodhisattvas of the Tenth Stage; your vassal Vimukticandra,
Commissioned with Extraordinary Powers, Commander-in-Chief of All Military Affairs in the World of Eighty Thousand Pāramitās, General of Destruction of Deﬁlements, Commandant of Leading Demonic Barbarians, Minister
of War, Regional Inspector of the Brahman Province, and Duke of the Bodhisattvas of the Eighth Stage; and others bow with our heads to the ground,
bow with folded palms, and present [a written appeal] to the Imperial Secretary
of the Imperial Court.
We think respectfully that the whole world is equally illuminated by the
numinous mirror (i.e., the sun), numerous streams return to the king of all
the valley streams (i.e., large rivers and seas),416 myriad transformations are
equal to what is empty and profound, and all wonders take absolute intelligence as the foundation. This is most likely because there is unity in the
foundation of truth, and in phenomena there is nothing with which to gather
together different kinds of things.
Therefore, the Tathāgata went beyond the serious darkness of confusion
and alone arose. He diligently accumulated abundant merit for numerous
kalpas, emitted lofty bright [light] into the three lowest realms of existence,
uprooted immense ignorance that exists from the beginning of the creation
of the world, mastered the innermost of the sacred virtue, investigated

281

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

94a

exhaustively the abstract tenor of nonarising, examined the vital element of
the transformation of things, and grasped the large rope to control the great
virtue. With regard to the fact that his distinguished appearance is outstanding
and extraordinary and his supernatural light is glorious, even if a thousand
suns shine at the same time, [the Tathāgata] is assuredly unparalleled.
[The Tathāgata] manifests in myriad forms but this does not mean that
[his manifestations] are too numerous. His true form unites with what is the
most subtle but this does not mean that it is the same. He manifests in the
ﬁve realms of existence corresponding to [sentient beings’ needs] but this
does not mean that he is born [in those realms]. He demonstrated entering
[nirvana] through physical death but this does not mean that he was extinguished. He is elusive and inaudible.417 He is indeterminable and ﬂeeting.
He has neither name nor image. His depth is immeasurable and his breadth
is unknown. He responds to many people’s feelings yet he is not troubled.
He provides for myriad movements but he is always tranquil. He quickly
goes through as many kalpas as there are grains of sand in the Ganges River.
He relieves the whole world momentarily. Even if the two polarities (i.e.,
Heaven and Earth) were to fall down he can never be harmed. Even if a
strong man were to carry him off on his back and try to move him secretly,
[the Tathāgata] would not change [position from his original place]. If he is
visited by a disastrous ﬁre he will not be not burned. If he is immersed in a
torrent he will not drown. Even Heaven and Earth are beneath his virtue.
Someone who possesses profound literary knowledge is still unqualiﬁed to
clarify the [Tathāgata’s] Way. The enormity [of the Tathāgata] contains the
whole world, but this cannot describe his greatness. His ﬁneness goes into
inﬁnitesimal space between things but this cannot describe his minuteness.
So he nourishes the masses. His ediﬁcation holds both the Originator and
the Mother of all things. He has no desire. He does nothing [just for the sake
of doing it], yet there is nothing that he does not do.418 He soars on the path
of complying with mutation and saunters about in the world beyond existence
and nonexistence. He is outstanding and prominent and the visible embodiment of a multitude of sages. He is peaceful in the state of nirvana. The two
vehicles (i.e., of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas) conceal their thoughts in
the tenor of emptiness as emptiness. Bodhisattvas of the tenth stage stop
thinking at the pivot of movement. The Brahmā King sighs with praise and

282

Fascicle Fourteen

takes refuge in the [Tathāgata’s] virtue. Śakra-devānām-indra keeps [the Tathāgata’s virtue] in mind and detests being in the rank [of the lord god of Trāyastriṃśa Heaven]. The Tathāgata’s sacredness goes to extremes [in this way].
Thereupon [Śākyamuni] responded to Dīpaṅkara’s prediction and veriﬁed
Mahābhijñājñānābhibhū’s prophecy. [Śākyamuni] went out of the ﬁve realms
of existence and rose just like a dragon. He is prominent in the world beyond
emperors. His Way is the most powerful in the three realms of existence and
his virtue covers the ten directions. The areas [he governs] near the capital
are as numerous as grains of sand in the Ganges River and his capital city is
the trichiliocosm. He is at rest in the comfortable room of the nine kinds of
meditation (Skt. navā-anupūrvasamāpatti), ascends the lofty mansion of the
seven factors of wisdom (Skt. sapta-bodhyaṅgā), washes in the clean pond
of the eight kinds of meditation leading to liberation (Skt. aṣṭa-vimokṣa),
and roams about in the spacious garden of dhāraṇī. Thereafter he resides in
the palace of benevolence, places himself on the seat equal to emptiness,
wears the [eighty] minor marks of physical excellence as his imperial ceremonial dress, and has a topknot (Skt. uṣṇīṣa) as his heavenly cap.
He appoints the one who belongs to Maitreya as Minister of the Left and
a peer of Mañjuśrī as Minister of the Right. Graceful hymns of Mahayana
sutras are sung before him and the bells and whisks of the four methods of
winning people over dance behind him. He is guarded by ofﬁcers who have
mastered the contemplation for bodhisattvas of the eighth stage, and he is
attended by numerous eminent transcendents who have attained the four
fruits. Ofﬁcials of the Three Communicating Agencies are all sages and the
Six Tax Supervisors have only wise people.419 Thereupon, the Duke of Zhou
and Confucius propagate the teaching. Yao and Shun preside over [China].
King Tang and King Wu elevate the great authority. The Regional Governors
are the Three Augusts.
When [Śākyamuni’s] ediﬁcation is accomplished the level thoroughfare
of the eightfold holy path to enlightenment (Skt. ārya-aṣṭāṅgika-mārga)
becomes evener, the ferries of the three vehicles are opened to all directions,
the wonderful residences of wuwei are arranged, [people who have] severe
suffering are liberated from deﬁlement, the crooked paths of the three lowest
realms of existence are closed off, pleasure is opened to heavenly and human
beings, the stage of fruition [attained through cultivation] is considered a

283

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

94b

title of nobility, and the meal of nectar (Skt. amṛta) is taken as ofﬁcial pay.
Those who have great merit are rewarded with a ﬁef of the Pure Land. Those
who have small merit are directed to the peace of the city created by supernatural
powers (Skt. ṛddhi-maya-nagara). This is what goes beyond the great enterprises
of all kings and the highest administration of the world of great peace.
The ﬁve realms of existence are the pure Imperial court for government
ofﬁcials. The four modes of birth are the culmination for those in the ofﬁcers’
ranks. Nevertheless, people are deluded and gravely ignorant. They waste
time going against the truth. They are pleased by familiar satisfaction, just
as [ﬁshes] that keep one another wet by tiny bubbles on the surface of water
completely forget about distant rivers and lakes.420
Therefore Devil King Pāpīyas planted the root of ignorance in himself at
the very beginning, accumulated delusions in his mind in the illusory world,
drifted on the turbulent waves of the three major evil passions,421 and entered
the dense forest of perverted views. Consequently he has come to stealthily
make sport of the sacred treasures, avail himself of falsehood, and profane
the truth. He boastfully reigns over the heavenly palace and divides the high
mountains and lands [among his vassals]. He issues a command to the six
heavens of the realm of desire as he likes and indulges in the power of prejudice. Internally he designates various poisons as the three dukes (three paramount aides to the ruler) and the nine kinds of deﬁlement (Skt. nava-saṃyojanā) as ministers. Externally he employs the six coverings (greed, breaking
precepts, anger, indolence, distraction, and ignorance) as his generals and
the four kinds of deﬁlement (delusion regarding the self, the view that the
self exists, self-conceit, and attachment to the self) as soldiers. Internally he
rampantly acts in deﬁance of authority; he is not afraid of ordinances of the
August (i.e., the Buddha). His light is as feeble as the glow of a ﬁreﬂy yet
he still competes with the sun for brightness. Consequently he has recently
challenged the divine authority and risen in arms against the bodhi tree. He
raises his voice just as Lord Thunder makes a sudden peal of thunder, and
he arranges people in a line just as Mount Khadiraka belches out ﬁre.
Furthermore, Vasudhāra Bodhisattva became confused in his meditation
room422 and Sadāprarudita Bodhisattva cried mournfully [over military maneuvers] at a marketplace.423 These are all due to the fact that the crazy idiot

284

Fascicle Fourteen

(i.e., Pāpīyas) indulges in savagery and damages the holy principles. He has
caused disorder in China for a long time.
The Sage King (i.e., the Buddha) laments that confused people are deaf
and blind [to the True Dharma]. He is saddened by the fact that a young
person who has lost his way [to return home] grows more homesick. He will
unite numerous evil people in order to equalize [and correct] their views,
and will assemble [the followers of] the nine heretical schools in order to
cause them to get on board the same ferry.
Hereupon, [the Buddha] orders his followers who have great powers to
be his generals and selects soldiers from among the vajra [wrestlers]; these
are men who eat gold and chew iron and people who can break up ice or
walk through ﬁre. Brave soldiers are as numerous as particles of dust and
sand. There are myriad intrepid people. They move like a shooting star, rise
like a wind, and prance like a dragon in the devils’ territory. The corps is stationed according to a carefully thought-out plan and [the soldiers] press their
enemies to the ﬁeld of inevitable death.
Nevertheless, the devil rebels do not behave themselves prudently. They
dare adhere to the ignorance of the savage tribes in the south. They oppose
us by ignoring the order, just as the states of Zong and Kuai did,424 unfurl a
commanding ﬂag in the land of self-conceit, and solidify deﬁlement on the
steep mountain of a multitude of delusions. [Devil rebels] impertinently
approach again and again, waywardly repeating [their actions], one after
another just like the scales of a ﬁsh. Moreover, as for their situation, the
mountain of ignorance is high, steep, and ﬁrm in front of them, the vast river
of lust swells behind them, the forest of evils luxuriantly covers their left
ﬂank, and the deep abyss of the mountain stream of ignorance gloomily lies
on their right. The soldiers of [the four kinds of] deﬁlement alternately watch
for [a chance] just like jackals in a border region. The generals of the six
coverings walk just like tigers on a long thoroughfare. When you gaze into
the distance, it looks just as it does when clouds rise and cover the sky and
fog envelops the whole world. The vigor of [the devil rebels] is a rare case
since the creation of the world.
We, the vassals [of the Buddha], hereupon receive the lofty authority from
the Imperial court and devise a superior wonderful strategy.

285

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

94c

We set up splendid plans with excellent wisdom and extensively make
an enclosure of profound stratagems. Skilled cavalry and foot soldiers surround
[the devils] a thousand or ten thousand times over. Covering the battle ﬁeld,
the reserve forces are stationed at positions of strategic importance. General
Dāna (giving) in the front line watches the ﬂag of parsimony and advances
straight ahead. General Vīrya (diligence) in the rear pushes [the devil] soldiers
of indolence to the back. [General] Dhyāna (meditation) captures the cavalry
of sloth on the left. [General] Śīla (precepts) defends against [the soldiers
of] wickedness on the right. [General] Upāya (expedient means) of the outer
army moves the cavalry to a steppe and causes the soldiers of frivolity to run
swiftly to the point under cross-examination and submission.
We spread out the brave brigades and we are in high spirits. We set up
the dangerous machinery in hidden places. [General] Prajñā (wisdom) of the
central army grasps the subtle mirror of the profound pivot, handles the wonderful art of victory, controls myriad powerful generals, and possesses as
many strong soldiers as there are particles of dust and sand.
Hereupon all our forces act in concert and vie with each other in advancing
on myriad paths. Their minds move the world and their voices shake Heaven
and Earth. Exercising their authority, brave men move quickly like waves.
The brightness of their drawn swords dazzles people’s eyes even more than
sunshine. The sound of the Dharma drums mixes with thunderclaps. [Spirited]
horses run and prance. Swift elephants jump and run around. The bow of
meditation is like smoke going up or clouds rising. The arrows of wisdom
ﬂy like a shower and drift into the air. [Soldiers] wield the whip of provisional
name (Pāli saṃmuti) and tread onto the steppe of does-not-exist (Skt. asaṃpravṛtti). They burnish themselves through the lion’s roar (i.e., the Buddha’s
exposition of the Dharma), pierce [their enemies] with the sound that suffering
is emptiness, wield [the famous sword called] Ganjiang and cut [the enemy
solders] to pieces, and brandish spears and lances, vying with each other to
win victory.
We lay the corpses of deﬁlement down and cover the ﬁeld with them. The
blood of the deﬁlement runs just as a long river does. We demolish the high
and steep mountain of ignorance, dry up the great stream of lust, drive those
who defy [authority] to the cave of various wrong views, and crush impertinence in the nest of the seven kinds of self-conceit.

286

Fascicle Fourteen

Thereupon, even if the devil rebels can make their way, they have lost the
spirit to oppose. Even though they try to retreat, they have no hiding place
where they hope to escape [from their difﬁculties]. They exhaust their
resources. Their path comes to an end. They run about anxiously but there
is nothing on which they can depend. Devil King [Pāpīyas]’s hands are tied
behind his back and he is brought before the military tribunal. His subordinates
bring death upon themselves at our camp gate. All heavenly beings arise just
as lightning ﬂashes and take refuge in [the Buddha’s] ediﬁcation. Confused
people come swiftly as the wind to receive their ﬁrst light of the sun (i.e.,
the Buddhist teaching). The power of the August (i.e., the Buddha) wipes
out [the devil rebels] just as the sun melts morning frost or the whole water
of a great stream is poured to extinguish a bonﬁre. Therefore, in the morning
we cause the enemies who have absconded for myriad generations to collapse
just like a landslide and purge the difﬁculties from ancient times in China
within a brief moment. This is truly the wonderful achievement of the spiritual
assembly by the holy August (i.e., the Buddha), and an excellent meritorious
deed that is rare in the world.
Formerly King Tang of the Yin dynasty [defeated King Jie of the Xia
dynasty and] established merit as great as a cloud in the outskirts of the Xia
dynasty; King Wu of the Zhou dynasty exterminated [King Zhou of the Yin
dynasty] and cleansed the atmosphere in the pasture of the Shang (i.e., Yin)
dynasty. These are, however, simply the heroic and wonderful incidents of
remote ages. How could it be possible to view [these achievements] as equal
to the achievement of our Sage?
Thereupon, I reverently propagate the Imperial plan and pacify those who
adhere to [Buddhism] for the ﬁrst time. I content them with the house equal
to emptiness, ﬁll them with the stream of the eight kinds of meditation leading
to liberation (Skt. aṣṭa-vimokṣa), defend them from [evils] through the propriety of the [ﬁve] precepts and the [ten] wholesome acts, and cause them
to follow the breeze of the six pāramitās. Old people understand to follow
the truth in a new song, and young wanderers hear for the ﬁrst time the sound
of “Let me return [to Buddhism]!”425
To be punished in accordance with Heaven’s decree is the way of the
Spring and Autumn era. To render a meritorious deed and suppress a rebellion
are acts that are praised by former kings. When a great criminal follows the

287

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

sacred law by respecting peace, the world is equally bright and this world is
reformed and puriﬁed. The profound breeze incites [people of] remote areas.
Those within the territory of our state have joy in their minds. In the imperial
court there is the song of “[all affairs] will be happily performed!”426 and
outside the government there is the song of “happy borders!”427
[The Buddha’s] merits are high and his Way is great. They are beyond
expression. His sacred thoughts are deep and profound, and they cannot be
described in words. I have brieﬂy itemized the Imperial authority and the
methods of wonderful schemes. Moreover, I have displayed the vigorous
power of our military. Our courier who travels as fast as lightning goes
quickly, like a shooting star, [carrying this appeal to you]. We respectfully
inform you with this written appeal. We, the vassals [of the Buddha], sincerely
humble ourselves and clap our hands in joy.
Having become free from giving sermons, I again somehow prolong the
day (i.e., have leisure time). With allegory I created this ﬁctional account,
hoping to clarify the Great Way. I hope that those who are fond of the wrong
way will return before they go too far.
A sutra says, “Nirvana is nonarising and yet there is nothing that is not
brought into existence. The most genuine intelligence is non-illuminating
and yet there is nothing that is not illuminated. Only the Tathāgata [possesses
both of these].”428 Victory is not won through the merit of shields and spears.
To invade territory is not achieved through a powerful army that is well
known in the world. An emperor or king is not esteemed just for being in
that rank. Regarding supreme rulers’ vassals, not only those of Lord Huan
[of Qi state] or Lord Wen [of Jin state] are noble. The teaching of Confucius
and the Duke of Zhou is far [from that of the Buddha] at this point. The words
of Laozi and Zhuangzi appear to be similar to [those of the Buddha] but they
are not equal to [the Buddha’s words]. Therefore, we know that the foundation
of truth exists beyond the views of the common people, and that the most
August (i.e., the Buddha) is the king within the true mirror. Middle-class
people hesitate between existence and nonexistence. The ignorant people of
the lowest class are surprised and laugh in a state of permanent confusion.
I hope now that those who read this will abandon their conceit, which is just
like that of Hebo, [the deity of the Yellow River,] who was happy about the
abundant water in the river in autumn, [showing that he had no knowledge

288

Fascicle Fourteen

that there is more water in the Northern Sea], and that they will go to a distance
and enjoy themselves at the profound gate of Ruo, [the deity] of the Northern
Sea who ruled over vast expanses of water].429 We should not bind our minds
with the familiar teaching or frighten our spirit with absurd doctrines.

Afterword to the Collection
for the Propagation and
Clarification of Buddhism
by Shi Sengyou

The [Collection for] the Propagation and Clariﬁcation [of Buddhism] I have
compiled is intended to guard the Dharma against [heretical] insults. It consists
of erudite people’s well-intentioned discussions and distinguished scholars’
excellent statements. It is also completely equipped with the fort to destroy
evils and break delusions and the moat to propagate the [Buddhist] Way and
protect the Dharma. The wise, however, are free from confusion, and those
who are confused contradict wisdom. If we lead people by [only speaking
of] the profound Dharma, we will end up causing them to understand nothing.
Therefore, I have further collected instances from secular writings and point
to issues with evidence. These words are not glorious or elegant but their
logic is simple and concise. I pray that those who have gone astray will return
to [the Buddhist Way] before too long and that they will completely dispel
all doubts. Therefore, [this] is entitled the Collection for the Propagation
and Clariﬁcation [of Buddhism].
I say [as follows]. The twofold truth (i.e., absolute and relative; Skt. paramārtha saṃvṛti) differ from each other. So Buddhists and non-Buddhists are
separated from each other in this point. The way to enlightenment (Buddhism)
is [the teaching of] emptiness and tranquility, and it encompasses the three
realms of existence and it regards them equally. The worldly teaching is conﬁned and stagnated; it directs only [the affairs of] a country and it limits the
mind. If your mind is limited to [the affairs of] a country, you will be doubtful
of all things except for whatever you can directly hear and see. If you regard
the three realms of existence equally, then the law of the mutation of the
spirit (i.e., the transmigration of birth and death) will always be understood.
To be seized with doubt and waver in understanding is the reason that sentient
beings are submerged [in the transmigration of birth and death] forever.

289

95a

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

When we closely inspect the worldly teaching and examine and clarify
the Five Classics, only Heaven is revered and only sages are given as paragons.
[The worldly teaching], however, does not survey the shape of Heaven and
does not infer the minds of sages, either. People respect [the teaching] and
have faith in it, but it is still obscure to them and they do not understand it.
Much less do they understand the Buddha, who is more honorable than
Heaven, or the Dharma, which is more wonderful than sages’ [teaching].
The [Buddhist] ediﬁcation goes beyond the world and its law is beyond the
world in which we cling to language. Even Jian Wu was frightened by the
Milky Way.430 How could it be possible that worldly scholars would not be
suspicious of or surprised by the ocean of enlightenment? If they are surprised
by the ocean of enlightenment, their surprise is the same [as that of Jian Wu
when he heard about the vastness of] the Milky Way.
Their ﬁrst doubt is that what the Buddhist scriptures expound is preposterous and exaggerated and cannot be veriﬁed. The second doubt is that since
one’s spirit perishes when one dies, it is hardly possible that [the spirit will
transmigrate] in the three periods of existence. The third doubt is that people
have never seen the real Buddha and [that his teaching] has no beneﬁt to the
governance of the state. The fourth doubt is that the Dharma teaching did
not exist in ancient times and only recently emerged during the Han period.
The ﬁfth doubt is that the [Buddhist] teaching should exist only in the region
of the western tribes and its ediﬁcation is not for Chinese people. The last
doubt is that the Dharma was rarely [practiced] in the Han and Wei periods
and began ﬂourishing only during the Jin period. Because of these six doubts,
no faith is planted [within the people]. We must save people from being
drowned [in delusion]. Therefore, I will clearly discuss these matters.
If people have the doubt that what the Buddhist scriptures expound is preposterous and exaggerated and it has no veriﬁcation, this is probably because
[in the Buddhist doctrine] the periods of time are inﬁnite and the world is
boundlessly vast. People in the present world all know that it will certainly
last tens of thousands of years, well beyond a hundred years, yet they do not
believe that after the lapse of tens of thousands of years it will reach innumerable kalpas (Skt. anādi-kāla). This is because they measure the Creator
only with their limited minds. All the people are aware that there are surely
the four polar regions outside of China,431 yet they do not believe that there

290

Fascicle Fourteen

are even more worlds far beyond those regions. This is because they adhere
to their own views in judging the Grand Void (i.e., the universe).
Formerly King Tang [of the Shang dynasty] asked [Xia] Ge, “Is there a
limit to the universe?” Ge replied, “There is more boundlessness outside the
boundless, and there is more limitlessness within the limitless.” [The king
then said,] “I, therefore, know [that the universe is] boundless and limitless.”432
The great wise man of ancient times taught the sage king according to reason,
and it completely tallies with [the teachings of] the Buddhist scriptures even
after a thousand years.
With what information do a group of people of limited knowledge object
to [the Buddhist teaching]? They look to themselves with their narrow minds
and make mistakes. With small round eyes they cannot see things and complain that their view is blocked by a wall. Moreover, they intend to disgrace
the esteemed Buddhist scriptures, go against the holy doctrine, and bring
false charges against [the teachings of] the inﬁnite time period and the worlds
[beyond the four polar regions]. This is the ﬁrst point for which they should
be pitied and lamented.
If people have the doubt that because one’s spirit perishes when one dies
and it is hardly possible that [the spirit will transmigrate] in the three periods
of existence, this is a case where someone falsely accuses his own spiritual
nature and despises and casts away his ancestral shrine.
The Duke of Zhou and Confucius, however, drew up statute records in
which they spoke the excellent words of spiritual beings. The Book of Changes
says, “[The union of essence and breath form things]. The wandering away
of the anima (hun) produces changes. Therefore we know the sentiments and
the appearances of spiritual beings.”433 Since [spiritual beings have] both
sentiments and appearance, would they be shapeless? The Book of Odes says,
“The three sovereigns reside in Heaven and King [Wu] is in charge of the
capital.”434 Spirits ascend to Heaven. Can it be said that they perish? The
Book of Rites says, “Under the Xia dynasty it was the [administrative] way
to give honor to the nature conferred on people; they served the spirits of the
departed (gui) and respected the spiritual beings (shen).”435 How could what
Great King Yu revered be viewed as unreal and preposterous? The Book of
History says, “When the Duke of Zhou tried to sacriﬁce himself for King
Wu, [who was critically ill,] he said, ‘I am capable of serving spiritual beings

291

95b

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

(guishen).’”436 Is it possible that the Duke of Zhou’s prayers to his ancestors
were deceptive?
If one dies and yet his spirit [continues to] exist, then [the law of] the
three periods of existence is as clear as a mirror. Who can know the end of
the transmigration of birth and death? Worldly scholars cling to ceremonies
and betray the Five Classics. They not only falsely accuse the Buddha but
also disgrace the sages. If they believe in the spirit (gui) found in the Five
Classics but doubt the spirit (shen) spoken by the Buddha, such people are
assuredly deaf or blind. They are unspeakable. This is the second point for
which they should be pitied and lamented.
If people have the doubt that they have never seen the real Buddha and
[that his teaching] has no beneﬁt to the governance of the state, then offering
sacriﬁces to Heaven and worshiping the deities of mountains and rivers
should be discontinued. Why? Who can see the Supreme Thearch’s face in
the deep blue sky? How could we recognize the appearance of Houji on the
vast earth? People plough the ﬁeld with their own hands. What help do they
receive from the god of the land? People create the footpaths between the
ﬁelds. Why do the zha deities get credit for this?437 Nevertheless, people still
spend a lot of money on the sacriﬁcial offerings and perform numerous seasonal religious services [for these deities]. Isn’t this because it is considered
that such unseen numinous beings should be revered and the people are taught
to render good returns [to the numinous beings]?
Moreover, the Buddha’s wisdom prevails throughout the realm of ultimate
reality and his divinity takes shape beyond the world. On the basis of [the
Buddha’s] compassion in creation the Supreme Thearch achieves [the functions of] Heaven. The sage kings rule over the people depending on [the
Buddha’s] nourishing precepts. If you revere the Dharma the six heavens are
all delighted. If you reject the Way myriad deities are vexed. People today
have never seen the appearance of [the Lord of] Heaven, yet they say that
offering a sacriﬁce to Heaven and Earth brings them happiness. They have
never seen the golden countenance [of the Buddha], yet they say that there
can be no reward even if they respectfully serve [the Buddha]. They make
light of the root and value what is insigniﬁcant. This is the third point for
which people should tremble in fear.

292

Fascicle Fourteen

If people have the doubt that the Buddha’s teaching did not exist in ancient
times and only recently emerged during the Han period, [I would like to say
that] the miraculous ediﬁcation [of the Buddha] is now in and now out of
our sight. Who can gauge its beginning and end? When we think of the far
distant time of [Fu]xi and [Shen] Nong, even their administrative achievements
are obscure. If the Dharma teaching existed during their times, how could
we have learned about it?
Formerly Fotudeng knew that there were an old [buddha] image and a
dew basin under the stone buried in the earth in the city of Linzi.438 Jiantuole
perceived the foundation of an old temple on Mount Panchi.439 Many people
tried to dig there and found that everything was just as he had said. These
are the vestiges left behind over many generations that were revealed in the
Jin period. Who can conclude that the Buddha’s teaching never existed in
ancient times?
The Liezi says, “During the reign of King Mu of the Zhou dynasty, a wizard
came from the far west. He could enter water and ﬁre [without being harmed],
pass through metal and stone, overturn mountains, cause river streams to ﬂow
backward, and move cities and towns. He stayed in the air and never fell
down. He was not obstructed when he ran into solid substances. He performed
various transformations without exhaustion. He was able not only to change
people’s physical forms but also to change their thoughts. King Mu respected
this wizard as if he was a god, and served him as if he was [the king’s] master.”440 When we observe the [wizard’s] mysterious conduct we see that there
were already ediﬁcation by a bodhisattva and the foreshadowing of the great
Dharma at the outset of the Zhou dynasty. It was not during the Han period
that the portent of the Buddha’s responsive activity in conjunction with human
beings’ receptivity ﬁrst occurred. Nevertheless, people ﬁrmly stick to this
single period (the Han period) [when the Buddha’s teaching emerged]. This
is the fourth point for which they should sigh in lamentation.
If people have the doubt that the [Buddhist] teaching should exist only in
the region of the western tribes and that its ediﬁcation is not for Chinese people, this would mean that the sages of former times stood on speciﬁc regions
in order to lay down their teachings; it would not mean that they established
their teachings in order to teach the people.

293

95c

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

A long time ago the Three Augusts ediﬁed the people with wuwei, the
Five Thearchs did so by means of virtue, the Three Kings did so through
observing the proprieties and inﬂicting a punishment, and the seven states
[of the Warring States period] did so through wielding power and inﬂuence.
The region [they ruled over] was always China, yet the worldly teaching
changed nine times. Today, when we return to the origin of the highest path
and take lessons from great wisdom, [the teaching of Buddhism] touches us
and consequently we understand it thoroughly. Is there any region where the
teaching does not spread?
Yu (the legendary founder of the Xia dynasty) is from the western tribe
Qiang, and Emperor Shun was born in the eastern Yi tribe. Who would say
that these sages’ birthplaces were humble and therefore he rejects them?
Confucius wanted to reside in the region of the Yi tribe and Laozi went to
the western region of the Rong tribe. How can a place be ﬁxed as the location
for the teaching? When even the sages of the mundane world founded their
teachings, they did not concern themselves with the location, whether China
or a non-Chinese region, not to speak of the Buddha who governs over the
trichiliocosm. How could he restrict his ediﬁcation to the western region?
According to the “Chapter on Royal Regulations (Wangzhi)” in the Book
of Rites, “Within the four seas [China occupies] a space of three thousand li
square.”441 The space that China occupies is not very large, either. The regions
along the Yi River and the Luo River originally used to belong to China, but
in the end they became the Rong tribe’s territory. The Wu and Chu areas [along
the Yangzi River] were originally non-Chinese territory, but they became part
of China. The Way moves and ﬂows everywhere, yet the land is not placed
under constant ediﬁcation. Moreover, the earth is boundless and each large
area is governed differently. The polar star is seen in the northwest. Therefore,
we know that India occupies the center of the world. Today [Chinese people]
call this small middle land “the prosperous land (hua)” and reject the True
Dharma. Even though they want to estrange themselves from [the True
Dharma], the miraculous ediﬁcation [of the Buddha] is continuously transmitted
[into China]. This is the ﬁfth point for which they should feel mournful.
If people have the doubt that the Dharma was rarely [practiced] in the
Han and Wei periods and began ﬂourishing only during the Jin period, this
is only because the fortune of the Way has its ups and downs. We cannot

294

Fascicle Fourteen

investigate this thoroughly. If we believe that śramaṇas cultivate Śākyamuni’s
teaching, how different is this from Confucius’ giving an account of [Tao]
Tang (Emperor Yao) and Yu (Emperor Shun)? Confucius studied the Five
Classics and left a model for all kings of later generations. Nevertheless, the
feudal lords of the Spring and Autumn era were not willing to follow and
employ [the model left by Confucius]. In the Warring States period [Confucius’ instruction] was slighted and at a low ebb. In the time of the ﬁrst emperor
of the Qin dynasty [the Confucian canon] was burned to ashes. Did this
happen because Confucius was unworthy or the Book of Odes and the Book
of History were shallow and superﬁcial?
More recently, in the reign of Emperor Wu of the Han dynasty, Confucianism began to be celebrated. Those who were well versed in the Classics
were appointed as ministers and the art of Confucius was honored. How
could it be possible that [Confucianism] is discarded in later ages because it
was slighted in the seven states [of the Warring States period]?
The preface to the Biographies of Arrayed Transcendents compiled by Liu
Xiang in the reign of Emperor Yuan of the Han dynasty says, “Seventy-four
[transcendents] are found in the Buddhist scriptures.” Therefore, we know
that the Buddhist scriptures were ﬁrst transmitted to China a long time ago.
When Emperor Ming dreamed [of the golden man], Fu Yi called [that
man] the Buddha. Thereafter, Qin Jing went on a mission from the east
(China), and Kāśyapa-mātaṅga came [to China] from the west. After that, a
[buddha] image was drawn on the watchtower outside of the Kaiyang Gate
[of Luoyang], and Buddhist scriptures were deposited in a room of Lantai
(the palace library). [Nevertheless,] the profound scriptures were not
expounded and the people did not acknowledge the heart of the scriptures.
Therefore, King [Ying] of Chu built a shrine for benevolence and purity and
Emperor Huan established worship under a lotus ﬂower-shaped canopy. The
Buddhist doctrine did not unite with [people’s minds]. [The Buddha] was
only worshiped as a deity, nothing more than that.
During the Wei dynasty Emperor Wu intelligently examined [the scriptures]
and explained the subtle ediﬁcation in his writing. Sun Quan, [the founder
of the Wu kingdom,] carried out a grand project and built a Buddhist temple.
At the beginning of the reign of Emperor Wu of the Jin dynasty, [Buddhism]
had a chance to take root deeply [in Chinese society]. Jīvaka brightly showed

295

96a

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

traces of supernatural powers. Zhu [Fa]hu collected the [three] stores of the
Dharma treasures (Skt. tripiṭaka). Consequently the princes and dukes as
well as ofﬁcials made progress in virtue by cleansing their minds. Numerous
intellectuals of myriad countries painstakingly reformed their ways.
In the Jin dynasty Emperor Ming was perspicacious and awakened. He
concentrated his mind preserving the one and drew treasured images with
his own hands to depict [the Buddha’s] appearance, which he enjoyed looking
at. Shortly, Master Daoan spread the Buddhist scriptures in the eastern region
of Mount [Taixing]. Kumārajīva propagated the Dharma in the Guanyou area
(i.e., Chang’an). The profound meaning [of the Buddhist Dharma] completely
extended and the ultimate reality [of things] was increasingly illuminated.
People of outstanding ability and wisdom veriﬁed the [Buddhist] doctrines
together, kept them in mind, and adhered to them.
We know therefore that the Dharma clouds began to rise [from a very
small place where] pebbles touch each other, and the wisdom water began
to ﬂow from [a tiny pool], the water which was only as much as could be
held in a wine cup. It is the normal state of the miraculous ediﬁcation [of the
Buddha] that there are certainly gradations in the teaching. The [mysterious]
responsive activities [in conjunction with] people’s receptivity are in accordance with the times. If we are in no condition to receive them, what can we
do about them? [It cannot be helped.]
Accordingly, it is not that Confucianism was unintelligent in the Qin
dynasty and only became intelligent in the Han dynasty. It is simply a matter
of whether or not [Confucianism] was adopted [in those respective times].
It is not that the Buddhist Dharma was unimportant in the Han dynasty but
became important in the Jin dynasty. It is solely a matter of whether or not
[the Buddhist Dharma] was clariﬁed. Consequently, we know that the Five
Classics are continually wholesome and their ups and downs follow the
turning of the wheel of fortune and that, [similarly,] the Buddhist ediﬁcation
is always thriving and whether or not it spreads widely depends on the conditions. Once you think about it in this way, you can no longer harbor deep
doubts. The [worldly scholars who have doubts about Buddhism], however,
stick to their doubts and have never been awakened. This is the sixth point
for which they should bitterly grieve.

296

Fascicle Fourteen

Believing in and following [Buddhism] is the foundation of good fortune.
Being confused and engaging in slander is the gate to misfortune. How much
more should dark people do so! The majority of them do not estimate their
own abilities. On the basis of their ignorance they falsely accuse the Awakened
Precursor’s omniscience, and on the basis of their lack of observation they
slander the discernment of the Perfect One (i.e., the Buddha). They contrarily
tell everyone that those who are experts on [the causality in] the three periods
of existence are perverse. Devoted only to immediate events, they consider
themselves to be intelligent. Thereupon, their minds are choked by confusion
and doubt and calumny ﬁlls their mouths. They expiate their hasty arguments
with heavy suffering and they bring on themselves punishments of the unseen
world through their conspicuous slander. Their words do not have even a triﬂing amount of merit; their thoughts do not have even a hairbreadth’s amount
of beneﬁt.
A river ﬂows as fast as if ﬂying. If a hill is hidden [in a marsh] [it may be
carried away] as quickly as a ﬂash of lightning.442 Before an exhaled breath
comes back, we suddenly leave this world behind. Retribution follows us
just as a shadow [follows the form]. If you repent of your folly would it be
possible to try to recover?
The mutation of the spirit (i.e., the transmigration of birth and death) is
endless. We go through this world and the netherworld alternately. We experience the transmigration of birth and death in the ﬁve realms of existence.
Is there any [realm] we would not go to? The heavenly palace is the clear
evidence that was bestowed upon Zhao Jian[zi] and Lord Mu of Qin state.443
Retribution that alternately comes from the spiritual world is seen in the
cases of Du Bo and Pengsheng.444 The case that good fortune visits those
who cultivate virtue is veriﬁed by the examples of [Tai]wu of the Yin dynasty
and Lord Jing of Song state.445 That misfortune falls upon those who kill
many people is proven by Bai Qi and Cheng Pu.446 Obscure and marvelous
things in this world are minutely recorded in ancient books. The beneﬁcial
activities of unseen divine beings in the next existence are extensively
explained in venerable [Buddhist] scriptures.
The laws of dependent origination and the Buddha’s responsive activity
in conjunction with human beings’ receptivity are, however, recondite, and

297

The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, Volume II

the truth of causality is subtle. Since it is difﬁcult to understand subtle things,
I omit and do not explain them here. [These] key points have already been
correctly shown in what wise people of the past debated. I somewhat follow
my shallow thoughts and add them here at the end of this volume. Although
my writing is not as beautiful as the jade tablets used in ofﬁcial ceremonies,
the content is sufﬁcient to instruct people (panjian).447 I hope that amiable,
courteous gentlemen will seek great fortune for themselves.
End of Fascicle Fourteen of The Collection for the Propagation
and Clariﬁcation [of Buddhism]

298

Notes
1

2

3
4
5
6

7
8

9

10

The Daoist term zhongmin refers to those who attained sagehood and longevity
through the instruction of a brilliant sage master. The concept of zhongmin developed
in southern China and was later applied by Kou Qianzhi (365?–448) of the Northern
Wei dynasty (386–534). By the time of the Tang dynasty (618–907) the notion of
zhongmin was no longer popular.

This derives from a historical fact in the Han dynasty. During Emperor Wu’s reign
(141–87 B.C.E.), “worm magic” (wugu; i.e., the art of poisoning or casting a spell
over someone) was popular in the court. When the emperor fell ill, his son Prince
Wei (131–91 B.C.E.) was falsely accused by Jiang Chong, who claimed the prince’s
practice of worm magic had caused the emperor’s illness. The prince then killed
Chong and attempted a revolt, but he was defeated and subsequently committed
suicide. The emperor, having found that the prince was falsely charged, felt pity for
him and built the Sizi Palace. See the Hanshu, Wu wuzizhuan.
There is no equivalent English name for the Chinese herb danghua, also called tianxianzi. It is a narcotic that causes frenzied behavior when ingested.

Corpus spirits are generally called sanshi (“three corpses”), evil spirits that inhabit
a human body and shorten one’s life span.

The Yellow Books are generally known as instruction books for the arts of the bedchamber. Presently, only four texts called Huangshu are extant in the Daozang.

Kyōto Daigaku Jinbun Kagaku Kenkyūjo Chūsei Shishōshi Kenkyū han, ed.,
Gumyōshū kenkyū (Kyoto: Kyōto Daigaku Jinbun Kagaku Kenkyūjo, 1973–1975),
vol. 3, p. 445, n. 1, suggests that this passage refers to Prince Sudāna’s charity (Skt.
dāna-pāramitā). See the Taizi Xudana jing (T.171.3:419a28–b1, 420c7–8).

In the Later Han dynasty three sheng was equivalent to six hundred milliliters.

This expression is based on a conversation about death between Marquis Jing and
Yanzi, found in the Zuozhuan, Zhaogong’s twentieth year. See James Legge, The
Chinese Classics (Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press, 1960), vol. 5, p. 684
(right column).

The Baopuzi explains the huangshen and yuezhang talismans. See James R. Ware,
trans. and ed., Alchemy, Medicine, and Religion in the China of A.D. 320: The Nei
p’ien of Ko Hung (Pao-p’u tzu) (Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press, 1966), p. 298.

The Discourse on the Triple Destruction was composed as a rejection of Buddhism
by a Daoist writing under the pseudonym Zhang Rong.
299

Notes

11

12
13

14

15

16
17
18

19
20
21

22
23
24

25

Xiaojing. See Henry Rosemont, trans., The Chinese Classic of Family Reverence: A
Philosophical Translation of the Xiaojing (Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press,
2009), p. 105.
Shiji, juan 4, Zhou benji. See William H. Nienhauser, Jr., The Grand Scribe’s Records
(Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1994, 2008), vol. 1, p. 57.

Lunyu, Taibo. See James Legge, The Chinese Classics: With a Translation, Critical
and Exegetical Notes, Prolegomena, and Copious Indexes (Taipei: Wen shih che ch’u
pan she, 1972), vol. 1, p. 207.

The ﬁve kinds of disasters refer to those that King Wu of the Zhou dynasty encountered
during his expedition to defeat King Zhou of the Yin dynasty: (1) he departed on an
inauspicious day, (2) he saw the planet Jupiter in the east, (3) he encountered a ﬂood,
(4) he was besieged, and (5) he encountered a landslide. See Xunzi, Ruxiao.

The Red Eyebrows were a rebel group that emerged toward the end of the Former
Han dynasty. The members applied red paint on their eyebrows in order to distinguish
themselves from Wang Mang’s soldiers.
T.262.9:60a16–b13.

T.475.14:557a18–b3.

The metaphor of passing horses derives from the Zhuangzi, Zhibeiyou: “'Man’s life
between Heaven and Earth is like a white colt passing by a crevice, [which is brieﬂy
glimpsed but then it] suddenly disappears.” See James Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi
quan ji (Taibei: Wen xing shu ju, 1963), p. 505.
Lunyu, Zi han. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 222.

Yijing, Xici xia. See James Legge, I ching; Book of Changes (New Hyde Park, NY:
University Books, 1964), p. 385, n. 22.

This expression is based on a passage in the Zhuangzi, Qiwulun: “A keeper of monkeys,
in doling out their acorns, [once] said, ‘In the morning I will give you three [acorns]
and in the evening four.’ This made them all angry, so he said, ‘Very well. In the
morning I will give you four and in the evening three [acorns].’ His two proposals
were substantially the same, but the result of the ﬁrst was to make the creatures angry,
and of the second to make them pleased.”
The source of this statement is unknown.

Shijing, Wei tian zhi ming: “[The ordinances of Heaven/]How deep are they and nonintermittent! (yu mubuyi).” See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 4, p. 570.

Shangshu, Yaodian: “[Yao] was reverential, intelligent, accomplished, and thoughtful—naturally and without effort (qin ming wen si anan).” See Legge, The Chinese
Classics, vol. 3, p. 15.
Zhuangzi, Waiwu. See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 581.

300

Notes

26

27
28
29

30

31
32

33

34
35
36
37
38
39
40

41
42

Mengzi, Wangzhang shang: “Those who explain the odes may not insist on one term
so as to do violence to a sentence, nor on a sentence so as to do violence to the general
scope.” See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 2, p. 353.
The people of Song state during the Warring States period were referred to as ignorant.

Jie Yu was a madman of Chu state; Lunyu, Weizi. See Legge, The Chinese Classics,
vol. 1, pp. 332–333.

“The sayings of an uncultivated person of the east of Qi state” means unreliable talk.
This expression is found in Mengzi, Wangzhang shang. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 2, p. 351.
Generally the term “Nine August Ones” refers to all legendary rulers before Shen
Nong; however, there are other interpretations. See Nienhauser, The Grand Scribe’s
Records, vol. 2, p. 242, n. 160.
The term jingyi is found in Zhuangzi, Keyi. See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan
ji, p. 414, n. 3.

This citation is given in Liu Xie’s Discourse on Extinguishing Delusions as “Death
is named nirvana. I have never seen a person who learns about death and yet does
not die” (T.2102.53:49c10).

This expression is based on the statement found in the Laozi dao de jing, Chap. 50:
“There are also three in every ten [people] whose aim is to live, but whose movements
tend to the land (or place) of death. And for what reason? Because of their excessive
endeavors to perpetuate life.” See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 140.
Zhuangzi, Dasheng. See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 457.

Liji, Liyun. See F. Max Müller, ed., The Sacred Books of the East (Oxford : Clarendon
Press, 1885), vol. 27, p. 378, n. 15.
Laozi Dao de jing, Chap. 13. See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 104.
Da banniepan jing (T.375.12:802a13–19).

Taizi ruiying benqi jing (T.185.3:473c3–474a2).
Xiuxing benqi jing (T.184.3:468a11).

This is based on a passage in the Zhuangzi, Tiandi: “If an ugly man has a son born to
him at midnight, he hastens with a light to look at it. Very eagerly he does so, only
afraid that it may be like himself.” See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 376.
See, for example, Da banniepan jing (T.376.12:881b24).

Liji, Tangong, shang. Legge translates the passage: “[Slight mourning is worn for an
aunt, and an elder or younger sister, (when they have been married);] the reason being
that there are those who received them from us, and will render to them the full

301

Notes

43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52

53

54
55
56

57
58
59
60
61
62

measure of observance”; See Müller, ed., The Sacred Books of the East, vol. 27, p.
147, n. 43.
No speciﬁc scripture is noted here.

Shiji, Gaozu benji. See Nienhauser, The Grand Scribe’s Records, vol. 2, p. 69.
Sanguo Weizhi, juan four, Gaogui Xianggong zhuan.

Jinshu, juan thirty two, Kangxian Chu huanghou zhuan.
Gaoseng zhuan (T.2059.50:409c18–21).

Zuozhuan, Aigong’s seventh year. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 5, p. 813
(right column).

See Laozi dao de jing, Chap. 1. See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 95.

Zuozhuan, Xianggong’s twenty third year. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 5,
p. 502 (right column).
Zengyi ahan jing (T.125.2:706a17–18).

This expression is based on a passage in the Laozi Dao de jing, Chap. 48: “He diminishes it and again diminishes it, until he arrives at doing nothing [on purpose].” See
Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 138.
This expression derives from Lunyu, Zi han. Legge translates it as “I looked up to
them, and they seemed to become more high; I tried to penetrate [into] them, and
they seemed to become more ﬁrm”; The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 220.
Foshuo Beijing chao (T.790.17:730a16–736a20).

Laozi dao de jing, Chap. 13. See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 104.

See the Zhuangzi, Dazongshi. Legge translates it as “the destruction of life is not
dying, and the communication of other life is not living”; Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi
quan ji, p. 294.
Shijing, Beifeng, Bozhou. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 4, p. 40, n. 5.
Shijing, Xiaoya, Jiaogong. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 4, p. 404, n. 1.

Liji, Tangong, xia. See Müller, ed., The Sacred Books of the East, vol. 27, pp. 198–
199, n. 24.

Liji, Ruxing. English translation by James Legge, in Müller, ed., The Sacred Books
of the East, vol. 28, p. 408, n.16.

Zhuangzi, Tiandi and Rangwang. See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, pp.
363, 589.

The Xiaojing states, “When we have established our character by the practice of the
[ﬁlial] course, so as to make our name famous in future ages and thereby glorify our

302

Notes

63

64
65
66

67
68
69
70

71
72
73

74
75
76
77
78
79
80

parents, this is the end of ﬁlial piety.” See Rosemont, The Chinese Classic of Family
Reverence, p. 105.

This expression is from the Zhuangzi, Tiandao, based on a conversation between the
wheelwright Bian, who could not tell a knack by word of mouth, and Duke Huan,
who learned through reading the words of the sages. See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi
quan ji, pp. 391–392.
Zuozhuan, Xigong’s twenty-fourth year. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 5, p.
192 (left column).
This expression is not found in the Zhuangzi.

The phrase “to empty the room in order to produce bright light (xushi shengbai)”
derives from the Zhuangzi, Renjianshi. Legge translates it as “the empty apartment
is ﬁlled with light through it”; Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 258.
Zhuangzi, Xuwugui. See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 545.

One zhang is equivalent to ten chi. In the sixth century, when the Hongmingji was
compiled, one chi was 24.5 centimeters (about 9.6 inches).
See the Miaofa lianhua jing (T.262.9:22c3–6).

The Scripture on the Clean and Pure Dharma Practice (Qingjing faxing jing) is a Chinese indigenous text. The manuscript fragment of this sutra is found in the Nanatsudera
manuscript collection. The text was published by Tairyō Makita and Toshinori Ochiai,
eds., Nanatsudera koitsu kyōten kenkyū sōsho, Chūgoku senjutsu kyōten (Tokyo: Daitō
Shuppansha, 1994–), vol. 2, pp. 6–15; the passages concerned are on pp. 13–14.
Miaofa lianhua jing (T.262.9:42c3).

Taizi ruiying benqi jing (T.185.3:473b10).

This expression derives from the Zhuangzi, Xiaoyaoyou; “east and west it (i.e., a cat)
leaps about, avoiding neither what is high nor what is low, until it is caught in a trap
or dies in a net.” See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 222.
Penzu is a legendary ofﬁcial during the reign of Emperor Yao. Penzu was believed
to have lived eight hundred years.
Zhuangzi, Zhibeiyou. See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 499.
Zhuangzi, Zhibeiyou. See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 506.

Xuanni is a posthumous title conferred upon Confucius by Emperor Ping of the Han
dynasty.
Chengshi lun, T.1646.32:274c19.

Taizi ruiying benqi jing, T.185.3:475a1–3.
Weimojie suoshuo jing, T.475.14:542b5.

303

Notes

81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97

98
99
100
101
102

Da bannie pan jing, T.374.12:533b4 and T.375.12:778a26–27.
Da banniepan jing, T.374.12:411a23 and T.375.12:652a5–6.

Da banniepan jing, T.374.12:411b18–19 and T.375.12:652b2–3.
Mozi, Minggui, xia and Guoyu, Zhouyu, shang.

Zuozhuan, Zhaogong’s seventh year. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 5, p. 618
(left column), in which Boyou is given as “Pih-yëw.”

Zuozhuan, Zhaogong’s thirty-ﬁrst year. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 5, p.
738 (right column), in which Wu would invade Ying.

Zuozhuan, Chenggong’s tenth year. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 5, p. 374
(right column).

Zuozhuan, Chenggong’s sixteenth year. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 5, p.
397 (left column).
Taiping yulan, juan 398.

The biography of Lü Shang is found in the Shiji, juan 32, Qi Taigong shijia, but this
story is not found there.
The source of this story is unknown.
Hou Hanshu, juan 56.
Jinshu, juan 41.

Shiji, juan 3, Yin benji. See Nienhauser, The Grand Scribe’s Records, vol. 1, p. 48.
Shiji, juan 125, Ningxing liezhuan.

Divination of the six kinds of dreams by the sun, moon, and stars is mentioned in the
Zhouli, Chunguan Zongbo.

This expression is based on a passage in the Zhuangzi, Qiushui, “People that do business on the water do not shrink from encountering iganodons and dragons—that is
the courage of ﬁshermen. Those who do business on land do not shrink from encountering rhinoceroses and tigers—that is the courage of hunters”; see Legge, Dao de
jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 434.

The Chinese character fo, “buddha,” here is replaced with the character shen, “spirit.”

For Sun Bin, see Shiji, Sunzi Wu Qi liezhuan; Nienhauser, The Grand Scribe’s Records,
vol. 7, pp. 39–41; for Lu Fu, see Jinshu, juan 44, Lu Fu zhuan.

Shujing, Shanshu, shuoming, shang. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 3, p. 252.
Shijing, Xiaoya, Qiaoyan. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 4, p. 342.

Shiji, juan 62, Guan Yan lie zhuan. See Nienhauser, The Grand Scribe’s Records, vol.
7, pp. 9–10.

304

Notes

103
104
105

106

107

108

109
110

111

112

113
114
115

116

Shiji, juan 92, Huiyinhou liezhuan. See Nienhauser, The Grand Scribe’s Records,
vol. 8, p. 94.
Gao Yao served as a chief judicial ofﬁcer for the legendary ruler Shun.

This expression is based on a story in the Shiji, Yin benji: King Zhou, a tyrant and the
last emperor of the Yin dynasty, became angry at Bi Gan, who remonstrated with him.
Zhou cut open Bi Gan to examine his heart, saying, “I have heard that a sage’s heart
has seven apertures”; see Nienhauser, The Grand Scribe’s Records, vol. 1, p. 51.

The Chinese character li, “to stand,” is read as the character qiu, “hillock,” and the
character yang, “sun,” is read as the character tang, “hot water,” according to Kyōto
Daigaku Jinbun Kagaku Kenkyūjo Chūsei Shisōshi Kenkyū han, ed., Gumyōshū
kenkyū, vol. 3, p. 492.
Zuozhuan, Xigong’s second year; see Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 5, p. 136
(right column) for the jade produced in Chuiji, and vol. 1, n. 69, for Bian He’s jade.
King Zhao of Qin state asked King Huiwen of Zhao to exchange He’s jade that he
possessed for ﬁfteen of his cities; Shiji, juan 81, Lian Po Lin Xiangru liezhuan; see
Nienhauser, The Grand Scribe’s Records, vol. 7, p. 263.
This statement is probably based on Zhuangzi, Quishui, “The [horses] Qiji and Hualiu
could in one day gallop one thousand li”; see Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan
ji, p. 429.
Xiaojing; see Rosemont, The Chinese Classic of Family Reverence, p. 116.

Yijing, Xici shang. Legge translates this passage: “Seeing their spirit-like intimations
and understanding them [depended on their being proper men]”; I ching: Book of
Changes, p. 378.

Pengsheng was killed by the people of Qi state. Later he appeared as a boar. The marquis of Qi state saw him and fell down in his carriage. See the Zuozhuan, Huangong’s
eighteenth year and Zhuanggong’s eighth year. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, v.
5, p. 70 (right column) and p. 82 (right column).
Yijing, Xici shang. Legge translates this: “[T]hus he knows the characteristics of the
anima and animus. There is a similarity between him and Heaven and Earth, and
hence there is no contrariety in him to them”; I ching: Book of Changes, p. 354.
Yijing, Kui. See Legge, I ching: Book of Changes, p. 140.

According to Shiji, juan 130, Taishigong zixu, Mohists overemphasize frugality, and
[therefore] it is difﬁcult to follow their teaching.

Shiji, juan 3, Yin benji, says, “Carrying a chopping board and a tripod on his back,
[Yi Yin] persuaded King Tang by means of a dainty”; See Nienhauser, The Grand
Scribe’s Records, vol. 1, p. 43.

Han Feizi, Shuonan. See Burton Watson, trans., Han Feizi: Basic Writings (New
York: Columbia University Press, 2003), p. 78.
305

Notes

117
118
119
120
121
122
123

124
125
126
127
128

129
130

131

132
133

134

Shiji, juan 43, Zhao shijia.

Zhuangzi, Qiwulun. See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 245.

Liji, Tangong xia. See Müller, ed., The Sacred Books of the East, vol. 27, p. 193.
Xiaojing. See Rosemont, The Chinese Classic of Family Reverence, p. 110.
Lunyu, Zihan. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 220.

Lunyu, Xiangdang. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 233, n. 10.

Liji, Jiyi. Legge translates: “We meet the approach of our friends with music, and
escort them away with sadness, [and hence at the sacriﬁce in spring we use music,
but not at the sacriﬁce in autumn]”; see Müller, The Sacred Books of the East, vol.
28, p. 210.

Taiping yulan, juan 398. Sun Jian’s wife, Wu, dreamed that the moon entered her
bosom and she gave birth to King Huan of Changsha.
Xiaojing. See Rosemont, The Chinese Classic of Family Reverence, p. 116.
Xiaojing. See Rosemont, The Chinese Classic of Family Reverence, p. 116.
Lunyu, Xianjin. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 240, chap. 11.

Zuozhuan, Chenggong’s ﬁfteenth year, has sheng da jie ci shou jie, which Legge
translates as “A sage is equal to the duties of all positions; a man of the second class
maintains the duty of his position”; The Chinese Classics, vol. 5, p. 388 (right column).
Mengzi, Liang Huiwang xia. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 2, p. 167, chap. 8.

Kyōto Daigaku Jinbun Kagaku Kenkyūjo Chūsei Shisōshi Kenkyū han, ed., Gumyōshū
kenkyū, vol. 3, p. 508, n. 30, suggests that Cao Siwen’s statement starting with this
and the Imperial response should come after the second criticism on Secretariat Fan’s
Discourse on the Extinction of the Spirit.

The entire passage in the Discourse on the Extinction of the Spirit is “[The relation]
between the body and the function is similar to that between a sword and its sharpness”
(T.2102.53:55b16–17).
Lunyu, Shuer. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 203, chap. 25.

These expressions are based on a passage in the Zhuangzi, Qiushui, “A frog in a well
cannot be talked with about the sea—he is conﬁned to the limits of his hole. An insect
of the summer cannot be talked with about ice—it knows nothing beyond its own
season”; see Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 423.

Zhuangzi, Qiushui. This expression is found in a conversation between Hebo and
Beihai Ruo; Mencius is not a correct reference. See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi
quan ji, p. 425.

306

Notes

135
136
137
138
139
140

141

142
143
144

145
146

147

148

149

150
151

Liji, Jiyi. See Müller, ed., The Sacred Books of the East, vol. 28, p. 212, n. 6.

Liji, Jiaotesheng. The attribution of the section on Liyun (“Ceremonial Usages”) is
incorrect. See Müller, ed., The Sacred Books of the East, vol. 27, p. 448, n. 20.
Lunyu, Zihan. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 220, chap.10.
Weimojie suoshuo jing (T.475.14:547c20–22).
Weimojie suoshuo jing (T.475.14:551c20–22).

See “Section Five: The Body is Mortal but the Spirit is Immortal,” in “The Discourse
on Why Śramaṇas Do Not Bow to the Sovereign (Shamen bujing wanghe lun) by
Dharma Teacher [Hui]yuan,” in The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation
of Buddhism, Vol. I, Fascicle Five, pp. 183–190 (T.2102.52:31b10–32b11).

This expression is based on Confucius’ statement in Lunyu, Shuer, “When I have presented one corner of a subject to someone, and from it he cannot learn the other three,
I do not repeat my lesson”; see Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 197, chap. 8
Mengzi, Lilou xia. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 2, p. 317, chap. 1.
Yijing, Xici shang. See Legge, I ching: Book of Changes, p. 354.

Liji, Tangong shang. Legge translates this passage as “Under the Yin they used the
[ordinary] sacriﬁcial vessels, intimating to the people that [the dead] had knowledge”;
See Müller, ed., The Sacred Books of the East, vol. 27, p. 151, n. 6.
Lunyu, Bayi. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 159, chap. 12.

This expression is based on a passage in the Laozi dao de jing, Chap. 25, “In the universe there are four that are great, and the [sage] king is one of them”; see Legge,
Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 116.

This expression is based on a passage in the Lunyu, Gongzhi Chang, “His (i.e., Confucius’) discourses about human nature and the Way of Heaven cannot be heard”;
see Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 177, chap. 12.

See the Shangshu, Yi xun. Legge translates this passage “[Think of them!—] Sacred
counsels of vast importance, admirable words forcibly set forth!”; Legge, The Chinese
Classics, vol. 3, p. 198.

Wulu Chongzong was an intellectual of the Han dynasty who was favored by Emperor
Yuan, so no one dared to argue against him. Only Zhu Yun refuted him in an argument
and brought him to submission, whereupon all the Confucianists said, “Zhu Yun broke
the long horn of Wulu”; see Hanshu, Zhu Yun zhuan.
Yijing, Xici xia. See Legge, I ching: Book of Changes, p. 381, n. 10.

This is in accordance with the description found in the Gongyang zhuan, Aigong’s
fourteenth year. The Zuozhuan contains the writings of Confucius until his death, in
Aigong’s sixteenth year.
307

Notes

152

153
154

155

156

157

158

159
160
161
162
163

164
165

Mengzi, Gaozi shang. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 2, pp. 418–419. “Nobility
of Heaven” refers to benevolence, righteousness, self-consecration, ﬁdelity, and indefatigable joy in these virtues.

The sophistry of a white horse not being white refers to the “Chapter on the White
Horse (Baima lun)” in the Gongsun Longzi, by Gongsun Long of Zhao state.

The expression “separating the hardness [of a stone] from its white color” is based
on a sophistry asserted by Gongsun Long during the Warring States period: “A piece
of stone has two different characteristics: hardness and white color. Two different
characteristics cannot mean one object, stone.”
This expression derives from a passage in the Yijing, Meng. Legge translates “‘[A second
and third application create annoyance, and] I do not instruct so as to create annoyance’—annoyance [he means] to the ignorant”; I ching: Book of Changes, p. 217.

This expression derives from a passage in the Yijing, Kun, “In the ﬁrst SIX, divided,
[we see its subject] treading on hoarfrost. The strong ice will come [by and by]”;
Legge, I ching: Book of Changes, p. 60, n. 1.
Lunyu, Shuer, says, “The subjects on which the Master did not talk were: extraordinary
things, feats of strength, disorder, and spiritual beings”; Legge, The Chinese Classics,
vol. 1, p. 201.

These expressions are based on passages in the Yijing, Xici shang and xia, respectively,
“By their spirit-like ability they knew [the character of] coming events, and their wisdom had stored up [all experiences of] the past,” and “I may venture to say that the
son of the Yan family had nearly attained [the standard of perfection]”; Legge, I
ching: Book of Changes, pp. 372, 392–393.
See note 111.

Hou Hanshu, juan 111, Fan Shi zhuan.

Lunyu, Bayi. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 159.

Liji, Jiyi. See Müller, ed., The Sacred Books of the East, vol. 28, p. 211, n. 3.

The Chinese phrase jian shuang lu (“to treads on hoarfrost and dew”) in the Liji, Jiyi,
is translated as a feeling of sadness on the basis of the passage, “When he (i.e., the
superior person) treads on the dew which has descended as hoarfrost he cannot help
a feeling of sadness, which arises in his mind, and cannot be ascribed to the cold”;
see Müller, ed., The Sacred Books of the East, vol. 28, p. 210.
See “Criticism of Secretariat Fan’s Discourse on the Extinction of the Spirit by Cao
Siwen,” in Fascicle Nine, pp. 65–68.

The six coverings are originally found in the Lunyu, Yanghua; they lead to (1) foolish
simplicity, (2) mental dissipation, (3) disregard of harmful consequences, (4) rudeness,
(5) insubordination, and (6) extravagant conduct. See Legge, The Chinese Classics,

308

Notes

166
167
168
169
170
171
172
173
174

175
176
177
178
179
180

181
182

183
184
185

vol. 1, p. 322, n. 3. In Buddhism this term refers to (1) greed, (2) breaking precepts,
(3) anger, (4) indolence, (5) distraction, and (6) ignorance.
Yijing, Kun Wenyan. See Legge, I ching: Book of Changes, p. 419.

Xiaojing. See Rosemont, The Chinese Classic of Family Reverence, p. 109.
Xiaojing. See Rosemont, The Chinese Classic of Family Reverence, p. 112.

Mengzi, Dengwengong xia. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 2, pp. 283–284.

This expression derives from the Lunyu, Gongye Chang. Legge translates, “[Hui
hears one point and] knows all about a subject”; The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 176.
See note 111.

Shujing, Yushu, Yi Ji. Legge translates this as “the imperial progenitors come to the
service”; The Chinese Classics, vol. 3, p. 87.
Zhouli, Chunguan, Zongbo.

Zuozhuan, Xuangong’s ﬁfteenth year. Wei Ke was able to escape death in dangerous
battle because his enemy was tripped up by tied-up grasses; later he came to know
in a dream that the grass had been tied by the father of his father’s concubine, as
repayment for Wei Ke’s previous kindness to the man’s daughter. See Legge, The
Chinese Classics, vol. 5, p. 328 (right column).
Zhuangzi, Waiwu. See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 576, n. 6.
Lunyu, Xianjin. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 241.

Shujing, Jinteng. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 3, pp. 353–354.

Shijing, Daya, Wenwang zhi shi, xiawu. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 4, p. 458.
See note 172.

Zhuangzi, Qiwulun. The Discourse on the Coexistence of Opposite Views refers to
the theory that that view and this (the opposite view) mutually produce one another.
This was originally asserted by Zhuangzi’s friend, Huishi. See Legge, Dao de jing ji
Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 230.
Laozi Dao de jing, Chap. 60. See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 152.

Zhuangzi, Yangshengzhu. Legge translates “What we can point to are the faggots
that have been consumed; but the ﬁre is transmitted [elsewhere]”; Dao de jing ji
Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 250.
See note 167.

Liji, Yueji. See Müller, ed., The Sacred Books of the East, vol. 28, p. 99, n. 19.

Shijing, Zhou song. Legge translates, “In solemn unison they give forth their notes.
Our ancestors will give ear”; The Chinese Classics, vol. 4, p. 588.

309

Notes

186
187

188
189

190

191

192
193
194

195
196
197
198
199
200

See note 173.

According to the Liji, Jiyi, one hears the sigh when he is departs through the door of
the hall. Legge translates this whole section, “On the day of sacriﬁce, when he enters
the apartment [of the temple], he will seem to see [the deceased] in the place [where
his spirit tablet is]. After he has moved about [and performed his operations] and is
leaving at the door, he will seem to be arrested by hearing the sound of his movements,
and will sigh as he seems to hear the sound of his sighing”; Müller, ed., The Sacred
Books of the East, vol. 28, p. 211, n. 3.
See note 177.

Zuozhuan, Zhaogong’s seventh year for Gun and Boyou, and Zhuanggong’s eighth
year for Pengsheng, respectively. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 5, p. 617
(right column), p. 618 (left column), and p. 82 (right column).

This expression is based on a passage in the Zhuangzi, Xiaoyaoyou: “A cicada and
a little dove laughed at it, saying, ‘We make an effort and ﬂy towards an elm or sapanwood tree; and sometimes before we reach it, we can do no more but drop to the
ground. Of what use is it for this [creature] to rise 90,000 li [in the sky] and make for
the South?’”; see Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 214.

The Chinese term liubian (six elemental energies of the changing seasons) derives
from the term liuqi zhi bian found in the Zhuangzi, Xiaoyaoyou. See Legge, Dao de
jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 217.
Ban niyuan jing (T.6.1:188c25–26), and Taizi ruiying benqi jing (T.185.3:472c7–8).
See note 147.

See the Miaofa lianhua jing (T.262.9:4b11–13): “Among eight hundred disciples
there was one called Seeking Fame. He was greedy for proﬁt. Even though he repeatedly read and recited many Buddhist scriptures, he did not attain nonobstruction
through this practice, and forgot many points he had read. Therefore, he was called
Seeking Fame.”
The expression “Zichan of Dongli” derives from the Lunyu, Xianwen. See Legge,
The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 278.

Liji, Tangong xia. See Müller, ed., The Sacred Books of the East, vol. 27, p. 193.
Taizi ruiying benqi jing (T.185.3:475a2).

These statements derive from the Zhuangzi, Xiaoyaoyou. See Legge, Dao de jing ji
Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 214.
Dhammapada (Faju jing) (T.210.4:574b5–6) and Beijing chao (T.790.17:735b13–14).

These passages are not found in the Book of Rites. In the Zuozhuan, Xigong’s tenth
year, there is this passage: “I have heard that the spirits of the dead do not enjoy the

310

Notes

201
202
203

204

205

206
207

208
209
210

211
212
213
214
215

sacriﬁces of those who are not of their kindred, and that people only sacriﬁce to those
who were of the same ancestry as themselves”; see Legge, The Chinese Classics,
vol. 5, p. 157 (left column).
Zuozhuan, Xuangong’s third year. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 5, p. 294
(left column).
See note 174.

The Chinese term tianzao means hanging pearl ornaments of a heavenly crown, but
this does not ﬁt the context. I translate this term as “heavenly beings,” following the
treatment in Ōta Teizō, trans., Kokuyaku issaikyō, Wa-Kan senjutsu bu, Gokyōbu 1
(Tokyo: Daitō Shuppansha, 1936), p. 251, n. 194.

Shanhai jing, Dahuangbei jing, for Zhulong. See Pu Guo, Yixing Hao, Hsaio-Chieh
Cheng, Huizhen Zheng Bai, and Kenneth Lawrence Thern, Shan hai ching: Legendary
Geography and Wonders of Ancient China (Taipei: Committee for Compilation and
Examination of the Series of Chinese Classics, National Institute for Compilation
and Translation, 1985), p. 249.

This expression is based on the phrase in Zhuangzi, Zhile: “A short rope cannot be
used to draw water from a deep well”; see Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji,
p. 447, n. 5.
This quotation is not found in the Taishō shinshū daizōkyō.

The Chinese term erqiandan refers to a governor-general because the salary for this
position was two thousand dan of grain. During the period between the Western Jin
and Liang dynasties one dan was equivalent to 26.4 kilograms.

The phrase “A man can propagate the Way” derives from the Lunyu, Weilinggong.
See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 302.
Zuozhuan, Xigong’s ﬁfteenth year. Legge did not translate this section.

Confucius said, “Ever since I have had You, I have not heard malicious words”; Shiji,
juan 67, Zhongni dizi liezhuan. See Nienhauser, The Grand Scribe’s Records, vol. 7,
p. 69.

The term “four that are great” from the Laozi Dao de jing, Chap. 25 refers to the Way,
Heaven, Earth, and the Sage King. See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 116.

In the original version of this story in Zhuangzi, Tiandi, there is Xiangwang (Purposeless) instead of Wangxiang. See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 360.
Weimojie suoshuo jing (T.475.14:537a16).
Miaofa lianhua jing (T.262.9:43b24).

Dīpaṅkara Buddha gave a prediction to Māṇava Bodhisattva about his future attainment
of buddhahood. See Taizi ruiying benqi jing (T.185.3:472c18–473a23).

311

Notes

216
217
218
219

220
221

222
223
224
225

226
227

228
229

230

231
232

Miaofa lianhua jing (T.262.9:25a1–2).
See note 166.

Weimojie suoshuo jing (T.475.14:537c16).

The Chinese name Pao (“kitchen”) Sheng (“to produce”) is not known. Probably the
Chinese character sheng is ding; Zhuangzi, Yangshengzhu. See Legge, Dao de jing
ji Zhuangzi quan ji, pp. 246–248.
“Thus Come” (Tathāgata) and “Well Gone” (Sugata) are two of the ten epithets for
the Buddha.

This expression derives from Confucius’ statement in the Lunyu, Weilinggong, “Let
every man consider virtue as what devolves on himself. He may not yield the performance of it even to his teacher”; see Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 304.
Lunyu, Yan Yuan. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 253.
This story is found in the Gaoseng zhuan (T.2059.50:325b7–c5).

A similar story to this is found in the Gaoseng zhuan (T.2059.50:409c18–28).

In the biography of Yu Falan in the Gaoseng zhuan (T.2059.50:349c22–29), there is
a story about a tiger that came into Falan’s room on a snowy day, stayed overnight,
completely tame with Falan, and left the next morning when it stopped snowing.
Gaoseng zhuan (T.2059.50:326c17–20).

The following section before the letter of King Wenxuan (460–494) consists of partial
descriptions of the Discourse to Clarify Buddhism, T.2102.52:12b27–29, 12c8–10,
12c11–21.
This quotation is not found in the Mengzi.

I moved the Chinese character xiao (“small”) between the characters shi (“to lose”)
and cun (“to exist”), following the suggestion found in Ōta, Kokuyaku issaikyō,
Gokyōbu 1, p. 263, fn. 2.

This expression is based on a passage in the Xiaojing, “Our bodies—to every hair
and bit of skin—are received by us from our parents, and we must not presume to
injure or wound them. This is the beginning of ﬁlial piety.” See Rosemont, The Chinese
Classic of Family Reverence, p. 105.
Zuozhuan, Mingong’s ﬁrst year. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 5, p. 125 (left
column).

This expression is based on a passage in Shiji, juan 83, Lu Zhonglian Zou Yang
liezhuan, “Your servant has heard that if the bright-moon pearl or a glowing jade ring
were tossed from the dark to a man on the road, he would put his hand to his sword
and glare at those around him.” See Nienhauser, The Grand Scribe’s Records, vol. 7,
p. 290.

312

Notes

233

234

235
236
237
238

239
240

241
242
243
244
245
246
247

There are different deﬁnitions of the ﬁve kinds of principles of human relationships
(wujiao). The Zuozhuan, Wengong’s eighteenth year, says, “Fathers became just and
mothers gentle; elder brothers kindly, and younger ones respectful; and sons became
ﬁlial.” See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 5, p. 283 (left column).
The Mengzi, Tengwengong shang, says, “To teach the relations of humanity: how,
between father and son there should be affection; between sovereign and minister,
righteousness; between husband and wife, attention to their separate functions; between
old and young, a proper order; and between friends, ﬁdelity.” See Legge, The Chinese
Classics, vol. 2, pp. 251–252.
This expression derives from the Lunyu, Yan Yuan: “If a man can for one day subdue
himself and return to propriety, all under Heaven will ascribe perfect virtue to him.”
See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 250.

According to the Zuozhuan, the “four wicked ones” refer to Chaos, Monster, Block,
and Glutton. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 5, p. 283 (left column).

In the Shiji, juan 130, Taishigong zixu, the frugality of the earthen steps of Yao’s residence is praised as an example of virtuous conduct.

Zhu Duo’s obsequious manner is also mentioned in the Lunyu, Yong ye. See Legge,
The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 190.

The Chinese term liuzhi (six kinds of hindrances) is unknown. The Gumyōshū kenkyū
suggests that this probably refers to the six sense objects of sensation and perception
(liuchen): visual color and form, sound, odor, taste, tactile object, and mental object;
see Kyōto Daigaku Jinbun Kagaku Kenkyūjo Chūsei Shishōshi Kenkyū han, ed.,
Gumyōshū kenkyū, vol. 3, p. 598, n. 3.
This expression derives from the Lunyu, Yan Yuan. See Legge, The Chinese Classics,
vol. 1, p. 250.

For the expression “a pair of bellows,” see the Laozi Dao de jing, Chap. 5; Legge,
Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 98. For non-self, see the Weimojie suoshuo jing
(T.475.14:545a1).
Yijing, Xici shang. See Legge, I ching; Book of Changes, p. 373, n. 70.

Laozi Dao de jing, Chap. 25. See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 115,
chap. 25.
Chuci, Jiubian.

Hou Hanshu, Liezhuan 40, Yang Li Zhai Ying Huo Yuan Xu lie zhuan.
Sanguo Weizhi, juan 11, Guan Ning zhuan.

Yan Junping was a diviner in Chengdu. See the Hanshu, juan 72, Wang Kong liang
Gong Bao zhuan.
Hou Hanshu, Liezhuan, juan 73.

313

Notes

248
249

250
251
252
253
254
255
256
257
258

259
260
261
262
263
264

265

Sanguozhi, juan 42.

The Gumyōshū kenkyū suggests that the four Chinese characters fa fu fa zhi after
Sengqian could be interpolations, redundancies owing to misprints, or scribal errors.
I follow this and have not translated them here. See Kyōto Daigaku Jinbun Kagaku
Kenkyūjo Chūsei Shishōshi Kenkyū han, ed., Gumyōshū kenkyū, vol. 3, p. 606, n. 9.
Shiji, juan 44, Wei shijia.

The “four bright men” refer to Dongyuangong, Luli, Qili Ji, and Xiahuanggong of
the Qin dynasty.
Hou Hanshu, Liezhuan 43.
Jinshu, juan 94.

Foshuo Beijing chao (T.790.17:729a1–736b1).

Zuozhuan, Zhuanggong’s ninth year. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 5, p. 84
(right column).

This expression derives from the Zhuangzi, Qiushui. See Legge, Dao de jing ji
Zhuangzi quan ji, pp. 437–438.
See note 176.

Bian He, a man of Chu, obtained a jade on Mount Chu and presented it to King Li
and King Wu, but both kings thought that it was only a stone and He’s legs were
amputated as punishment. King Wen later realized that it was a real jade. This story
is found in the Han Feizi, Heshi. See Burton Watson, trans., Han Feizi: Basic Writings
(New York: Columbia University Press, 2003), pp. 81–82.
See note 18.

Laozi Dao de jing, chap. 41. Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 132, n. 1.

This expression is based on the passage found in the Xiuxing benqi jing (T.184.3:463a20–
21).
Qiwulun. See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 242.
Miaofa lianhua jing (T.262.9:16c4–17b17).

This expression is based on the statement of the king of Zhou found in the Zuozhuan,
Zhaogong’s ninth year: “I am to you (i.e., Shuxiang of Jin state) as the cap or crown
to the other garments, as the root to the tree, or the spring to the steam, as their
counselor to the people. If you tear the cap and break the crown in pieces, tear up the
root, stop up the spring, and take it on you to cast the counselor away, what can be
expected by me, the one man, from the Rong and the Di?” See Legge, The Chinese
Classics, vol. 5, p. 625 (right column).
Jinshu, juan 33.

314

Notes

266
267
268

269
270
271
272
273

274

275
276
277

278

279
280
281

Hanshu, Liezhuan 28, Gongsun Hong, Bu Shi, Er Kuan zhuan.

Neither Wei Zhi nor Zun Zu is known.

This statement derives from the Lunyu, Yang Huo: ‘“It is according to the rules of
propriety,’ they say. Are gems and silk all that is meant by propriety?” See Legge,
The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 324.

This statement is based on the proverb in the Hanshu, Jia Yi zhuan, “We learn from
the follies of others (qianche fu houche jie).”

Lunyu, Wei Linggong for Zang Wen Zhong. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol.
1, pp. 298–299.

Sanguo Weizhi, juan 11, Tian Cou zhuan.

Shiji, juan 86, Cike zhuan. See Yang Hsien-yi and Gladys Yang, trans., Selections from
Records of the Historian (Peking: Foreign Languages Press, 1979), pp. 387–389.

The expressions “the penetrating (i.e., the assemblage of excellences)” and “great
good fortune” derive from the Yijing, Qian Wenyan and Kun, respectively. See Legge,
I ching: Book of Changes, pp. 60, 408.

This statement is based on a description found in the Zhuangzi, Quishui: “There is
in the south a bird called ‘the Young Phoenix’—do you know it? Starting from the
South Sea, it ﬂies to the Northern [Sea]; never resting but on the bignonia, never
eating but the fruit of the melia azederach, and never drinking but from the purest
springs.” See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 439.

Legge, I ching: Book of Changes, p. 96, n. 6.

Müller, ed., The Sacred Books of the East, vol. 27, p. 408, n. 16.

The three editions of the Song, Yuan, and Ming dynasties, and the old Song edition
of the Kunaichō Library have the Chinese characters ji (“then”) and xian (“transcendent” or “hermit”) instead of the characters yu (“I”) and zuo (“to make”). Since the
three appeals (found in Fascicle Fourteen) list the composers’ names, I translate here
following the four editions mentioned above; however, it is possible that Sengyou
composed them on the basis of only three names.

This expression is based on a description in Zhuangzi, Qiwulu: “When the breath of
the Great Mass [of Nature] comes strongly, it is called Wind. Sometimes it does not
come so; but when it does, then from myriad apertures there issues its excited noise”;
see Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 225.

Shenri jing (T.535.14:819b2–3).

Gaoseng Faxian zhuan (T.2085.51:865c1–6).

“King of Nanqiao” refers to Liu Yixuan (415–454), the sixth son of Emperor Wu of
the Song dynasty.

315

Notes

282
283
284
285
286
287

288

289

290
291

292
293

294

295
296
297

Lunyu, Shuer. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 203.

Liji, Xueji. See Müller, ed., The Sacred Books of the East, vol. 28, p. 89.
Shujing, Dayumo. See The Chinese Classics, vol. 3, p. 59, n. 12.

Yijing, Kun Wenyan. See Legge, I ching: Book of Changes, p. 419.

Zuozhuan, Yinggong’s ﬁfth year. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 5, p. 19 (left
column).

This is based on the statement found in the Lunyu, Yan Yuan: “To subdue one’s self
and return to propriety is perfect virtue. If a man can for one day subdue himself and
return to propriety, all under Heaven will ascribe perfect virtue to him.” See Legge,
The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 250.

The formal sitting style refers to sitting with both knees on the ground or ﬂoor with
the buttocks resting on the legs (the traditional Chinese style); the informal style
refers to squatting with raised heels (the Indian style).

This expression derives from the Lunyu, Xueer. Legge translates the passage as “In
practicing the rules of propriety, a natural ease is to be prized”; The Chinese Classics,
vol. 1, p. 143.
Gaoseng zhuan (T.2059.50:353a23–27).

Zuozhuan, Huangong’s fourteenth year. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 5, p.
61, for the Chinese text. This statement means that lacunae in the text should not be
interpolated based on presumption.

The Lunyu, Xianwen, for Pi Chen and Shi Shu. See Legge, The Chinese Classics,
vol. 1, p. 278.

Zuozhuan, Xuangong’s ﬁfteenth year. Wei Ke was able to escape imminent death in
a dangerous battle because his enemy was tripped up by tied-up grasses; later he came
to know in a dream that the grass had been tied up by the father of his father’s concubine, as repayment for Wei Ke’s previous kindness to the man’s daughter. See
Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 5, p. 328 (right column).

This statement is based on a description in the Liji, Yueji: “The times of the ﬁve Dis
were different and therefore each did not adopt the music of his predecessor. The Three
Kings belonged to different ages and so each did not follow the ceremonies of his predecessor.” See Müller, ed., The Sacred Books of the East, vol. 28, p. 102, n. 27.
Zhuangzi, Tianyun. See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 401.
Mengzi, Jinxin xia. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 2, p. 479.

This expression is based on a conversation between the Duke of She and Confucius
recorded in the Lunyu, Zilu: “The Duke of She informed Confucius, saying, ‘Among
us here there are those who may be styled upright in their conduct. If their father have

316

Notes

298

299

300
301
302
303
304
305

306
307
308

309
310
311

stolen a sheep, they will bear witness to the fact.’ Confucius said, ‘Among us, in our
part of the country, those who are upright are different from this. The father conceals
the misconduct of the son, and the son conceals the misconduct of the father. Uprightness is to be found in this.’” See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 270.

The expression “the virtuous person who is in charge of the tallies (siqi)” derives
from the Laozi dao de jing, Chap. 79. Legge translates the Chinese term siqi as “the
conditions of the engagement”; Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 169.

This expression is based on a passage found in the Liji, Quli shang: “At eighty or
ninety, we say of him, ‘He is very old.’ When he is seven, we say that he is an object
of pitying love. Such a child and one who is very old, though they may be chargeable
with crime, are not subjected to punishment.” See Müller, ed., The Sacred Books of
the East, vol. 27, p. 66.
According to the Jinshu, Liezhuan 47, the name Chu Yi is read as Chu She.

Zuozhuan, Zhaogong’s third year. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 5, p. 589
(left column).
Laozi Dao de jing, Chap. 73. See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 164.

This expression is based on a phrase found in the Zhuangzi, Dazongshi: “He overspreads
Heaven and supports the Earth.” See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 304.

The Chinese word chong (in the name He Chong) means “fullness,” “complete,”
“great,” or “reality.”

The statement starting with the sentence “Even though the Buddha’s ediﬁcation is
endlessly vast and infers the world beyond the visual and aural senses, respect is considered to be its foundation” up to this point is found in “The Discourse on Why Śramaṇas Do Not Bow to the Sovereign (Shamen bujing wanghe lun) by Dharma Teacher
[Hui]yuan,” in The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism,
Vol. I, Fascicle Five, p. 174 (29c24–30a3).
Liji, Sanfu sizhi. See Müller, ed., The Sacred Books of the East, vol. 28, p. 466, n. 5.

This phrase “letting the people act freely and exercising forbearance (zaiyou),” is the
title of a chaper in the Zhuangzi.

Zhang Chang is probably the Metropolitan Governor of the Former Han dynasty,
who often quoted the Chinese classics at court. His biography is found in the Hanshu,
juan 76.
Lunyu, Taibo. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 211.

This passage derives from the Yijing, Guan, Tuan. See Legge, I ching: Book of Changes,
p. 230, XX, n. 3.
Lunyu, Xianjin. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 240.

317

Notes

312

313
314
315

316

317

318

319

320

321

This statement is based on one found in the Yijing, Xici shang: “The superior person
occupies his apartment and sends forth his words. If they are good, they will be
responded to at a distance of more than a thousand li—how much more will they be
so in the nearer circle! He occupies his apartment and sends forth his words. If they
are evil, they will awaken opposition at a distance of more than a thousand li.” See
Legge, I ching: Book of Changes, p. 361, n. 42.
Lunyu, Yan Yuan. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 250.
T.185:3.480c2–3.

This statement based on the “Chapter on the White Horse (Baima lun)” in the Gongsun
Longzi is known as a sophism asserted by Gongsun Long of Zhao state in the Warring
States period.

This statement is based on a conversation between Zhuangzi and Huizi regarding the
enjoyment of ﬁshes, found in the Zhuangzi, Qiushui: “Zhuangzi and Huizi were walking on the dam over the Hao [River], when the former said, ‘These thryssas come
out and play about at their ease—that is the enjoyment of ﬁshes.’ The other said, ‘You
are not a ﬁsh; how do you know what constitutes the enjoyment of ﬁshes?’ Zhuangzi
rejoined, ‘You are not I. How do you know that I do not know what constitutes the
enjoyment of ﬁshes?’ Huizi said, ‘I am not you; and though indeed I do not fully
know you, you certainly are not a ﬁsh, and [the argument] is complete against your
knowing what constitutes the happiness of ﬁshes.’ Zhuangzi replied, ‘Let us keep to
your original question. You said to me, ‘How do you know what constitutes the enjoyment of ﬁshes?’ You knew that I knew it, and yet you put your question to me—well,
I know it [from our enjoying ourselves together] over the Hao.’” See Legge, Dao de
jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, pp. 439–440.

This expression is based on that found in the Liji, Zhongni Yan ju: “When the three
disciples had heard these words from the Master, they saw clearly as if a ﬁlm had
been removed from their eyes.” See Müller, ed., The Sacred Books of the East, vol.
28, p. 277.

The Dao de jing states, “Therefore the Dao is great; Heaven is great; Earth is great;
and the [Sage] King is also great. In the universe there are four that are great, and the
[Sage] King is one of them.” See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 116, n. 3.

There are basically two deﬁnitions of the six generations: (1) the Yellow Emperor,
Yao, Shun, Yu, King Tang, and King Wu; and (2) the Xia, Yin, Zhou, Qin, Han, and
Wei dynasties.

This statement is based on a conversation between Confucius and Zigong found in
the Lunyu, Bayi. When Zigong wanted to stop the offering of sheep on the inauguration
of the ﬁrst day of each month, since the sacriﬁcial ceremony had degenerated into
formalism, Confucius said that it is regrettable to lose the form of the old ceremony.
See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 161.

According to Kyōto Daigaku Jinbun Kagaku Kenkyūjo Chūsei Shishōshi Kenkyū

318

Notes

322
323

324

325

326

327
328

329

330
331

332
333

han, ed., Gumyōshū kenkyū, vol. 3, p. 684, n. 3, Huan Xuan issued this decree on the
third day of the twelfth month of Yuanxing (403), the day he ascended the throne.
See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 116, for “the four that are great.”

This expression is based on a conversation between Ziyou and Ziqi found in the
Zhuangzi, Qiwulun: “Ziyou said, ‘The notes of Earth then are simply those which
come from its myriad apertures; and the notes of Man may just be compared to those
which [are brought drawn from the tubes of] bamboo—allow me to ask about the
notes of Heaven.’ Ziqi replied, ‘Blowing the myriad differences, making them stop
(proceed) of themselves, sealing their self-selecting—who is it that stirs it all up?’”

Kyōto Daigaku Jinbun Kagaku Kenkyūjo Chūsei Shishōshi Kenkyū han, ed.,
Gumyōshū kenkyū, vol. 3, p. 691, n. 18, suggests that “non-Buddhist teaching” here
refers to the ediﬁcation of the king based on a description found in the Zhuangzi,
Qiwulun: “. . . thus it was that the Dao, which inwardly forms the sage and externally
the king, . . .”

Zhi Daolin lived from 314 to 366, Huan Xuan from 369 to 404. The date of this letter
is the ﬁfth day of the fourth month of the third year of Long’an (399). Kyōto Daigaku
Jinbun Kagaku Kenkyūjo Chūsei Shishōshi Kenkyū han, ed., Gumyōshū kenkyū, vol.
3, p. 696, n. 1, presumes that this letter was composed by someone else.

This statement is based on one found in the Laozi dao de jing, Chap. 48: “He who
practices the Dao daily diminishes his doing. He diminishes it and again diminishes
it, till he arrives at doing nothing (wuwei). Having arrived at this non-inaction, there
is nothing that he does not do.” See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 138.
Zhuangzi, Dechongfu. See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, pp. 274–276.

A “complaints board” derives from a story that during the reign of Emperor Yao a
board was set up on a roadside for people to record errors made regarding public
administration; through these records, the emperor learned of his faults.

The Chinese character chi in the family name of Chi Chao (Jiapin, 336–377) is often
read as xi. According to Huang Bosi’s Fatie kanwu (Model Book for Errata) compiled
in the Northern Song dynasty, chi is the correct pronunciation. See Morohashi Tetsuji,
Dai Kan-Wa jiten (Tokyo: Taishūkan Shoten, 1955–1960), vol. 11, p. 243.
Puyao jing (T.186.3:507c23–24).

The ﬁve hindrances (Skt. pañca-nivaraṇā) are usually listed as (1) greed (Skt. rāga),
(2) anger (Skt. pratigha), (3) lethargy (Skt. styāna-middha), (4) restlessness and mortiﬁcation (Skt. auddhatya-kaukṛtya), and (5) doubt (Skt. vicikitsā).
Similar phrases are found in the Puyao jing (T.212.4:753a26–28) and the Foshuo
Beijing chao (T.790.17:731c14–15).
Ban niyuan jing (T.6.1:181a25–27).

319

Notes

334

335
336

337
338
339
340

341
342

343
344
345
346
347
348

This expression derives from the Yijing, Xici shang: “The superior man occupies his
apartment and sends forth his words. If they are good they will be responded to at a
distance of more than a thousand li.” See Legge, I ching: Book of Changes, p. 361.
This derives from the Liji, Zhongyang: “There is nothing more visible than what is
secret.” See Müller, ed., The Sacred Books of the East, vol. 28, p. 300.

According to the Collection of Records Derived from the Tripiṭaka (Chusanzang jiji,
T.2145.55:5c26–27), the earliest extant catalogue compiled by Sengyou in the early
sixth century, there are two translations of the Sutra of the Twelve Gates (Shiermen
jing) by An Shigao. This text was believed to no longer be extant until a manuscript
of the text was found in Kongōji Temple in Kawachi Nagano, Japan. The Kokusai
Bukkyōgaku Daigakuin Daigaku group, led by Ochiai Toshinori, has researched the
Kongōji collection and published three monographs. The Shiermen jing was introduced
in one of them, Kongōji issaikyō no kisoteki kenkyū to shinshutsu butten no kenkyū
(Tokyo: Kokusai Bukkyōgaku Daigakuin Daigaku, 2004), pp. 195–203. The passage
quoted here is not found in this manuscript.
Lunyu, Liren. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 168.

Zhuangzi, Dazongshi. See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 301.

Zhuangzi, Gengsang Chu. See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 523.

According to the Collection of Records Derived from the Tripiṭaka (Chu sanzang jiji,
T.2145.55:8c3), this scripture is called the Pusa zhengzhai jing, the Pusa zhaifa, or
the Chizhai jing. This quotation is not found in any text in the Taishō canon.
Shiji, juan 56, Chen chengxiang shijia. See Yang and Yang, Selections from Records
of the Historian, p. 264.

Yangshe Xi (Shuxiang) was the elder brother of Fu (Shuyu). See Zuozhuan, Xianggong’s sixteenth year and Zhaogong’s ﬁfth year for Xi, and Zhaogong’s thirteenth
year for Fu.

See the Shangshu, Shundian, for the four criminals. See Legge, The Chinese Classics,
vol. 3, pp. 39–40.
Shiji, juan 5, Qin benji. See Nienhauser, The Grand Scribe’s Records, vol. 1, p. 91.
T.6.1:181b1–3.

The phrase “placing [a beautiful gem] into a case” derives from the Lunyu, Zihan.
See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 221.

This expression is found in the Laozi dao de jing, Chap. 73. See Legge, Dao de jing
ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 164.

See note 336 for the Sutra of the Twelve Gates (Shiermen jing). According to the
Kongōji manuscript, the original expression differs slightly from this quotation, but
this tenet is designated as the ﬁrst gate.

320

Notes

349
350
351
352
353

354
355
356
357

358

359

360

361

362
363

T.533.14:814a20–24.
T.210.4:573c8.

T.630.15:453a12–14.

This sutra is listed in the Collection of Records Derived from the Tripiṭaka (Chusanzang
jiji, T.2145.55:7a13) but it is no longer extant.

Generally, the “four immeasurable minds” refer to benevolence or loving-kindness
(ci; Skt. maitrī), compassion (bei; Skt. karuṇā), joy (xi; Skt. muditā), and giving up
[all attachments] or equanimity (she; Skt. upekṣā). The Chinese word hu in the four
immeasurable minds is used as an equivalent to the word she in many sutras, such
as the Zengyi ahan jing (T. 125), the Sheng jing (T. 154), and the Taizi ruiying benqi
jing (T. 185). Here the term hu is literally interpreted as “protection.”
This is a summary of the original statement. See T.185.3:475c14–17.

This passage is not found in the Chengju guangming dingyi jing (T. 630) of the Taishō
canon.
T.6.1:189b22–23.

The list of the eight worldly matters is found in the Xiuxing benqi jing (T.184.3:496b26–
27), the Taizi ruiying benqi jing (T.185.3:476c14–15), and the Jingdu sanmei jing,
an indigenous Chinese scripture found in Zangwai fojiao wenxian (Beijing Shi: Zong
jiao wen hua chu ban she, 1995–), vol. 7; the passage is on p. 301, lines 6–7; CBETA
(ZW7.n63.301a6-7).
This tenet is found in various sutras. The same Chinese expression is found in the
Zhong ahan jing. See T.26:435c27–28, 462a27–28, 464b29–c1, 467b29–c1, 600b8–
9, 673a7–8.

This expression is based on a passage found in the Zhuangzi, Daozhi: “Its brief existence is not different from the passing of a crevice by one of King Mu’s horses,” or
one from the Zhuangzi, Zhibeiyou: “Human life between Heaven and Earth is like a
white colt passing by a crevice and suddenly disappearing.” See Legge, Dao de jing
ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 615, or p. 505, respectively.
This expression derives from the Zhuangzi, Zhibeiyou: “Life is due to the collecting
of the breath. When [breath] is collected there is life; when it is dispersed there is
death.” See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 499.

This exact statement is not found in any sutra but a similar one is found in the Xiuxing
benqi jing (T.184.3:469a18–19), the Taizi ruiying benqi jing (T.185.3:476b21–22),
the Dhammapada (Faju jing) (T.210.4:559a20–21), and the Faju piyu jing
(T.211.4:576b4–5).
T.474.14:523a25.

This statement derives from the Lunyu, Yang Huo: “When they have got them their

321

Notes

364
365
366
367
368
369

370

371
372

373
374
375

376
377

378
379

anxiety is because they might lose them. When they are anxious that such things
might be lost, there is nothing to which they will not proceed.” See Legge, The Chinese
Classics, vol. 1, p. 325.
Weimojie jing (T.474.14:528c1).

Chengju guangming dingyi jing (T.630.15:451c25–26).

A similar expression is found in the Taizi ruiying benqi jing (T.185.3:473c3).
This quotation is not found in any text in the Taishō canon.

A similar story is found in the Sishierzhang jing (T.784.17:724a1–5), in which the
Buddha asked his disciples how long is the human life span.

This expression is based on Lunyu, Zihan: “The prosecution of learning may be compared to what may happen in raising a mound. If but one basket of earth is lacking
to complete the work and I stop, the stopping is my own work. This may be compared
to throwing earth down onto the level ground. Even though only one basketful is
thrown at a time, the advancing with it is my own going forward.” See Legge, The
Chinese Classics, vol. 1, pp. 222–223.

The phrase “concurrently forgetting everything (jianwang)” derives from the Zhuangzi,
Tianyun: “If it is easy to make my parents forget me, it is difﬁcult for me to forget all
the people in the world. If it is easy to forget all the people in the world, it is difﬁcult
to make them all forget me.” See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 395.
Taizi ruiying benqi jing (T.185.3:479c27–28).

The Chinese term ruosang, which means to leave one’s native place or homeland
when young, is originally found in the Zhuangzi, Qiwulun. See Legge, Dao de jing
ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 242.
T.186.3:507c26–27.

T.6.1:181a21: “When your mind, consciousness, and feeling cease you neither die
nor are [re]born.”

The twenty-eight heavens refer to the six heavens of the realm of desire (Skt. kāmadhātu), the eighteen heavens of the realm of form (Skt. rūpadhātu), and the four heavens of the formless realm (Skt. ārūpyadhātu).
Weimojie jing (T.474.14:522b11–13).

The Chinese word yifu is based on passages found in the Laozi dao de jing, Chap.
58: “Misery!— happiness is to be found by its side! Happiness!—misery lurks beneath
it!” See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 150.
Weimojie jing (T.474:14.520a14-16).

Laozi dao de jing, Chap. 81. See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 171.

322

Notes

380

381

382
383
384

385
386
387

388
389
390

391

This statement is based on the Zhuangzi, Lie Yukou: “Near the He [River] there was
a poor man who supported his family by weaving rushes [to make screens]. His son,
when diving in a deep pool, found a pearl worth a thousand ounces of silver.” See
Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 651.

Shujing, Hongfan, explains the ﬁve kinds of happiness and the six extreme evils:
“Ninth, of the ﬁve [sources of] happiness. The ﬁrst is long life; the second, riches;
the third, soundness of body and serenity of mind; the fourth, love of virtue; and the
ﬁfth, fulﬁlling to the end the will [of Heaven]. Of the six extreme evils, the ﬁrst is
misfortune shortening one’s life; the second, sickness; the third, mental distress; the
fourth, poverty; the ﬁfth, wickedness; the sixth, weakness.” See Legge, The Chinese
Classics, vol. 3, p. 343.
Shiji, juan 9, Lü taihou benji. See Nienhauser, The Grand Scribe’s Records, vol. 2,
pp. 125–126.

Zuozhuan, Zhaogong’s seventh year. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 5, p. 617
(right column).

The “seven symptoms” (qizheng) are not known. Ōta Teizō and the Gumyōshū kenkyū
suggest that this may refer to the seven disasters (qinan): loss of the light of the sun
and moon, loss of the light of the constellations, ﬁre, ﬂoods, strong gales, drought,
and bandits, according to the Renwang huguo boreboluomiduo jing (T.246.8:843a18–
29). See Ōta, Kokuyaku issaikyō, Gokyō-bu 1, p. 325, n. 43; Kyōto Daigaku Jinbun
Kagaku Kenkyūjo Chūsei Shishōshi Kenkyū han, ed., Gumyōshū kenkyū, vol. 3, p.
738, n. 53.
The expression “to forget what he wished to say” derives from the Zhuangzi, Dazongshi. See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 288.

This expression derives from the Zhuangzi, Dechongfu. See Legge, Dao de jing ji
Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 271.

This statement is based on a passage in the Lunyu, Shuer: “When the Master was in
Qi he heard the Shao and for three months did not know the taste of ﬂesh.” See Legge,
The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 199.
Yijing, Xici shang. See Legge, I ching: Book of Changes, p. 373, n. 70.

Zhuangzi, Geyi. See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 412. The Chinese
phrase xiong jing can also be translated as “to climb up a tree like a bear.”

This statement is based on the Yijing, Kun: “The fourth six, divided, [shows the
symbol of] a sack tied up. There will be no ground for blame or for praise.” See
Legge, I ching: Book of Changes, p. 60.

This statement is based on a story in the Zhuangzi, Xuwugui, that the artisan Shi
cleaned off all the mud from a statue of a man of Ying. See Legge, Dao de jing ji
Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 541.

323

Notes

392

393

394
395
396

397

398

399
400

401

402

The Chinese term ren li is read as rentu, in accordance with Ōta, Kokuyaku issaikyō,
Gokyōbu 1, p. 328, n. 78, and Kyōto Daigaku Jinbun Kagaku Kenkyūjo Chūsei
Shisōshi Kenkyū han, ed., Gumyōshū kenkyū, vol. 3, p. 740, n. 106.

This statement derives from the Zhuangzi, Tiandao: “Those who know the joy of
Heaven during their life act like Heaven, and at death undergo transformation like
[other] things.” See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 380.

Several Buddhist scriptures state that Mount Sumeru enters into a mustard seed. See,
for instance, the Weimojie suoshuo jing (T.475.14:546b28).

This idea is also found in several scriptures; see, for instance, the Weimojie suoshuo
jing (T.475.14:546b29–c1).

The Gumyōshū kenkyū suggests that the seven treasures could be seven days, based
on the description of the Weimojie suoshuo jing (T.475.14:546c9–12): “A bodhisattva
extends seven days to a kalpa.” See Kyōto Daigaku Jinbun Kagaku Kenkyūjo Chūsei
Shisōshi Kenkyū han, ed., Gumyōshū kenkyū, vol. 3, p. 741, n. 124.

Qi Xie is the title of a book. It is also said to be the name of a good storyteller of ghost
tales. See the Zhuangzi, Xiaoyaoyou. James Legge takes it to be a book; Dao de jing
ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 213.
According to the Liezi, the sword that can cut jade, called kunyu, and the noncombustible textiles that can withstand ﬁre (huowanfu) were presented by the western
tribe. See Liezi, Tang wen. The English translation in Eva Wong, Liezi: A Taoist Guide
to Practical Living (Boston, MA: Shambhala Publications, 1995) does not include
this last section, called “Tang wen.”

The Chinese term xuanyuan refers to the profound primordial vapor of Chaos, before
Heaven and Earth separated from each other.

Mount Heng was designated as South Mountain (Nanyue), but Emperor Wu of the Han
dynasty designated Mount Huo as South Mountain. Emperor Wen of the Sui dynasty
(r. 581–604) later changed the designation of South Mountain back to Mount Heng.

There are different deﬁnitions regarding the ﬁve kinds of principles of human relationships (wujiao). The Zuozhuan, Wengong’s eighteenth year, says, “Fathers became
just and mothers gentle; elder brothers kindly, and younger ones respectful; and sons
became ﬁlial.” See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 5, p. 283 (left column). The
Mengzi, Tengwengong shan, says, “To teach the relations of humanity: how between
father and son there should be affection; between sovereign and minister, righteousness;
between husband and wife, attention to their separate functions; between old and
young, a proper order; and between friends, ﬁdelity.” See Legge, The Chinese Classics,
vol. 2, pp. 251–252.

The Chinese term wuji, “ultimate of nonbeing,” derives from the Laozi Dao de jing,
Chap. 28. See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 119. where he translates
this passage as “Endless [return to] man’s ﬁrst state [has made].”

324

Notes

403

404
405
406

407

408

409

410
411

412

413

414

According to the Liezi, the “primordial substance” (taisu) is the stage where “things
have not only assumed deﬁnite shapes and forms but have taken on qualities,” and “in
the Primal Beginning, yin and yang divide, and their interaction produces limited but
identiﬁable shapes and forms”; Wong, Liezi: A Taoist Guide to Practical Living, p. 28.

The Lingzhengji is no longer extant, therefore, it is unknown where this quotation
ends. I follow Ōta, Kokuyaku issaikyō, Gokyō-bu 1, p. 331.
The Zhenzhongjie is no longer extant.

The Chinese characters ying (“baby”) and ying (“gnarl”) do not ﬁt the context here.
I follow the interpretation found in Kyōto Daigaku Jinbun Kagaku Kenkyūjo Chūsei
Shishōshi Kenkyū han, ed., Gumyōshū kenkyū, vol. 3, p. 745.

These texts can be interpreted as the Huangluozi jing and the Xuanzhong ji, both of
which are no longer extant. It is unknown where the quotation ends. I follow Kyōto
Daigaku Jinbun Kagaku Kenkyūjo Chūsei Shishōshi Kenkyū han, Gumyōshū kenkyū,
vol. 3, p. 745.

The ancient state of Zhongrong is found in the Shanhai jing, but the source of the
disease mentioned here is unknown. See Ching, Cheng, and Thern, trans., Shan hai
ching: Legendary Geography and Wonders of Ancient China, p. 216.

This sentence is obscure. If King Huan is meant to be Huan Wen (312–373), he died
of illness before the Taiyuan era (376–396). Therefore, following Kyōto Daigaku
Jinbun Kagaku Kenkyūjo Chūsei Shisōshi Kenkyū han, ed., Gumyōshū kenkyū, vol.
3, p. 746, I translate the Chinese phrase da yuan as “great beginning.”
A text that is very similar to this, Written Appeal to the Demon, attributed to Daoan,
is found in the Guang Hongmingji (T.2103.52:344a24–345b16).

The Chinese term datong is originally found in Zhuangzi, Dazongshi and Qiushui.
According to Ogawa Tamaki, Rōshi Sōshi (Tokyo: Chūō Kōronsha, 1998), pp. 278,
396, it refers to the Great Way beyond all discriminations. Legge says that it is another
denomination of the Dao, and “is also explained as meaning, ‘the great void in which
there is no obstruction,’” Daodejing ji Zhuangzi quanji, p. 305, n. 2. Following Legge,
I translate datong as “the Great Pervader.”

According to Ōta, Kokuyaku issaikyō, Gokyō-bu 1, p. 334, fn. 4, and Kyōto Daigaku
Jinbun Kagaku Kenkyūjo Chūsei Shisōshi Kenkyū han, ed., Gumyōshū kenkyū, vol.
3, p. 759, n. 13, the four evils are (1) ignorance of non-self, (2) belief in the existence
of a self, (3) self-conceit, and (4) self-attachment.

Ōta suggests that the “eighteen innocent people” may be the eighteen kinds of sages
who have not attained arhatship (Skt. aṣṭādaśa śaikṣāḥ); Kokuyaku issaikyō, Wa-Kan
senjutsu bu, Gokyō-bu 1, p. 334, fn. 10.

The Written Appeal to the Demon attributed to Daoan, found in the Guang Hongmingji
(T.2103.52:344c4), has the name Tanwujie, after the Sanskrit word guru.

325

Notes

415
416

417

418
419

420

421
422
423
424
425
426
427
428
429
430

These two sentences appear to be word games. The Chinese word mengfan refers to
the place where the sun sets, while fusang means the place where the sun rises.

This expression is based on a passage found in the Laozi dao de jing, Chap. 66: “That
whereby the rivers and seas are able to receive the homage and tribute of all the valley
streams, is their skill in being lower than they;—it is thus that they are the kings of
them all.” See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 157.

The Chinese term xiyi (“elusive and inaudible”) derives from the Laozi Dao de jing,
Chap. 14. Legge translates this term as “equable and inaudible”; Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi
quan ji, p. 105.

The same statement is found in the Laozi dao de jing, Chap. 37. See Legge, Dao de
jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 127.

The Three Communicating Agencies are a collective reference to three agencies that
were intended to keep the emperor in contact with the central administration, the ofﬁcialdom at large, and foreign states; respectively, the Imperial Secretary (Central
Pavilion), the Censorate (Pavilion of the Fundamental Laws), and the Tribunal of
Receptions (Outer Pavilion). The Six Tax Supervisors are six agencies subordinate
to the Ministry of Education; they are the agencies of Land, Forest, River, Grain,
Crafts, and Market Tax Supervisors.

This statement is based on the Zhuangzi, Dazongshi: “When the springs are dried up
the ﬁsh collect together on the land. Then that they should moisten one another there
by the damp[ness] around them and keep one another wet by their slime, it would be
better for them to forget one another in the rivers and lakes.” See Legge, Dao de jing
ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 290.
The Chinese term sanran is taken to mean the term sandu, the “three poisons” of
greed, anger, and stupidity.
Weimojie suoshuo jing (T.475.14:543a9–25).

Xiaopin borebolumi jing (T.227.8:582a.24–26).

Emperor Yao once intended to smite the rulers of the Zong and Kuai states; Zhuangzi,
Qiwulun. See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 238.

The Chinese word guiyu (“to let me return”) derives from the Lunyu, Gongye Chang.
See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 1, p. 181.
Shangshu, Yiji. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 3, p. 90.

Shijing, Weifeng, Shuoshu. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 4, p. 172.
This sutra is unknown.

See Zhuangzi, Qiushui, for Hebo, who realized the danger of his ignorance. See
Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 422.
Zhuangzi, Xiaoyaoyou. See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 218.

326

Notes

431
432
433
434
435
436
437

438
439
440
441
442

443

444

445
446
447

According to the Er’ya, the four polar regions (siji) outside of China are (1) Taiyuan
in the east, (2) Binguo in the west, (3) Puqian in the south, and (4) Zhuli in the north.

Liezi, Tang wen. See Wong, Liezi: A Taoist Guide to Practical Living, p. 131.
Yijing, Xici shang. See Legge, I ching: Book of Changes, p. 354.

Shijing, Daya, Xia Wu. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 4, p. 458.
Liji, Biaoji. See Müller, The Sacred Books of the East, vol. 28, p. 341.
Shangshu, Jinteng. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 3, p. 354.

Liji, Jiaotesheng. The eight zha deities were believed to be meritorious for people’s
livelihood. During the Zhou dynasty there was a year-end sacriﬁce for these deities.
See Müller, The Sacred Books of the East, vol. 27, p. 431.
Gaoseng zhuan (T.2059.50:385b22–24).
Gaoseng zhuan (T.2059.50:388c21–25).

Liezi, Zhou Muwang. See Wong, Liezi: A Taoist Guide to Practical Living, p. 85.
Liji, Wangzhi. See Müller, The Sacred Books of the East, vol. 27, p. 245, n. 19.

This expression is based on a statement in the Zhuangzi, Dazongshi: “If you hide a boat
in the ravine of a hill, and hide the hill in a lake, you will say that [the boat] is secure;
but at midnight a strong man will come and carry it off on his back, while you, in the
dark, know nothing about it.” See Legge, Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji, p. 290, n. 6.

The Chinese character mu, “peaceful,” is read as the character mu, “beautiful,” here.
When Zhao Jianzi and Lord Mu recovered consciousness after their serious illnesses
both said that they had experienced great pleasure in the Heavenly Thearch’s palace;
Shiji, juan 43, Zhao shijia.

Du Bo was falsely charged and killed by King Xuan of the Zhou dynasty. King Xuan
was later shot to death by the spirit of Du Bo; Mozi, Minggui. Pengsheng was killed
by the people of Qi state, but he later appeared as a boar. The marquis of Qi state saw
him and fell down in his carriage; Zuozhuan, Huangong’s eighteenth year and Zhuanggong’s eighth year. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 5, p. 70 (right column) and
p. 82 (right column).
See Shiji, juan 3, Yin benji, for Taiwu and juan 38, Song Weizi shijia, for Lord Jing.

Bai Qi’s biography is found in the Shiji, juan 73, Bai Qi Wang Jian liezhuan. See
Nienhauser, ed., The Grand Scribe’s Records, vol. 7, pp. 167–173.

The Chinese panjian, a large girdle with a mirror in it used by a queen, derives from
Zuozhuan, Zhuanggong’s twenty-ﬁrst year. See Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 5,
p. 101 (right column). In ancient times people wrote admonitions or maxims on the
panjian and used it as a note of instruction.

327

Glossary
bhikṣu (biqiu): A mendicant monk; a Buddhist monk. See also four kinds of Buddhist
disciples; śramaṇa.
bhikṣuṇī (biqiuni): A Buddhist nun. See also four kinds of Buddhist disciples.

bodhisattva: Literally, “enlightenment (bodhi) being (sattva),” one who has generated
the aspiration for highest enlightenment (bodhicitta) and is on the path to buddhaood.
In the Mahayana bodhisattvas seek enlightenment not just for themselves but in
order to compassionately aid others to attain liberation as well. The bodhisttava
path entails the perfection of six qualities or attitudes (Skt. pāramitās) and completion
of ten stages of spiritual development (Skt. daśabhūmi) See also Mahayana; One
Vehicle; six pāramitās.
dharmakāya (fashen): The Dharma body. There are various interpretations for this term.
In the Sarvāstivādin school it refers to the True Dharma expounded by the Buddha
or the collection of the auspicious qualities of the Buddha, including his wisdom,
compassion, and various powers. In the Mahayana the term evolved into a kind of
cosmic principle that was regarded as the true nature of the Buddha or ultimate
reality and the source from which his other forms derived. For instance, the dharmakāya is one of the two kinds of buddha bodies along with the physical form
(rūpakāya), or of the three kinds of buddha bodies along with the enjoyment or
reward body (saṃbhogakāya) and the accommodative body (nirmāṇakāya), or of
the four kinds of buddha bodies along with the enjoyment or reward body, the
accommodative body, and the transformed body, or of the ten kinds of buddha
bodies, two versions of which are presented in the Huayan jing (Garland Sutra)..

Dao de jing (Scripture of the Way and Its Virtue): The foundational Daoist scripture
authored by Laozi. Also called Laozi or Laozi Dao de jing.

Decadent Dharma See three periods of the Dharma.

dependent origination (Skt. pratītyasamutpāda): A fundamental Buddhist teaching on
the twelvefold chain of causation through which all phenomena come into being
dependent on their causes and conditions; nothing exists independently of its causes
and conditions.

eight difﬁculties (ba’nan): The eight conditions in which one is unable to encounter a
buddha or hear the Dharma: being in hell; being in the state of an animal; being in

329

Glossary
the state of a hungry ghost; being in the heaven of long life or in Uttarakuru, the
continent to the north of Mount Sumeru where people always enjoy great happiness
(people in these worlds would not therefore be motivated to seek liberation); being
deaf, blind, and mute; being knowledgeable about worldly affairs and eloquent
(which may impede people from following the true path); and living during the
period before or after the Buddha’s appearance in the world.

eightfold holy path (bashengdao): The last of the fundamental Buddhist teaching of the
fourfold truths is the cessation of suffering through the eightfold path to enlightement
or nirvana, consisting of (1) right view, (2) right thought, (3) right speech, (4) right
action, (5) right livelihood, (6) right effort, (7) right mindfulness or recollection,
and (8) right meditation. See also fourfould truths.

eight kinds of gods and demigods that protect Buddhism (babuzhong): Gods (devas),
demigods (asuras), dragons (nāgas), demons (yakṣas), divine musicians (gandharvas),
mythical birds (garuḍas), half-horse, half-human beings (kiṃnaras), and great serpents (mahoragas).

Five Classics: The Confucian canon comprised of the Book of Changes (Yijing or Zhouyi),
which looks into the law between Heaven, Earth, and human beings and asserts
that all phenomena of the universe arise from changes caused by the union and separation of yin and yang; the Book of History (Shujing or Shangshu), a record of two
ideal rulers, Yao and Shun, and the three dynasties of Xia, Yin (Shang), and Zhou;
the Book of Odes (Shijing or Maoshi), a collection of three hundred odes composed
prior to Confucius’s time; the Spring and Autumn Annals (Chunqiu), which discerns
virtue and vice in various historic events that took place in all states for a period of
two hundred and forty-two years, from the ﬁrst year of Lord Yin up to the time of
Lord Ai of Lu state; and the Book of Rites (Liji), a compilation of records of theory
and practice regarding rites.
ﬁve desires (wuyu or wuqing): Desires that arise in connection with the ﬁve senses of
sight, sound, smell, taste, and touch; or desires for wealth, sex, food and drink,
fame, and sleep.

ﬁve kinds of ceremonies (wuli): Sacriﬁcial ceremonies, funeral rites, ceremonies for
guests and visitors, ceremonies for the army and military forces, and coming of age
and marriage ceremonies.

ﬁve penalties (wuxing): Harsh punishments for crimes, including branding, cutting off
the nose or feet, castration, and death. The earliest record that describes wuxing is
the Canon of Shun in the Book of History, in which Gao Yao carried out these penalties at Shun’s command.

ﬁve precepts (wujie; Skt. pañca-śīla): The ﬁve basic precepts taken by laypeople on
entering the Buddhist path: not killing, not stealing, not using false speech, not
engaging in sexual misconduct, and not ingesting intoxicants.

330

Glossary
five realms of existence (wudao, wutu, or wuqu): The realms of hell, hungry ghosts,
animals, human beings, and heavenly beings. See also six realms of existence; three
realms of existence.

ﬁve roots of wholesomeness (wugen): (1) Belief in the Three Treasures, (2) making
efforts to practice good, (3) being mindful of the True Dharma, (4) concentration,
and (5) investigation into the true nature of reality. See also Three Treasures.

Five Sacred Mountains (wuyue): The Eastern Mountain (Mount Tai), the Southern Mountain (Mount Heng or Huo), the Western Mountain (Mount Hua), the Northern Mountain (Mount Heng), and the Central Mountain (Mount Song).

ﬁve skandhas (wuyin or wuyun; Skt. pañca-skandha): The ﬁve constituent elements of
existence that produce various kinds of suffering: matter or form (rūpa), perception
(vedanā), conception (samjñā), volition (samskāra), and consciousness (vijñāna).

Five Thearchs (wudi): Five legendary emperors of Chinese antiquity: the Yellow Emperor
(Huangdi), Emperor Gaoyang (Zhuanxu), Emperor Gaoxin (Diku), Emperor Yao,
and Emperor Shun.

four abodes of emptiness (sikong; Skt. catur-ārūpyāvacara): (1) The abode of limitless
space, (2) the abode of limitless consciousness, (3) the abode of emptiness, and (4)
the abode of neither thought nor non-thought.

four devils (simo; Skt. māras): Deﬁlements (Skt. kleśas), the ﬁve skandhas, death (Skt.
maraṇa), and the king of devils, Māra, in the Paranirmitavaśavartin Heaven, who
tries to thwart followers’ attempts to carry out good acts. See also ﬁve skandhas.

fourfold truths (sidi): The fundamental Buddhist teaching: the truth of suffering, the truth
regarding the cause of suffering, the truth regarding the extinction of suffering, and
the truth of the cessation of suffering, which is the eightfold path to enlightenment
or nirvana. See also eightfold holy path.

four fruits (siguo): The four stages of spiritual attainment in the Hinayana: the fruit of
entering the stream of the sacred Dharma (Skt. srota-āpanna), the fruit of having
only one more rebirth (Skt. sakṛdāgāmin), the fruit of not returning (Skt. anāgāmin);
and the fruit of arhatship. See also Hinayana.

four great elements (sida): Earth, water, ﬁre, and wind.

four immeasurable minds (sidengxin or siwuliangxin; Skt. catur-apramāṇa): Benevolence
(ci; Skt. maitrī), or giving pleasure and happiness to others; compassion (bei; Skt.
karuṇā), or removing others’ pain and suffering; taking joy (xi; Skt. muditā) in
making other people happy; and giving up all attachments, or equanimity (she or
hu; Skt. upekṣa).

four kinds of Buddhist disciples (sizhong): Monks (bhikṣus), nuns (bhikṣuṇīs), laymen
(upāsakas), and laywomen (upāsikās).

331

Glossary
four methods of winning people over (sishe; Skt. catur-saṃgrahavastu): Means of converting people to Buddhism through offering donations, kind speech, kind conduct
to beneﬁt others; and doing things together with others.

four modes of birth (sisheng): Four ways in which living beings are born: birth from the
womb, from an egg, from moisture, and through metamorphosis.

four small elements (siwei). The ﬁrst four of the ﬁve skandhas: color or form smell, taste,
and touch. See also ﬁve skandhas.

Grand Terminus (Taijizhang): In Daosim, the origin of all things in the universe.

Hinayana (“Lesser Vehicle”): A derogatory term applied by Mahayana Buddhists to early
schools of Buddhism whose primary soteriological goal is individual salvation.
Hinayana followers are grouped into two paths of practice of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, and there are four stages of spiritual development culminating in arhatship.
See also four fruits; Mahayana; pratyekabuddha; śrāvaka.
icchantika (yichanti): One who has no good roots and thus no possibility of becoming
a buddha.

kalpa ( jie): An eon, an immeasurably long period of time.

Mahayana (“Great Vehicle”): A school or movement in the development of Buddhism
that took place over several centuries begining around the second century B.C.E.,
often contrasted with the earlier Buddhist traditions termed by Mahayanists as the
Hinayana. The ideal of the Mahayana is the bodhisattva path. See also bodhisattva;
Hinayana.
Mount Sumeru (Xumishan): In Buddhist cosmology, the highest mountain that rises
from the center of the world.

nine kinds of Buddhist scriptures (jiubujing): The ﬁrst nine of the twelve kinds of Buddhist
scriptures. See twelve kinds of Buddhist scriptures.

nine kinds of deﬁlements ( jiujie): (1) Clinging or attachment, (2) anger or hatred, (3)
arrogance, (4) ignorance, (5) holding evil views, (6) attachment to the body, (7)
doubt, (8) jealousy, and (9) greed.

nine realms of the transmigration of birth and death (jiudi): Subdivisions of the three
realms of samsaric existence, consisting of the realm of desire, the four meditation
heavens of the realm of form, and the four domains of the formless realm. See also
three realms of existence.

nine schools (jiuliu): Confucianism, Daoism, the school of Yin-Yang, Legalism, the Nominalist school, the school of Mo Di (i.e., Mohism), the school of the Political Strategists, the school of Miscellaneous Thoughts, and the school of the Farming Life.

nirvana (niepan): The ultimate goal of Buddhism, a state in which delusions are extinguished and the highest wisdom (Skt. prajñā) is attained.

332

Glossary
One Vehicle ( yisheng): A Mahayana teaching of the single path to enlightenment of the
bodhisattva, as opposed to the paths of śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas. See also
bodhisattva; Mahayana; śrāvaka; pratyekabuddha; three vehicles.

pratyekabuddha (“self-enlightened one”): One who attains enlightenment through direct
apprehension of dependent origination (Skt. pratītyasamutpāda) without the aid of
a teacher and who does not teach others. One of the two types of Hinayana paths.
See also dependent origination; Hinayana; two vehicles.

Semblance Dharma See three periods of the Dharma.

Seven Classics: The Five Classics plus the Book of Music (Yuejing), no longer extant,
and the Analects (Lunyu) of Confucius. See also Five Classics.

seven factors of wisdom (qijing, qijuezhi, or qiputifen): (1) Distinguishing the True
Dharma from false teachings, (2) making effort to practice the True Dharma, (3)
rejoicing in the True Dharma, (4) eliminating slothfulness and attaining ease and
relaxation, (5) mindfulness to maintain the equilibrium of concentration and insight,
(6) concentration and (7) detaching one’s thoughts from external objects, thereby
securing mental serenity.

seven imperial shrines (qimiao): Shrines dedicated to the earliest ancestor (taizu) in the
center, to the three sons of the earliest emperor (san zhao) on the left, and to the
three grandsons of the earliest emperor (san mu) on the right.

seven kinds of self-conceit (qiman): The feeling of superiority toward those who are
inferior to oneself; the feeling of superiority toward those who are one’s equals; the
feeling of superiority toward those who are superior to oneself; being proud of
oneself and despising others; considering oneself to be more worthy or virtuous
than one actually is; false humility, i.e., feeling pride at one’s humility; and proudly
thinking that one is virtuous when, in fact, one has little virtue.

seven states: The seven dynastic states that formed during the Warring States period
(403–221 B.C.E.) when China was embroiled in warfare: the states of Qin, Chu, Qi,
Han, Zhao, Wei, and Yan.

six arts (liuyi): Six areas in which a reﬁned person must be skilled: rites, music, archery,
driving a chariot, learning, and mathematics.

Six Classics: The Five Classics plus the Book of Music. See also Five Classics.

six desires (liuyu): Desires arising from the contact of the six sense organs of the eyes,
ears, nose, tongue, body, and mind with their respective objects: form or color,
sound, odor, taste, tactile objects, and mental objects. Also called the six feelings
(liuqing). See also six dusts; six sense organs.

six dusts (liuchen; Skt. ṣaḍ viṣayāḥ): The objects of the six sense organs: color or form,
sound, odor, taste, tactile objects, and mental objects. See also six sense objects.

333

Glossary
six extreme evils (liuji): Misfortune that results in shortening one’s life span, illness,
mental distress, poverty, wickedness, and weakness.

six pāramitās (liuboluomi or liudu): The six qualities or “perfections” a bodhisattva practices in order to attain enlightenment or nirvana: (1) generosity or giving (Skt. dāna),
offering material goods, the Dharma, and peace; (2) morality or precepts (Skt. śīla);
(3) forbearance or patience (Skt. kṣānti); 4) diligence or effort (Skt. vīrya); (5) meditation (Skt. dhyāna); and (6) wisdom (Skt. prajñā). See also bodhisattva.

six puriﬁcation days (liuzhai): The eighth, fourteenth, ﬁfteenth, twenty-third, twentyninth, and thirtieth days of the month, during which laypeople observe eight precepts
(the ﬁve precepts along with additional proscriptions against indulging in adornment
or perfume, entertainment, sleeping in a raised bed, or eating after midday) in order
to purify themselves. See also ﬁve precepts.

six realms of existence (liudao or liuqu): The six realms of existence into which sentient
beings are reborn: the realms of hell, hungry ghosts, animals, humans, asuras
(demigods), and devas (heavenly beings). See also three lowest realms of existence.
six relations (liuqin): One’s father, mother, elder and younger brothers, wife, and children.

six sense organs (liugen): The eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body (tactile sense), and mind.

six schools (liujia): The predominant Chinese philosophical schools: Yin-yang, Confucian,
Mohist, Legalist, Nominalist, and Daoist.

six supernatural powers (liutong or liushentong): (1) The ability to go anywhere at will
and to transform oneself or objects at will; (2) the capability of seeing anything at
any distance; (3) the capability of hearing any sound at any distance: (4) the ability
to know others’ thoughts; (5) the ability to know one’s own and others’ former lives;
and (6) the ability to destroy all evil passions.

śramaṇa (shamen): A Buddhist monk.
śrāmaṇera (shami): A male novice.

śrāvaka: Literally, “hearer,” originally referring to the Buddha’s early disciples who
directly heard him teach. The term later came to designate followers of the Hinayana.
See also Hinayana; two vehicles.
Sun En (d. 402 C.E.): Leader of the rebel followers of the Way of the Heavenly Master,
whose group agitated in Central and Southern China for more than ten years. He
called his teaching the Purple Way (zidao) and taught his followers on how to
become a Water Transcendent (shuixian). See also Way of the Five Pecks of Grain.

Tathāgata (rulai): One of ten epithets of a buddha, construed as “one who comes from
thusness.” See also thusness.

ten epithets of a buddha (shihao): Tathāgata (Thus-come One), Arhat (One Worthy of
Alms), Fully Enlightened One, One Having Wisdom and Practice, One who Has
334

Glossary
Attained Emancipation, Knower of the World, Unsurpassed, Tamer of Humans,
Teacher of Gods and Humans, and World-honored One.

ten powers (shili): Ten powers attributed to a buddha: (1) distinguishing right and wrong;
(2) knowing the karma of all sentient beings of the past, present, and future, and its
outcome; (3) knowing all forms of meditation; (4) knowing the greater and lesser
capacities of sentient beings; (5) knowing the thoughts and desires of sentient beings;
(6) knowing the different levels of existence of sentient beings; (7) knowing the
results of various methods of practice; (8) knowing the transmigratory states of all
sentient beings and the courses of karma they follow; (9) knowing the past lives of
all sentient beings and the nirvanic state of nondeﬁlement; and (10) knowing how
to destroy all evil passions.

ten wholesome acts (shishan): Not killing living beings, not stealing, not committing
adultery, not telling lies, not uttering harsh words, not uttering words that cause
enmity between people, not engaging in idle talk, not being greedy, not being angry,
and not holding wrong views.

Three Augusts (sanhuang): Three legendary monarchs of ancient China. There are several
different theories about the identity of these ﬁgures. For instance, Sima Qian’s Shiji
lists Tianhuang (Emperor of Heaven), Dihuang (Emperor of Earth), and Renhuang
(Emperor of People) in the Sanhuangji (Chronicles of the Three Augusts), and Tianhuang, Dihuang, and Qinhuang (the ﬁrst emperor of the Qin dynasty) in the Qin Shihuangji (Chronicles of the First Emperor of the Qin Dynasty). The Chunqiu wei (a
book about charms and omens circulated in the Han dynasty as appendices to the
Spring and Autumn Annals) lists Fuxi, Shen Nong, and Nüwa as the Three Augusts.

three kinds of emptiness (sankong): The three gates of emancipation: emptiness (kong),
devoid of characteristics (wuxiang), and absence of aspiration (wuyuan).

three lowest realms of existence (santu): The three lowest of the six realms into which
sentient beings may be reborn, the realms of hell, hungry ghosts, and animals. Also
called the three evil paths (san’edao). See also six realms of existence.

three most revered people (zaisan): The sovereign, one’s parents, and one’s teacher.

three periods of existence (sanshi): Past, present, and future.

three periods of the Dharma: Three ﬁve-hundred year–periods of the Buddhist teaching:
the period of the True Dharma (zhengfa), when the Buddha’s teaching is properly
practiced and enlightenment can be attained; the period of the Semblance Dharma
(xiangfa), when the teaching is practiced but enlightenment is no longer attainable;
and the last period of the Decadent Dharma (mofa), when only the teaching still
exists but practice and the attainment of enlightenment are no longer possible.

three poisons (sandu): Greed, anger, and stupidity.

three powers (sancai): Heaven, human beings, and Earth.

335

Glossary
three realms (sanjie): The realm of desire (Skt. kāmadhatu), which comprises the realms
of hell, hungry ghosts, animals, asuras (demigods), and human beings, and a part
of the heavenly realm of devas; the realm of form (Skt. rūpadhātu), which includes
part of the lower heaven, and in which there are only reﬁned types of form without
sexual desire and other appetitites; and the formless realm (Skt. arūpyadhātu), in
which there is no material form, only meditative states.

three robes (sanyi or sanfu): The three types of monks’ robes: (1) a formal robe made
out of nine to twenty-ﬁve pieces of cloth (Skt. saṃghāṭī), worn for almsrounds or
when a monk is invited to a royal palace; (2) a robe made out of seven pieces of
cloth (Skt. uttarāsaṅga), worn when attending services, lectures, and ceremonies;
and (3) the everyday robe (Skt. antaravāsaka) worn by a monk day and night.

Three [Spiritual] Ofﬁces (san’guan): In Daoism, the ofﬁce of Heaven, the ofﬁce of Earth,
and the ofﬁce of water. In the Way of the Five Pecks of Grain illness was considered
to be a punishment meted out to a sinful person by spiritual beings. People who
were afﬂicted with illness wrote letters of appeal to the Three Spiritual Ofﬁces,
asking that their offenses be pardoned so that they would be relieved of their illness.
See also Daoism; Way of the Five Pecks of Grain.

three transcendental knowledges (sanda or sanming): The ability to know one’s former
lives and those of others, the ability to know one’s future destiny and that of others,
and the ability to know about all the suffering of the present life and to remove its
root cause.

Three Treasures (sanbao): Buddha, Dharma (the Buddhist teachings), and Sangha (the
communiy of Buddhist followers.).

three vehicles (sansheng): The three paths of Buddhist teaching and practice for śrāvakas,
pratyekabuddhas, and bodhisattvas. See also bodhisattva; Hinayana; Mahayana;
One Vehicle; pratyekabuddha; śrāvaka.

thusness (ru; Skt. tathā): The state of things as they really are; ultimate reality.

trichiliocosm (Skt. tri-sāhasra-mahāsāhasra): In ancient Indian cosmology, the entire
universe in which a thousand worlds make a small one-thousand world; a thousand
of these make a medium one-thousand world; and a thousand of these make a great
one-thousand world.

Tripiṭaka (sanzang): The three “baskets,” or collections, of the Buddhist teachings; Sutra
(discourses of the Buddha), Vinaya (monastic rules), and Abhidharma (treatises).
True Dharma. See three periods of the Dharma.

twelve gates of meditation (shiermen): Three groups of the four stages of meditation:
the four stages of meditation in the realm of form, the four immeasurable virtues
attained through meditation, and the four stages of meditation in the formless realm.

twelve kinds of Buddhist scriptures (shierbujing): (1) Sūtra, the Buddha’s exposition of
the Dharma in prose; (2) geya, verses that repeat the ideas already expressed in prose;
336

Glossary
(3) gāthā, verses containing ideas not expressed in the prose section of a sūtra; (4)
nidāna, narratives of past occurrences that explain a person’s present state; (5) itivṛttaka,
narratives of past lives of the Buddha’s disciples; (6) jātaka, narratives of the Buddha’s
past lives; (7) adbhuta-dharma, accounts of miracles performed by the Buddha or
other deities; (8) avadāna, exposition of the Dharma through allegories; (9) upadeśa,
discussions of doctrine, often in question-and-answer form; (10) udāna, exposition
of the Dharma by the Buddha without awaiting questions or requests from his disciples;
(11) vaipulya, full-length, in-depth exposition of principles of truth; and (12) vyākaraṇa,
the Buddha’s predictions of his disciples’ attainment of buddhahood.

two vehicles (ersheng): The two paths of Buddhist teaching and practice for śrāvakas
and pratyekabuddhas. See also pratyekabuddha; śrāvaka; three vehicles.

upāsaka/upāsikā: Buddhist laymen/laywomen. See also four kinds of Buddhist disciples.

Way of the Five Pecks of Grain (Wudoumijidao): An early Daoist order established by
Zhang Ling in the Shu region (present-day Sichuan province) in the last years of
the Late Han dynasty; also called the Way of the Heavenly Master, since the founder
adopted the title Heavenly Master and succeeding patriarchs maintained the title.
So called because followers were required to offer ﬁve pecks of grain. See also
Zhang Ling.
Way of the Spirit (shendao): In Daoism, the unfathomed mysterious way, the transcendental
religious world, or a synonym for a supreme spiritual being.

Zhang Ling: Founder of the Way of the Heavenly Master (Tianshidao), also called the
Way of the Five Pecks of Grain; he is also known as Zhang Daoling. His son is
Zhang Heng, the second patriarch, and his grandson is Zhang Lu, the third patriarch.
See also Way of the Five Pecks of Grain.

Zhang Jiao (d. 184): The leader of the Yellow Turbans, who gained the support of the
people of Luoyang who suffered from disease or poverty by offering medical care
and religious practice and organized a religious group called Taipingdao (Way of
Great Peace) based on the cult of Yellow Emperor and Laozi (Huang-Lao). In 184
C.E. Zhang Jiao led several hundreds of thousands of followers in a rebellion against
the Han dynasty, with the intent of bringing about the “world of great peace,” but
he died of illness and eventually the rebellion was quelled. His followers wore
yellow turbans to distinguish themselves from their enemies.

337

Bibliography
Hsiao-Chieh Cheng, Hui-Chen Pai Cheng, and Kenneth Lawrence Thern, trans. Shan
hai ching: Legendary Geography and Wonders of Ancient China. Taibei: Committee
for Compilation and Examination of the Series of Chinese Classics, National Institute
for Compilation and Translation, 1985.
Inagaki, Hisao. A Dictionary of Japanese Buddhist Terms. Berkeley: Stone Bridge Press,
1992.

Kimura, Eiichi. Eon kenkyū, ibun-hen. Kyoto: Kyōto Daigaku Jinbun Kagaku Kenkyūjo,
1960.

Kopecki, Andrew J. Cultural Adaptation in the Chinese Acceptance of Buddhism: Selections
from the “Hongmingji“: A Thesis. Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard University, Cambridge,
1981.

Kyōto Daigaku Jinbun Kagaku Kenkyūjo Chūsei Shisōshi Kenkyū han, ed. Gumyōshū
kenkyū, 3 vols. Kyoto: Kyōto Daigaku Jinbun Kagaku Kenkyūjo, 1973–1975. Japanese translation of the entire text of the Hongmingji.

Le Blanc, Charles. Huai-nan tzu. Philosophical Synthesis in Early Han Thought: The
Idea of Resonance (kan-ying) with a Translation and Analysis of Chapter Six. Hong
Kong: Hong Kong University Press, 1985.
Legge, James, trans. Dao de jing ji Zhuangzi quan ji. Taibei: Wen xing shu ju, 1963.

—. I ching: Book of Changes. Ch’u Chai with Winberg Chai, ed. with introduction and
study guide. New Hyde Park, NY: University Books, 1964.
—. The Chinese Classics: With a Translation, Critical and Exegetical Notes, Prolegomena, and Copious Indexes, vols. 1–4. Taipei: Wen shih che ch’u pan she, 1972,
second revised ed.

—. The Chinese Classics: With a Translation, Critical and Exegetical notes, Prolegomena,
and Copious Indexes, vol. 5. Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press, 1960.
Liebenthal, Walter. “The Immortality of the Soul in Chinese Thought,” Monumenta Nipponica 8 (1/2) (1952): 341–395.

Liu Lifu. Hongdao yu mingjiao: “Hongmingji” yanjiu. Beijing: Zhongguo Shehui Kexue
Chubanshe, 2004.
—. “Hongmingji” yanjiu. Gaoxion Xian Dashu Xiang: Foguangshan Wenjiao Jijinhui, 2004.

339

Bibliography
Makita, Tairyō, and Toshinori Ochiai, eds. Nanatsudera koitsu kyōten kenkyū sōsho.
Chūgoku senjutsu kyōten, 2 vols. Tokyo: Daitō Shuppansha, 1994–1996.

Masuda, Koh, editor-in-chief. Kenkyūsha’s New Japanese-English Dictionary. Tokyo:
Kenkyusha Ltd., 1974, fourth edition.

Morgan, Evan, trans. Tao, The Great Luminant: Essays from Huai nan tzu. Shanghai:
Kelly & Walsh Ltd., 1934.
Müller, F. Max, ed. The Sacred Books of the East, 50 vols. Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1879-1910.

Nienhauser, William H., Jr., ed. The Grand Scribe’s Records, 9 vols. Bloomington, IN:
Indiana University Press, 1994–2011.

Ogawa, Tamaki. Rōshi Sōshi. Tokyo: Chūō Kōronsha, 1998.

Ōta, Teizō, trans. Kokuyaku issaikyō. Wa-Kan senjutsu bu. Gokyōbu 1. Tokyo: Daitō Shuppansha, 1936. Japanese translation of the entire text of the Hongmingji.

Rosemont, Henry, trans. The Chinese Classic of Family Reverence: A Philosophical
Translation of the Xiaojing. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press, 2009.
Sawada, Mizuho. Ressenden Shinsenden. Tokyo: Heibonsha, 1993.

Schmidt-Glintzer, Helwig. Das Hung-ming chi und die Aufnahme des Buddhismus in
China. Wiesbaden: Steiner, 1976.
Wang Zhimei. Cong “Hong ming ji” kan fo jiao Zhongguo hua. Taibei: Taibei Xian
Yonghe Shi: Hua mu lan wen hua gong zuo fang, 2008.

Ware, James R., trans. and ed. Alchemy, Medicine, and Religion in the China of A.D.
320: The Nei p’ien of Ko Hung (Pao-p’u tzu). Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press, 1966.
Watson, Burton, trans. Han Feizi: Basic Writings. New York: Columbia University Press,
2003.

Wong, Eva, trans. Liezi: A Taoist Guide to Practical Living. Boston: Shambhala Publications, 1995.

Yang, Hsien-yi, and Gladys Yang, trans. Selections from Records of the Historian. Peking:
Foreign Languages Press, 1979.

Yoshikawa, Tadao, trans. Gumyōshū Kōgumyōshū. Daijō butten: Chūgoku Nihon hen,
vol. 4. Tokyo: Chūō Kōronsha, 1988.

Zürcher, Erik. The Buddhist Conquest of China: The Spread and Adaptation of Buddhism
in Early Medieval China. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1959.

340

Index
A

Ai, Lord, 232
animal(s)/beast(s)/creature(s), 5, 6, 11, 32,
54, 58, 60, 63, 64, 79, 101, 105, 121,
123, 148, 235, 237, 238, 240, 252,
256, 262, 268, 269, 270, 272,
300n21, 310n190
alligator, 270
bear, 120, 257, 262, 270, 323n389
boar/hog(s)/pig(s), 60, 97, 120, 170,
178, 257, 269, 270, 271
cat, 270, 303n73
cow(s), 69, 70, 178, 270, 271
deer, 117
dog(s), 257, 270
jiao, 258
raccoon, 22, 270
dragon(s), 6, 7, 24, 52, 58, 69, 129, 171,
260, 267, 268, 272, 275, 276, 283,
285, 304n97
foxes, 22
frog, 79, 95, 105, 306n133
hare(s)/rabbit(s), 63, 117, 182, 189, 263
horse(s), 4, 17, 51, 58, 59, 60, 61, 70,
99, 123, 159, 173, 236, 275, 277,
278, 279, 286, 300n18, 321n359
Daoli, 59
divine, 278, 280
Hualiu, 59, 173, 305n108
Qiji, 305n108
white, 28, 98, 215, 308n153
iguanodons, 52, 304n97

jackal(s), 22, 285
leopard, 270
monkey(s), 270, 300n21
rhinoceroses, 52, 97n97
sheep, 178, 192, 220, 269, 270, 271,
317n297, 318n320
tiger(s), 6, 7, 26, 52, 135, 148, 261, 270,
276, 277, 285, 304n97, 312n225
turtle(s), 262, 267, 270
unicorn, 97
water buffaloes, 261
wolf/wolves, 722, 135, 268, 274
wormlike/vermicular, 91, 121, 237
See also bird(s); ﬁsh(es); insect(s);
snake(s)
An Qisheng, 262
anti-Buddhist, xix, xx
Archivist. See Laozi
Aśoka, King, 149
See also Ayuwang Temple
Avalokiteśvara, 136, 277
Ayuwang Temple, 149

B

Bai Qi, 297, 327n446
Ban niyuan jing, 310n192, 319n333
Banzhou sanmei jing (Skt. Pratyutpannabuddha-saṃmukhāvasthitasamādhi), 181
Baopuzi, 299n9
barbarians, 20, 31, 32, 132, 204, 206
Ba River, 149

341

Index
Bei, 165
Beihai Ruo, 306n134
Beijing chao, 310n199
bhikṣu(s) (biqiu), 36, 44, 149, 220, 233
two hundred and ﬁfty precepts for, 185
See also Buddhist clergy/monk(s);
Buddhist order/sangha; four kinds
of Buddhist disciples; śramaṇa(s)
Bian, 35, 303n63
Bian He, jade of, 59, 167, 305n107
Bian Sizhi, 223, 224, 225, 226
Bi Gan, 58, 305n105
Binguo. See four polar regions
Biographies of Arrayed Transcendents
(Liexian zhuan), 149, 295
See also Liu Xiang
bird(s)/fowl, 6, 14, 34, 59, 60, 63, 65,
178, 179, 262–262, 265, 269, 272,
315n274
crane, 5, 173
dove, 70, 77, 300n194
ju/yuanju, 59, 60
juxu, 68, 74, 75
kingﬁshers, 165
luan, 176, 259, 274, 276
myna, 12
owl(s), 13, 268, 272, 274
peng, 120, 265
phoenix(es), 59, 60, 99, 173, 259, 260,
268, 374n274
qiongqiong, 68, 74, 75
shrike, 13
sparrows, 97, 128
swallows, 97
wild duck(s), 97, 103, 128
zhen, 258
See also animal(s)/beast(s)/creature(s)
birth and death, 36, 39. 48, 123, 141,
146, 219, 222, 239, 240, 246, 248,
251, 255, 256, 260, 289, 292, 297
See also rebirth; transmigration

342

Bo, 33
boat(s)/ferryboat, 4, 51, 106, 127, 192,
231, 255, 259, 274, 327n442
Bocheng, 35
bodhisattva(s), 23, 80, 125, 162, 177,
244, 253, 260, 278, 293, 324n296
images, 21, 31
path/way, 160, 161
practice(s), 163, 244, 253
stages, ten, 24, 35, 276
eighth, 276, 283
ninth, 276
tenth, 125, 282
body and spirit, 49–50, 52, 55, 57, 59, 60,
61, 66, 67, 68, 69, 71, 73, 74, 75, 85
Book of Changes, 37, 59, 60, 89, 97, 113,
144, 179, 199, 211, 291
Great Appendix, 109
section on gu lines (guyao), 175
See also Five Classics; Yijing
Book of History, 49, 58, 116, 118, 120,
179, 291, 295
Yao dian, 21
See also Five Classics; Shangshu;
Shujing
Book of Mountains and Seas, 148
See also Shanhai jing
Book of Odes, 12, 15, 23, 28, 51, 119, 126
“The Bow Adorned with Horn (Jiaogong),” 34
See also Five Classics; Praise Odes of
Lu; Shijing
Book of Rites (Liji), 29, 37, 67, 73, 76,
93, 123, 128, 291, 310n200
“Chapter on Records of Music (Yueji),”
119
“Chapter on Royal Regulations
(Wangzhi),” 294
“Chapter on Scholars’ Behaviors (Ruxing),” 175

Index
“Chapter on the Meaning of Sacriﬁces
(Jiyi),” 79, 114, 120
section on “Ceremonial Usages”
(Liyun), 79, 307n136
See also Five Classics; Liji
Boyang. See Laozi
Boyou, 49, 59–60, 120, 304n85, 310n189
Boyuan, 133
Boyue, 58
Brahmā King, 282
Brahmanic teaching, 37
buddha(s), 20, 48, 49, 91, 235, 278,
304n98
image(s), 21, 30, 31, 63, 138, 143,
149, 293, 295
Buddha, xix, 18, 21, 23, 24, 26, 27, 33,
36–38, 61–65, 79, 93, 104, 109,
117, 120, 125, 128, 135, 137–149,
163, 164, 168, 176, 184, 194, 195,
196, 198, 204, 205, 207, 208, 215,
220, 224, 227, 229, 232, 236, 249,
252, 254, 256, 260, 275, 284, 285,
287, 288, 290, 292, 294, 295, 297,
322n368
altruistic/responsive activities, 17, 24,
140, 142, 143, 171, 179, 293, 297
ediﬁcation/teaching, 22, 23, 63, 89,
120, 139, 199, 204, 206, 209, 212,
213, 216, 287, 293, 294, 296,
317n305
exposition of the Dharma, 129, 130
lion’s roar, 286
image(s), 23, 139, 177, 296
manifestation/trace, 24, 27, 140, 141,
143, 144, 145
marks, eighty minor, thirty-two, 26, 283
nirvana, 23, 251
relic(s), 147, 149
power, 148, 280
merit(s)/providence/virtue, 23, 36–37,
88, 147, 221, 288

taking refuge in, 28, 64, 147, 235, 252
ten epithets, 28, 126, 143, 145, 312n220
See also Śākyamuni; Tathāgata
Buddhabhadra, 183, 190
Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha. See Three
Treasures
buddhahood, 28, 44–45, 48, 117, 145, 166,
167, 169, 311n215
buddha lands, 252
See also Pure Land
buddha-nature, 28, 42, 90
Buddhism, xx, 4, 11, 13, 14, 15–16, 17,
20, 22, 23, 24, 30, 31, 33, 63, 64, 65,
80, 81, 83, 87, 88, 95, 96, 104, 106,
107, 122, 123, 124, 131, 134, 135,
136, 139, 142, 143, 144, 145, 147,
148, 151, 155, 169, 175, 177, 178,
180, 181, 188, 190, 196, 197–198,
199, 201, 203, 204–205, 206, 207,
208, 212, 213, 218, 221, 222, 223,
224, 225, 227, 228, 229, 231, 239,
244, 246, 247, 250, 252, 255, 261,
262, 279, 287, 289, 294, 297,
308n165
adoption/transmission of, in China/Chinese, xx, xxi, 131, 149, 177, 196,
242, 295
and Confucianism/Daoism, 14, 19, 27,
30, 80, 107, 108, 136, 140, 142, 150,
154, 155, 156–157, 180, 207, 225,
226, 253
criticism/doubts/negative views of, xix,
15–17, 18, 33, 34, 61, 62, 136, 139,
147, 152, 227, 254, 296, 299n10
six doubts about, xix, 290
Hinayana, 113, 183
Mahayana, 16, 31
promulgation/protection of, xix, xx, 82,
107
Buddhist(s), xx, xxi, 4, 15, 38, 52, 65,
98, 102, 105, 109, 115, 124, 134,

343

Index
Buddhist(s) (continued)
147, 156, 157, 175, 180, 181, 196,
197, 200, 218, 220, 223, 224, 229,
261, 289
ceremonies/service(s), 38, 62, 205, 220,
221
decorum/rules of conduct, 176, 198,
205
images, 131, 136, 142, 145, 148
lay/laypeople, xix, xx, xxi, 24, 82,
102, 134, 136, 145, 176, 177, 180,
199, 221, 235
robes/surplice, 165, 221, 232
pagodas/temples, xx, 16, 63, 131, 136,
145, 152, 227, 264, 295
practice(s), 149, 159, 177
precepts, 18, 185, 213, 225, 264
Buddhist clergy/monk(s), xix, xx, 15–20,
24, 28, 29, 31, 34, 61–64, 82, 102,
132, 133, 135, 136, 145, 147–149,
165–167, 169, 172, 176, 177, 180,
182, 183, 190, 191, 194–196,
198–204, 212, 220–225, 227–229,
231, 232, 270
See also bhikṣu(s); śramaṇa(s)
Buddhist Dharma, xix, 20, 32, 88, 132,
159, 185, 200, 202, 205, 206, 208,
223, 296
See also Dharma
Buddhist ediﬁcation/doctrine(s)/principles/teaching(s)/tenets, xix, xx, xxi,
14, 16, 17, 32, 37, 42, 79, 84, 85,
92, 99, 102, 103, 105, 106, 107,
117, 121, 123, 124, 127, 130, 132,
133, 135, 149, 159, 166 168, 184,
188, 200, 201, 208, 212, 220, 227,
243, 248, 254, 261, 287, 290, 291,
293, 295, 296
Buddhist order/sangha, xvi, 175, 220,
228, 235

344

Buddhist scripture(s)/texts, xix, xxi, xxii,
4, 13, 15, 20, 24, 30, 31, 32, 38, 82,
93, 101, 103, 111, 118, 127, 128, 132,
138, 139, 144, 145, 149, 158, 160,
164, 169, 170, 187, 191, 218, 227,
229, 230, 235, 236, 254, 290, 291,
295, 296, 297, 310n194, 324n394
nine kinds of, 106
See also scripture(s); sutra(s)
Buddhist Way, 17, 19, 20, 21, 28, 29, 33,
35, 36, 37, 42, 85, 90, 96, 103, 105,
107, 108, 110, 115, 117, 128, 143,
144, 157, 158, 159, 160, 164, 166,
169, 175, 177, 178, 179, 181, 184,
185, 189, 195, 208, 213, 215, 219,
220, 221, 223, 225, 228, 230, 232,
232, 236, 240, 246, 248, 252, 255,
259, 260, 261, 266, 280, 289
See also Great Way; Way, Buddhist/of
the Buddha/Śākyamuni/Tathāgata,

C

Cai Mao, 51
Cai Zun, 96
cakravartin. See golden wheel king/
wheel-turning king
Canon of Filial Piety, 59, 66, 70, 71, 89,
113, 119
See also Xiaojing
Cao, Lord, 169
Cao Jingzong, 126–127
Cao Mao, 29
Cao Pi, 160
Cao Siwen, 65, 68, 69, 74, 77, 111,
306n130, 308n164
Cao state, 51
causality/causation, xxi, 19, 99, 109, 132,
144, 207, 210, 239, 240, 251, 254,
263, 298
See also karma/karmic; reward and
retribution

Index
Celestial Thearch/Heavenly Thearch, 66,
68, 69, 277, 327n443
See also Five Thearchs; Supreme
Thearch
ceremonial cap/dress/gown(s)/robe, 30,
82, 94, 96, 102, 106, 110, 112, 115,
126, 181, 183, 191, 283
ceremony(ies), 19, 30, 116, 118, 119,
120, 130, 192, 194, 203, 220–221,
227, 272, 292, 298, 316n294,
318n320
ﬁve kinds of, 96, 122, 124
sacriﬁcial/of sacriﬁce, 79, 102, 103,
113, 257, 318n320
See also Buddhist, ceremonies/service(s); rite(s)/ritual(s)
Chan, 195
Chang’an, 10, 16, 32, 190, 193, 196, 296
Changsha, King of, 81, 306n124
Chaofu, 165
Cheng, Emperor, 193, 194, 197
Cheng, King, 134
Chengdu, 313n246
Chengju guangming dingyi jing,
321nn355, 365
Cheng Pu, 297
Chenhua, 5
Chen Ping, 242
Chi Chao, 133, 235, 319n329
Chifu, 262
China, xx, 9, 19, 20, 21, 23, 24, 30, 31,
38, 51, 89, 96, 120, 131, 133, 135,
139, 147, 149, 163, 165, 176, 177,
179, 183, 186, 187, 190, 196, 202,
204, 213, 242, 254, 273, 283, 285,
287, 290, 294, 295, 299n1, 326n431
Chinese, xix, xx, xxi, 21, 24, 32, 120,
121, 135, 174, 177, 180, 183, 188,
189, 198, 200, 205, 207, 208, 212,
213, 221, 224, 254, 266, 290, 293,
294, 295, 299n3, 303n70, 316nn288,

291; 317n308, 321nn357, 358;
327n447
character(s)/language, xxi, 20, 21, 23,
24, 30–31, 44, 51, 184, 190, 235,
251, 304n98, 305n106, 308n163,
310n191, 311nn203, 207; 312nn219,
229; 313n238, 314n240, 315n277,
317nn298, 304; 319n329, 321n353,
322nn372, 377; 323nn389, 392;
324nn399, 402; 325nn406, 409, 410,
415; 326nn417, 425; 327n443
Chu area/state, 16, 59, 115, 137, 138, 223,
232, 242, 294, 295, 301n28, 314n258
Ying (capital city), 263
See also Mount Chu
Chu, Emperor Dowager, 30
Chuiji, 59, 305n107
Chu She, 193, 195, 198, 317n300
Classics, 220, 295
See also Five Classics; Seven Classics;
Six Classics
Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, xix–xxii, 175,
307n140, 317n305
Afterword, 289–298
See also Hongmingji; Sengyou
Collection of Records Derived from the
Tripiṭaka (Chusanzang jiji), xxi,
320nn336, 340; 321n352
See also Sengyou
Confucian, 57, 62, 64, 107
canon/teachings, 143, 169, 295
robe/style of dress, 62, 232
scholars, 35, 38, 119
See also Confucianism/Confucianist(s);
Confucius
Confucianism/Confucianist(s), 17, 27, 34,
62, 73, 86, 90, 102, 107, 140, 141,
144, 150, 179, 194, 197, 208, 212,
213, 214, 224, 226, 253, 295, 296,
307n149

345

Index
Confucianism/Confucianist(s) (continued)
and Buddhism, 19, 80, 107, 108, 136,
140, 142, 150,180, 225
and Daoism, xix–xxi
See also nine schools
Confucius, 24, 30, 31, 36, 38, 41, 59, 61,
64, 67, 72, 76, 79, 80, 90, 97, 98,
100, 107, 117, 118, 121, 123, 125,
137, 139, 140, 169, 178, 179, 201,
220, 230, 232, 261, 262, 294, 295,
303n77, 307n147
books/teachings/writings of, 81, 89,
92, 109, 111, 118, 157, 200, 288,
307n151
cited/quoted, 34–35, 67, 71–72, 76,
134, 206, 213, 307n141, 311n210,
312n221, 316n297
and the Duke of Zhou, 20, 59, 111,
119, 138, 140, 142, 143, 145, 178,
207, 210, 283, 288, 291
and Taibo and Yuzheng, 15
and Yang Huo, 58, 59, 60
and Yao, 33, 265
and Youzi, 31
and Yuan Rong, 34
and Zhong You/Zilu, 67, 72, 207
and Zigong, 318n320
and Ziyou and Zixia, 38
See also Canon of Filial Piety; Five
Classics; Spring and Autumn Annals
constellations/stars, 72, 144, 262, 267,
268, 269, 271, 272, 277, 279, 285,
288, 304n96, 323n384
Big Dipper, 267, 268, 269
Great Bear, 271
Heavenly Banner, 274
Milky Way, 12, 179, 290
Nanji, 268
North Polar/polar, 262, 277, 294
Palace of the Purple Tenuity, 277
Cultivated Talent (Xiucai), 168, 199

346

D

Danzhu, 61
Danyang, 82, 106, 131
dao/Dao, 51, 318n318, 319nn324, 326;
325n411
Daoan, xx, xxi, 176, 177, 183, 190, 296,
325nn410, 414
Daobao, 201
Daobiao, 158, 159–160, 161–163,
164–165, 175
Dao de jing, 117
See also Laozi; Laozi/Laozi Dao de
jing
Daogao, 137, 138–139, 141–143
Daohan, 114
Daoheng, 158, 159–160, 161–163,
164–165, 175
Daoism/Daoist teaching, xix–xxii, 4, 8, 13,
14, 23–27, 37, 154, 155, 156–157,
158, 253, 254, 299n1
See also nine schools; wuwei; yin and
yang
Daoist(s), xxi, 4, 5, 9, 11, 12, 13, 25, 26,
27, 38, 156, 157, 254, 299n10
monk(s)/priest(s), 10, 33, 34, 148
school(s) and titles, xi, xxi, 9, 10–11,
157, 254
scripture(s), 4, 8, 101
See also Dao de jing; Laozi/Laozi Dao
de jing; rite(s)/ritual(s); yin and yang
Daosheng, 189, 191, 192, 232
See also Zhu Daosheng
Daoxuan, xxii
Daozeng, 299n5
deﬁlement(s), 6, 25, 29, 31, 32, 45, 46, 47,
89, 101, 105, 112, 124, 125, 155, 168,
179, 232, 237, 239, 246, 259, 264,
277, 279, 281, 283, 284, 285, 286
Deer Park, 88, 139
Deng Tong, 51

Index
Deng Xi, 64
Devadatta, 125
Dhammapada (Faju jing), 245, 310n199,
321n361
Dharma, xix, 12, 24, 29, 32, 63, 64, 65,
86, 100, 101, 106, 107, 129, 130,
135, 140, 143, 150, 151, 154, 161,
163, 175, 185, 187, 188, 196, 198,
201, 220, 221, 224, 236, 264, 276,
286, 289, 290, 292, 293, 294, 296
cloud(s), 96, 128, 296
drum(s), 139, 181, 286
gate, 30, 31, 92, 96, 137, 158, 163
great, 105, 147, 159, 160, 168, 184,
188, 202, 203, 204, 230, 232, 237,
293
profund/subtle, 23, 33, 289
robe(s), 35, 159, 161, 164, 165, 180,
204, 208, 220, 221, 224
sound, 42, 106, 142, 286
teacher(s), 31, 87, 92, 93, 99, 101, 107,
108, 109, 116, 117, 123, 125, 126,
159, 162, 163
three periods of:
Decadent, 141, 233
Semblance, 119
True, 119, 123, 138, 139, 143, 285, 294
wheel, 96, 107
See also Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha;
Buddhist Dharma
dharmakāya, 145
Dharma King, 273, 274, 275, 279, 280
See also Buddha
Dharmarakṣaṇa. See Tanwuchen
Dian, 65
See also Zeng Shen/Zengzi
Dīpaṅkara, 139, 283, 311n215
Discourse on Buddhist Laymen and
Clergy (Baihei lun), 132
See also Huilin

Discourse on Debating to Remove Hindrances (Bianho lun), 3–13
See also Xuanguang
Discourse on Extinguishing Delusions,
301n32
See also Liu Xie
Discourse on the Achievement of Reality
(Chengshi lun), 43
Discourse on the Coexistence of Opposite
Views (Fangsheng zhi lun), 118,
309n180
See also Zhuangzi
Discourse on the Extinction of Man’s
Nature (Miexing lun), 129
See also Discourse on the Extinction
of the Spirit
Discourse on the Extinction of the Spirit
(Shenmie lun), 48, 49–65, 68, 69,
70, 73, 79–80, 81, 82, 92, 94, 96,
111, 116, 130, 306nn130, 131
Cao Siwen’s criticisms of, 65–68,
74–77, 306n130, 308n164
See also Fan Zhen/Zizhen
Discourse on the Full Understanding of
Life (Daxing lun), 132
See also He Chengtian
Discourse on the Triple Destruction
(Sanpo lun), 13–18, 20, 21–22, 23,
27–38, 299n10
See also Zhang Rong
Discourse on the Way to Reach the Origin
of the Two Teachings (Tangyuan lun),
156
See also Shaozi; Zhang Rong
Discourse on the White Horse (Baima
lun), 318n315
Discourse on Why Śramaṇas Do Not Bow
to the Sovereign (Shamen bujing
wangzhe lun), 307n140, 317n305
See also Huiyuan

347

Index
Discourse to Clarify Buddhism (Mingfo
lun), 132, 133, 148, 312n227
See also Zong Bing
Di tribe/tribespeople, 9, 10, 135, 314n264
Dong’an Temple, 190
Dongguan County, 13
Dongli, 127, 310n195
Dongyuangong, 314n251
See also four bright men
Duan Ganmu, 164
Du Bo, 48, 297, 327n444
Du Hui, 128
Dunhuang, 6
Du Wei, 163
Du Yi, 99
Du Zigong, 9
dynasty(ies), xxi, 75, 90, 105, 131, 138,
173, 190, 196, 200, 201, 202, 204,
205, 208

E

Eastern Jin dynasty, xix, xx, xxi, 6, 175,
177
See also Jin dynasty/state; Western Jin
dynasty
Eastern Mountain, 267, 268, 269
See also Five Peaks/Five Sacred
Mountains; Mount Tai
eighteen innocent people, 274, 325n413
Eight Executives, 199, 200, 202, 217, 218
eightfold holy path, 123, 150, 278, 283
eight difﬁculties, 32, 146, 251, 256
eight kinds of gods and demigods that
protect Buddhism, 107
See also gods
eight worldly matters, 246, 321n357
elements:
four great, 253, 356
four small, 118
three great, 199, 207
See also six elemental energies
348

emptiness, 4, 16, 26, 91, 107, 119, 137,
176, 248, 249, 252–253, 260, 278,
282, 283, 286, 287, 289
contemplation on, 236, 251
four abodes of, 251
three kinds of, 274
enlightenment, 15, 35, 81, 92, 106, 125,
126, 129, 157, 160, 165, 167, 179.
231, 290
aspiration for, 236
path/way to, 123, 150, 178, 277, 278,
283, 289
right, perfect, 64, 156, 182
See also nirvana
Essentials for Believing in the Dharma,
175, 235–253
See also Chi Chao
existence(s), 4, 16, 36, 44, 62, 76, 101,
113, 119, 123, 126, 140, 146, 157,
163, 200, 213, 218, 221, 237, 243,
246, 249, 252, 252, 256, 259, 260,
282, 288, 297
former/previous, 35, 44, 61, 86, 89,
229, 238, 244, 246, 247
future/next, 142, 191, 209, 211, 240,
244
See also nonexistence; realm(s), of
existence; three periods of existence
Explanation on Dispelling Delusions
(Shizhi), 154
Extensive Collection for the Propagation
and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism, xxii
See also Daoxuan; Guang Hongmingji

F

Fajing, xxii
Faju piyu jing, 321n361
Falang, King, xviii
Family Code, 253
Faming, 137, 144, 148

Index
Fan Bolun/Fan Tai, 132, 182, 184, 185,
186, 187, 188, 191
Fangxun, 58, 152, 179
See also Yao/Yao, Emperor
Fan River, 173, 276
Fan Shi, 102
Fan Wang, 133
Fan Xiaocai, 102–103
Fan Xiu, 82
Fan Zhen/Zizhen, 48, 49, 61, 67, 68, 73,
83, 86, 95, 102, 119
See also Secretariat Fan; Wulu Chongzong
Fatie kanwu (Model Book for Errata),
319n329
See also Huang Bosi
Faxian, 187
Fayun, 80
Fei Changfang, xxii
Fengren, 262
Feng Huai, 193, 195
ﬁlial/ﬁlial piety, xxi, 15, 17, 18, 33, 35,
48, 59, 64, 66, 67, 71, 172,79, 80,
85, 86, 87, 93, 95 96, 99, 100, 104,
105, 107, 109, 110, 113, 114, 125,
127, 150, 151, 152, 171, 200, 207,
218, 219, 222, 236, 302n62,
312n230, 313n233, 324n401
See also Canon of Filial Piety
First Emperor of the Qin dynasty, 4, 153
ﬁsh(es), 42, 64, 148, 163, 182, 212, 236,
263, 265, 270, 272, 284, 285,
318n316, 326n420
kun, 265
See also animal(s)/beast(s)/creature(s)
Five Classics, 21, 23, 108, 110, 114, 117,
124, 128, 290, 292, 295, 296
See also Book of Changes; Book of
History; Book of Odes; Book of
Rites; Seven Classics; Six Classics;
Spring and Autumn Annals

ﬁve desires, 101, 155
ﬁve hindrances, 239, 319n331
ﬁve kinds of afﬂictions, 46
ﬁve kinds of disasters, 16, 300n14
ﬁve kinds of happiness, 256, 323n381
ﬁve kinds of principles of human relationships, 151, 197, 267, 313n233,
324n401
See also Confucianism/Confucianist(s)
ﬁve paths, 238, 264
See also realm(s), of existence, ﬁve
Five Peaks/Five Sacred Mountains, 121,
267, 269
See also Mount Heng/Huo; Mount
Hua; Mount Song; Mount Tai
ﬁve penalties, 35
Five Powers, 138
See also Chu area/state; Jin dynasty;
Qi dynasty; Qin dynasty/state; Song
dynasty
ﬁve rebellious acts, 3, 17
ﬁve skandhas, 118, 239, 240, 252
Five Thearchs, 18, 22, 23, 32, 105, 121,
138, 140, 143, 145, 178, 192, 294
See also Celestial Thearch/Heavenly
Thearch; Shun, Emperor; Supreme
Thearch; Yao/Yao, Emperor; Yellow
Emperor
Five Thousand Words. See Dao de jing;
Laozi/Laozi dao de jing
Former Han dynasty, 16, 153, 170, 300n15,
317n308
See also Han dynasty; Later Han
dynasty
Foshuo Beijing chao, 302n54, 314n254,
319n332
Fotudeng, xxi, 33, 135, 149, 293
four bright men, 164, 165, 314n251
See also Dongyuangong; Luli; Qili Ji;
Xiahuanggong
four classes of people, 175

349

Index
four continents, 107
four criminals, 242, 320n343
four evils, 273, 325n412
fourfold truths/Four Noble Truths, 129,
236
four fruits, 283
four great rivers/Four Holy Rivers, 176,
267
See also Huai River; Ji River; Yangzi
River; Yellow River
four immeasurable minds, 16, 236, 237,
245–246, 247, 252, 321n353
four kinds of evil attachments, 112
four methods of winning people over,
277, 283
four polar regions, 290, 291, 326n431
four seas, 169, 264, 294
four seasons, 79, 207, 246, 267
four stages of sainthood, 183
four subjects of learning, 38
four that are great, 92, 137, 224, 307n146,
311n211, 318n318, 319n322
four types of impermanent things, 248
four wicked ones, 152, 313n235
Fu, 242, 320n342
Fu Jian, 135
Fu Jing, 108
Futu. See Buddhism
Fuxi, 23, 293
Fu Yue, 51
Fu Yi, 295

G

Gan Bao, 149
Gaṅgānadīvālukā, 281
Ganges River, 282, 283
Gaogui Xiang, Lord. See Cao Mao
Gaoseng Faxian zhuan, 315n280
Gaoseng zhuan, 312nn224, 225, 226;
316n290, 327nn438, 439

350

Gao Yao, 58, 60, 305n104
Gaozu, Emperor, 29, 58, 257
Ge Xuan, 25
god(s), 7, 28, 32, 63, 87, 105, 283, 293
of the earth/land, 267, 271, 292
Green God, 172
Yellow God, 13
See also eight kinds of of gods and
demigods that protect Buddhism
golden wheel king/wheel-turning king,
107
Gonggong, 242
Gongsun Duan, 59
Gongsun He, 59
Gongsun Hong, 170
Gongsun Long, 308nn153, 154; 318n315
Gongsun Longzi, “Chapter on the White
Horse (Baima lun),” 308n153,
318n315
Gongsun Qing, 4
Gongsun Zan, 173
Gongyang/Gongyang zhuan, 149,
307n151
See also Spring and Autumn Annals
Grand Creator, 256
Grand One, 262
Grand Terminus, 8, 37, 157, 262
Grand Void, 45, 256, 291
See also void/voidness
Great Awakened One, 143, 155
See also Buddha
Great Law, 12
Great Mass of Nature, 177, 315n278
Great Pervader, 273, 325n411
Great Sage, 140, 141, 168, 259
See also Buddha; Sage King
Great Way, 11, 25, 122, 167, 192
See also Way
Guang Hongmingji, xxii, 325nn410, 414
Guangjing, 38

Index
Guangwu, Emperor, 160, 163
Guan Ning, 160
Guanyou area, 296
See also Chang’an
Guanzhong, 10, 32, 193, 195
See also Shaanxi province
Guan Zhong, 58, 165
Guliang, 149
See also Spring and Autumn Annals
Gun, 120, 242, 257, 310n189
Guo Changzi, 217–218
Guo Jingchen, 9
Guo Pu, 148
Guo Wen, 133
Guo Wenju, 148
Gusou, 61

H

Handan, 129, 166, 167
Han dynasty, xix, xx, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 11, 16,
26, 29, 34, 51, 58, 102, 133, 134,
147, 163, 164, 165, 175, 178, 179,
196, 198, 259, 290, 293, 294, 295,
296, 299n2, 303n77, 307n149,
324n400
See also Former Han dynasty; Later
Han dynasty
Han Fei, 64, 243
Han Feizi, 305n116, 314n258
Hangu Pass, 21, 31
Han River, 130
Hao River, 118, 216, 217, 318n316
Heaven, 7, 8, 12, 14, 17, 19, 22, 25, 28, 29,
33, 42, 50, 51, 67, 68, 70, 72, 73, 74,
75, 76, 80, 84, 85, 94, 98, 115, 118,
138, 146, 152, 157, 177, 199, 207,
218, 224, 231, 237, 241, 242, 246,
251, 252, 253, 254, 255, 262, 264,
269, 271, 273, 276, 290, 292, 292,
300n23, 311n211, 313n234, 316n287,
318n318, 319n323, 324n393

correlate(s) of, 67, 70, 71, 72, 74, 75, 76
Gate of, 51, 70
Lord of, 11, 12, 259, 292
law/mandate/will of, 42, 60, 87, 192,
193, 269, 274, 275, 278, 323n381
movement(s) of, 166, 172
rebirth in, 25, 237, 238
saciﬁce(s) to, 71, 72, 73, 292
son of, 34, 120, 175
See also Heaven and Earth; heaven(s);
Way of Heaven
Heaven and Earth, 6, 22, 37, 49, 73, 79,
89, 92, 97, 99, 105, 136, 157, 161,
167, 173, 199, 206, 207, 211, 218,
219, 222, 267, 268, 269, 270, 271,
280, 282, 286, 300n18, 305n112,
317n303, 321n359, 324n399
heaven(s), 156, 251
Juntian (Melody Heaven), 66
nine, 66, 258, 268
Paranirmitavaśavartin, 26
Trāyastriṃśa, 285
Tuṣita, 62, 276
twenty-eight:
eighteen, of the realm of form,
322n375
four, of the formless realm, 322n375
six, of the realm of desire, 274, 281,
284, 292, 322n375
heavenly, 8, 36, 241, 249, 262, 271, 274,
275, 276, 278, 279, 283, 311n203
beings, 29, 32, 91, 98, 107, 109, 113,
129, 133, 137, 219, 221, 225, 238,
240, 246, 280, 283, 287, 311n203
bodies, 199, 218
drum, 4, 27
net, 36, 244
ofﬁce, 8, 271, 272
palace, 279, 284, 297
Heavenly Master, 5, 9, 10, 23
See also Zhang Ling

351

Index
Hebo, 288, 306n134, 326n429
He Chengtian, 132, 136
He Chong, 133, 175, 193, 195, 198, 199,
200, 202, 317n304
Hedong, 149
He Jiong, 103–104
hell(s), 7, 12, 64, 92, 238, 239, 240, 246,
258
Avīci, 37, 47, 62
eighteen, 258, 277
of intense heat, 65
of pincers, 13
of sharp-pointed swords, 65
Henan province, 135, 177
Deng and Fan areas, 123
Heng, 5
See also Zhang Ling
Hengyang, 132
heretical, 79, 102, 112, 119, 289
masters, six, 251
schools, nine, 285
heretic(s), 38, 87, 93, 105, 123
He River, 322n380
He Shangzhi, 131, 137
heterodox/heterodoxy, 10, 81, 112, 113,
175
schools, ninety-six, 147
hexagram(s), 103
qian and kun, 37
sixty-four, 109
See also Book of Changes
He Yang, 108–109
He Zhun, 133
Highest Sage. See Buddha
Hinayana, 183, 187
Hongmingji, xxi, 303n66
See also Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism
Houji, 66, 67, 70, 72,73, 74, 75, 76, 292
Hu, 33
Huai River, 114, 267

352

Huan, Duke, 303n63
Huan, Emperor, 295
Huan, King, 271, 306n124, 325n409
Huan, Lord, 58, 59, 288
Huandou, 242
Huang Bosi, 319n329
Huanglan, 265
Huangluozi jing (Sutra on Huangluo),
170, 325n407
Huangshu, 299n5
Huang Xian, 164
Huan Qian, 200, 201
Huan Wen, 325n409
Huan Xuan, 166–167, 175, 199–200,
201–202, 209, 214–216, 217–218,
222–223, 224, 225, 226, 227, 228,
230, 318n321, 319n325
Hu Hai, 16
Hui, 309n170
Huiguan, 187, 189, 192
Huilin, 132, 136
Huishi/Huizi, 309n180, 318n316
Huiwen, King, 305n107
Huiyan, 147, 148, 191, 217, 218, 222
Huiyi, 180, 183, 184–185, 186, 187, 188,
191, 192
Huiyuan, xx, xxi, 85, 134, 166, 167–168
175, 227, 228, 307n140, 317n305
Huiyue, 81
Huns, 22, 135
hunters/hunting, 5, 179, 304n97
Hymn for the Hall of Happy Wise People
(Lexiantang song), 178

I

icchantika(s), 84, 117, 125, 129
immortality, of the spirit, 81, 82, 84, 89,
97, 103, 111, 116, 117, 120, 121,
126, 127, 129
immortals, 261
abode/realm of, 6, 34, 176

Index
Imperial Response to His Subjects: The
Examination of the Discourse on the
Extinction of the Spirit, 79–80
responses to, 80–130
India/Indian, xx, 38, 44, 106, 120, 148,
202, 274, 294, 316n288
identiﬁed as Shendu/Tianzhu, 148
Inner Section of the Mysterious and
Sublime (Xuanmiao Neipan), 26
insect(s), 24, 32, 55, 60, 64, 69, 79, 123,
245, 257, 269, 306n133
cicada, 95, 120, 127, 310n190
See also animal(s)/beast(s)/creature(s)

J

Jambudvīpa, 117, 275
Jeta, Prince, 160
Ji, 41–48
See also Shen Ji
Ji An/Ji Miao, 153
Jian’an, 5, 193, 195
King of, 81, 97, 100
Jianchu Temple, 1, 148
Jiangnan area, 228
Jiangsu province, 5
Jiangzuo area, 149, 190
Jiang Chong, 299n2
Jiankang, 96, 129, 183, 227
Jiantuole, 293
Jian Wu, 290
Jiaozhou, 137, 218
Jie, King, 72, 74, 75, 80, 125, 135, 280,
287
Jie tribe, 135
Jie Yu, 22, 301n28
Jili, 15, 30
Jilu, 71, 118, 137
See also Zilu
Jin dynasty/state, xix, 26, 30, 50, 59, 99,
129, 136, 149, 164, 170, 173, 190,

193, 194, 195, 198, 288, 290, 293,
294, 295, 296, 314n264
See also Eastern Jin dynasty; Western
Jin dynasty
Jingdu sanmai jing, 321n357
Jing, Emperor, 16, 134
Jing, Lord, 11, 136, 297, 327n445
Jing, Marquis, 299n8
Jingnan area, 133
Jing River, 220, 228
Jingzhou, 148
Jingzhuzi (Jingxing Famen), 156, 190
Jinji, 149
See also Gan Bao
Jinqu Menxun, 135
Jinyangqiu, 149
See also Sun Sheng
Ji River, 267
Jizi (of Yanling), 66, 70, 74, 75

K

kalpa(s), 36, 96, 105, 123, 160, 169, 179,
200, 207, 209, 210, 211, 213, 219,
239, 244, 254, 258, 264, 274, 275,
281, 282, 290, 324n396
bhadrakalpa, 281
Kang, King, 134
Kang Falan, xxi
Kapilavastu, 274
karma/karmic, 11, 16, 36–37, 41, 101,
118–119, 120, 129, 144, 145, 150,
179, 219, 243–244, 250
See also causality/causation; reward
and retribution
King-Sire of the East (Dong wanggong),
268
Kongōji Temple, 320nn336, 348
Kongming, 163, 165
See also Zhuge Kongming/Liang
Kong Zhigui, 149, 154–158

353

Index
Kou Qianzhi, 299n1
Kṣemaṃkara-paripṛcchā (Pusa shingdi
jing), 244
Kuai state, 285, 326n424
Ku, Emperor, 76
Kukkutuṭārāma, 138
Kumārajīva, 20, 31, 162, 164, 190, 296
Kunaichō Library, 315n277

L

Lalitavistara (Puyao jing), 251
Lantai, 295
Lao, Lord, 8, 9
Laozi, 21–22, 24–25, 30, 31, 33, 38, 41,
79, 101, 117, 155, 156, 200, 218,
224, 288, 294
quoted, 20, 27, 118, 157
See also Dao de jing; Laozi/Laozi Dao
de jing
Laozi/Laozi Dao de jing, xx, xi, 199,
301nn33, 36; 302nn49, 52, 55;
307n146, 309n181, 311n211,
313nn240, 242; 314n260,
317nn298, 302; 319n326, 320n347,
322nn377, 379; 324n402,
326nn416, 417, 418
See also Dao de jing; Laozi
Later Han dynasty, 20, 23, 149, 160,
299n7
See also Former Han dynasty; Han
dynasty
Later Qin dynasty, 158
See also Qin dynasty
Later Zhao dynasty, 33
See also Zhao dynasty/state
Legalist school, 64
See also nine schools
Li, Elder/Sir, 21, 25
See also Laozi
Li, King, 314n258
Liang dynasty, xix, 1, 41, 79, 87, 311n207
354

Liang Xiao. See Boyou
Li Bing, 57, 58
Lidai sanbaoji, xxii
See also Fei Changfang
Lie Yixuan, 315n281
See also Nanqiao, King of
Lie Yu, 173
Lie Yun, 89–90
Liezi, 293, 324n398, 325n403
Li Hong, 26
Liji, 301nn35, 42; 302nn59, 60;
306nn119, 123; 307nn135, 136,
144; 308nn162, 163; 309n184,
310nn187, 196; 316nn283, 294;
317nn299, 306; 318n317, 320n335,
326nn435, 437, 441
See also Book of Rites
Li Lao, 38, 155
See also Laozi
Li Lou, 130
Li Miao, 137, 139–140, 143–144
Lin brothers, 133
Linchuan, King of, 80
Ling. See Wen, Lord
Lingzhengji, 325n404
Liu Bei, 165
Liu Cheng, 90
Liu Jun. See Liu Shanming
Liu Qia, 109–110
Liu Shang, 11
Liu Shanming, 168, 169–170, 171–172,
173–174
Liu-Song dynasty, 7
See also Song dynasty
Liu Xiang, 149, 295
Liu Xie, 13, 301
Liu Yixuan. See Nanqiao, King of
Li Zhu, 27
Longmen, 171
Lord of Heaven, 11, 12, 259, 292
Lord of the Way, 8

Index
Lotus Sutra, 17, 123, 138
Lü, Empress Dowager, 257
Luan Da, 11
Lu Ao, 128
Lu Cheng, 170
Lu Chui, 115
Lu Fu, 57, 304n99
Lu Gao, 85–86
Lü Jiang. See Lü Shang
Luli, 314n251
See also four bright men
Lu Lian, 124–125
Luo River, 3, 294
Luoyang, 295
Kaiyang Gate, 295
Lu Qi, 51
Lu Ren, 115
Lü Shang, 51, 170, 171, 304n90
See also Taigong Wang
Lu state, 59, 139, 172, 232
Lu Song, 9, 26
Lu Xiujing, 6, 9, 10–11
Lu Xu, 87

M

Ma Fan, 224
Magadha, 138
magic, 271
formula, 6
worm, 299n2
Mahābhijñājñānābhibhū, 139, 274, 275,
283
Mahāparinirvāṇa-sūtra, 26
Mahāprajñāpāramitā-sūtra, 26
Mahāsāṃghika-vinaya (Mohe sengqi lü),
185
Mahayana, 16, 31, 155, 157
scriptures/sutras, 187, 253, 283
Maitreya, 128, 138, 140, 263, 277, 283
Māṇava, 38, 139, 311n215

Mañjuśrī, 277, 283
Ma Ron, 21
Ma Yuanhe, 112–113
medicine, 14, 25, 85, 181, 244, 270
meditation, 14, 19, 36, 105, 110, 112,
182, 229, 250, 251, 286
couch/room/seat, 185, 190, 284
eight kinds of, 101, 106, 126, 129,
283, 287
four-stage/four stages of, 24, 278
nine kinds of, 283
seven kinds of, 129
Mencius, 21, 72–73, 79, 97, 115, 192,
306n134
Meng River, 173, 276
Mengzi, 150, 312n228
merit(s)/meritorious, 5, 8, 10, 23, 25, 36,
45, 62, 64, 88, 136, 141, 147, 159,
163, 164, 167, 169, 172, 178, 190,
206, 229, 231, 236, 241, 243, 245,
246, 247, 251, 252, 276, 279, 280,
281, 284, 287, 288, 297, 327n437
Miaofa lianhua jing, 393nn69, 71;
310n194, 311n214, 312n216,
314n263
Middle Way, 110
See also nondual/nonduality
Minchi, 135
See also Henan province
Ming, Emperor, 20, 23, 147, 149, 177,
178, 193, 295, 296
Ming dynasty, 315n277
Ming Shaobin, 117–119
Minyue region, 3
mirror, 73, 173, 281, 286, 288, 292,
327n447
Mi Zixia, 65
Mo Di, 64, 90
Mohism/Mohist(s), 64, 140, 141, 143,
305n114
See also nine schools

355

Index
Moling county, 10
Moonlight Boy (Candraprabha), 177
Mount Chu, 314n258
Mount Heng, 267, 324n400
Mount Hua, 12, 267
Mount Huo, 267, 324n400
Mount Iron Surroundings (Cakravāḍa)
Mount Ji, 164, 166
Mount Jing, 167, 215
Mount Khadiraka, 284
Mount Langfeng, 176
Mount Lu, 166, 217, 227, 228
Mount Panchi, 293
Mount Ruoye, 164
Mount Song, 196, 267
Mount Sumeru, 264, 275, 276, 280,
324n394
Mount Tai, 7, 196, 267, 268, 271
Mount Taixing, 296
Mount Xuanque, 267, 268
Mount Yan, 3
Mount Yanzi, 173
Mount Yuntai, 5
See also Jiangsu province
Mount Zhongnan, 164
Mozi, 115
Mu, Duke of, 128
Mu, King, 293, 321n359
Mu. Lord, 66, 68, 69, 297, 327n443
music/musical, 8, 109, 114, 116, 118, 119,
124, 192, 255, 259, 261, 130n123,
316n294
compositions:
Shao, 261, 323n387
Xianchi, 255
of Juntian, 66, 68, 69

N

Nairañjanā River, 130
Nanqiao, King of, 178, 315n281

356

Nanyang, 177
See also Henan province
Nature, 62, 210, 211, 212, 256, 267, 268
law of, 219, 222
See also Great Mass of Nature
Nine August Ones/Nine Augusts, 22,
271, 301n30
Nine Murks, 5
nine schools, 141, 146, 225, 285
nirvana, 14, 23, 27, 96, 140, 223, 227, 246,
251, 288
of the Buddha/Tathāgata, 140, 251, 282
equated with death, 14, 27, 28, 301n32
as wuwei, 29, 227, 251, 260
Nirvana Sutra, 28, 123, 187, 243, 246, 251
Nobility of Heaven, 97, 308n152
Nominalist school, 64
See also nine schools
nonarising, 20, 176, 177, 187, 251, 254,
261, 278, 282, 288
non-Buddhist(s), xx, 98, 109, 124, 289
books/scriptures/text(s), xxi, 30, 82,
112, 127
teaching(s), 17, 24, 43, 84, 85, 98, 102,
115, 117, 127, 139, 225, 226, 228,
279, 319n324
schools, ninety-six, 112, 262
nondual/nonduality, 23, 30, 59, 85, 110,
124, 254
nonexistence, 16, 76, 79, 83, 101, 113,
237, 251, 260, 282, 288
See also existence
non-self, 157, 248, 249, 313n240,
325n412
Northern Sea, 129, 289, 315n274
Northern Song dynasty, 319n329
See also Song dynasty/state
Northern Wei dynasty, xx, 299n1
See also Wei dynasty
North Temple, 148

Index
numinous, 4, 26, 30, 65, 254, 256, 258,
262, 281
being(s), 55, 71, 129, 255, 265, 268,
271, 292
transcendent, 9, 11

O

One, the, 14, 23
One Vehicle, 24, 32, 84, 101, 155
See also vehicle(s)

P

Pao Sheng, 312n219
Pāpīyas, 284, 287
pāramitās, 250, 278, 281
dāna-, 250, 299n6
six, 16, 128, 232, 250, 252, 287
Pengsheng, 59, 60, 102, 116, 120, 297,
305n111, 310n189, 327n444
Penzu, 38, 303n74
Perfect One. See Buddha
Pi Chen, 190, 316n292
Ping, Emperor, 303n77
power(s), 138, 148, 161, 172, 250, 275,
278, 285, 287
supernatural, 14, 22, 25, 38, 280, 284,
296
six, 278
ten, 36
three, 113, 121
Praise Odes of Lu, “Section on Pasture
(Jiong),” 260
See also Book of Odes
prajñā, 15, 121, 250, 286
See also wisdom
pratyekabuddhas, 260, 282
precepts, 18, 19, 26, 107, 123, 152, 155,
177, 184, 185, 186, 187, 189, 198,
213, 225, 227, 229, 232, 235, 237,
238, 250, 252, 255, 264, 284, 286,
292, 308n165

ﬁve, 134, 150, 196, 197, 235, 236,
258, 287
ten, 238, 244
two hundred and ﬁfty, 185, 186
province(s), 51, 158, 179
Puban of Hedong, 149
Puqian. See four polar regions
Pure Awakened One. See Buddha
Pure Land, 91, 284
Purple Way, 7, 11
Pusa zhengzhai jing/Pusa zhaifa, 320n340
Puyao jing, 319nn330, 332

Q

Qi, 132
Qiang tribe, 135, 294
Qi dynasty/state, 16, 22, 58, 60, 102,
138, 149, 232, 242, 288, 301n29,
305n111, 323n387, 327n444
King/Lord of, 30, 102
Qili Ji, 314n251
See also four bright men
Qin dynasty/state, 4, 11, 16, 22, 153,
165, 243, 295, 296, 314n251,
318n319
See also Later Qin dynasty
Qingzhou, 168
Qin Jing, 295
Qiu Zhongfu, 130
Qi Xie, 265, 324n397
Qiyuan Temple, 182, 184, 185, 190, 191
Qiwulun, 314n262
Queen Mother of the West (Xi wangmu),
268
Que Gongze, 261

R

Rāmadatta, King, 33
Ran Boniu, 242
Rāṣṭrapāla, 261, 271

357

Index
realm(s) of existence:
ﬁve, 27, 123, 126,128, 246, 249, 282,
283, 284, 297
six, 24, 92, 126
three, 20, 25, 33–34, 101, 146, 156,
238, 246, 249, 252, 256, 273, 283,
289
three lowest, 238, 256, 276, 281, 283
See also existence(s)
rebirth, 13, 14, 251
See also birth and death; transmigration
receptivity, 37, 120, 148, 171, 179, 293,
296, 297
Records of Minor Conquest (Lingzheng ji),
268
Red Eyebrows, 16, 300n15
Red Writing (Chizhang), 9, 12, 13, 33
See also talisman(s)
Renwang huguo boreboluomiduo jing,
323n384
reward and retribution, xxi, 119, 120,
122, 124, 129, 136, 144, 145, 178,
179, 204, 207, 213, 238, 240, 242,
243, 244, 246, 247, 249, 251, 255
See also causality/causation; karma/
karmic
rite(s)/ritual(s), 9–10, 17, 18, 48, 269
Daoist, xxi
canon/scripture of, 93, 104
Confucian, 62
of ﬁlial offering, 80
funeral, 113
instruments and images, 140, 142
Mud and Ash Fête, xxi, 9
Yellow Register Fête, 8
See also Book of Rites; Rites of Zhou
Rites of Zhou (Zhouli), 116
Rong tribe, 294, 314n264
Ruo, 289
Ruo River, 123
Ruoshi, 129

358

Ruyi, 257

S

Sadāprarudita, 4, 80, 275, 284
Sage, 33, 35, 38, 102, 120, 140, 142,
147, 186, 232, 287
See also Buddha; Great Sage; Śākyamuni
Sage King, 285, 311n211, 318n318
See also Buddha; four that are great
Śakra-devānām-indra, 283
Śākyamuni, 18, 19, 21, 27, 29, 33, 79,
119, 134, 137, 139, 182, 205, 207,
209, 211, 213, 223, 232, 274, 275,
278, 283
and Confucius, 24, 81, 92, 107, 117,
140, 178
and Laozi/Li Lao, 38, 117, 156
passing of, 27, 31, 208
teaching of, 24, 33, 35, 38, 42, 81, 92,
101, 115, 117, 132, 135, 137, 150,
295
See also Buddha; Sage
śāla trees, twin, 21, 27
Saṃghadeva, 187
Sanfu area, 32
Saṅkha, 138
Sanmiao, chief of, 242
See also four criminals
Sanskrit, 23, 325n414
Śāriputra, 232
school(s), 26, 38, 64, 102, 15, 117, 121,
147, 187, 262
Buddhist/of Śākyamuni, 137, 157, 220
Confucian/of Confucius, 107, 137
Daoist, xxi, 9, 157, 254
heterodox/non-Buddhist, ninety-six,
112, 147, 262
nine, 141, 146, 225, 285
six, of philosophy, 64

Index
School of Changes, 157
See also Daoism/Daoist teaching; nine
schools
scripture(s), 4, 8, 22, 24, 25, 26, 38, 66,
73, 86, 87, 93, 108, 109, 112, 113,
114, 120, 121, 126, 129, 130, 136,
140, 146, 187, 196, 229, 235, 247,
255, 270, 295, 302n43, 320n340,
324n395
Buddhist, xix, xxi, 4, 13, 15, 20, 24,
30, 31, 32, 38, 93, 101, 103, 106,
107, 109, 111, 118, 127, 128, 132,
138, 139, 144, 145, 149, 158, 160,
164, 169, 170, 187, 191, 218, 227,
229, 230, 236, 254, 255, 290, 291,
295, 296, 297, 310n194, 324n394
twelve kinds of, 235
Chinese, 121, 321n357
Daoist, 4, 8, 101
classical, 93, 95
foreign, 265
non-Buddhist, 30
See also sutra(s)
Scripture on the Clean and Pure Dharma
Practice (Qingjing faxing jing), 38,
303n70
Secretariat Fan, 65, 74, 95, 111, 306n130,
308n164
See also Fan Zhen/Zizhen
Seeking Fame (Qiuming), 123, 310n194
Senghui. 10, 20
Senglüe, 162, 164, 165, 166
Sengqian, 162, 163, 164, 314n240
Sengshun, 27
Sengyan, 168–169, 170–171, 172–173
Sengyou, xix–xx, xxii, 1, 289, 315n277,
320n336
sense objects, six, 313n238
sense organs, six, 57, 239–240, 263, 264
See also six desires

senses, 57, 199, 201, 317n305
seven apertures, 56, 58, 69, 305n105
Seven Classics, 144, 145
See also Five Classics; Six Classics
seven symptoms, 259, 323n384
seven treasures, 177, 264, 324n396
sexual behavior/practices/relations, 6, 10,
39, 236, 237
Shaanxi province, 10, 32
Yangpeng area, 38
Shan Bao, 27
Shan county, 164
Shandong province, 11, 149
Shang dynasty, 75, 105, 138, 280, 287,
291
See also Yin dynasty
Shangjun, 152
Shangqing (Supreme Purity) school, 26
Shangshu, 300n24, 307n148, 320n343,
327n436
See also Book of History
Shang Yang, 22
Shanhai jing, 311n204, 325n408
See also Book of Mountains and Seas
Shaohao Jintian, Emperor, 104
Shaozi. See Zhong Rong
She, Duke of, 316n297
Shen Gun, 99–100
Shen Hong, 128–129
Shen Ji, 41, 97–98
See also Ji
Shenman jing (Śrīmālādevīsiṃhanādasūtra), 157
Shen Nong, 23, 293, 301n30
See also Three Augusts
Shentu Jia, 233
Shi, 263, 323n391
Shi Baolin, 281
Shi family, 33
Shi Hu, 33, 135, 149

359

Index
Shiji, 300n12, 302n44, 304nn90, 94, 95,
99, 102; 305nn103, 105, 107, 114,
115; 306n117, 311n210, 312n232,
313n236, 314n250, 315n272,
320nn341, 344; 323n382,
327nn443, 444, 446
Shijing, 300n23, 302nn57, 58; 304n101,
309nn178, 185; 326n427, 327n434
See also Book of Odes
Shi Le, 33, 149
Shi Yu, 80
Shizu. See Wu, Emperor
Shu, 163
Shudu. See Huang Xian
Shujing, 304n100, 309nn172, 177;
316n284
See also Book of History
Shun, Emperor, 6, 18, 35, 58, 59, 60, 61,
76, 87, 109, 152, 261, 294,
305n104, 318n319, 323n381
See also Five Thearchs; Yao and Shun
Shuxiang, 314n264, 320n342
Shuyu. See Fu
Sichuan province, Ba Shu area, Min
region, 11
Si Dai, 59
Sima Jiong, 129–130
Sima Yun, 98–99
Sishierzhang jing, 322n368
Sivi, King, 171
six barbarian tribes/groups of barbarians,
32, 204, 206
Six Classics, 132
See also Five Classics; Seven Classics
six coverings, 111, 284, 285, 308n165
six desires/six feelings, 236, 239, 279
See also sense organs, six
six dusts, 122,146
six elemental energies, 121, 310n191
six extreme evils, 256, 323n381
six kinds of dreams, 52, 304n96

360

six kinds of hindrances, 155, 313n238
six relations, 166, 219, 222
Sizi Palace, 299n2
snake(s), 60, 238, 262, 268, 270
python(s), 5, 9. 268, 270
vipers, 238
See also animal(s)/beast(s)/creature(s)
Song dynasty/state, 21, 131, 138, 147,
297, 301n27, 315nn277, 281
See also Liu-Song dynasty; Northern
Song dynasty
sorcerers/sorcery, 146, 148
South Mountain. See Mount Heng
South Sea, 315n274
spirit(s), 5, 7, 8, 12, 13, 14, 24, 27, 35,
41, 43, 48, 49–50, 51–52, 53,
55–61, 65–76, 83–86, 88, 90, 94,
96, 100, 104, 108, 110, 111, 114,
115, 118, 120, 124, 127, 129, 132,
134, 146, 148, 153, 183, 186, 191,
197, 201, 207, 213, 215, 216, 236,
241, 252, 254–258, 261, 262,
268–269, 272, 274, 275, 279, 289,
291, 292, 304n98, 305n110,
308n158, 310n200, 327n444
ancestral/of ancestors, 12, 67, 73, 76,
119, 124, 125, 127, 128
corpus, 5, 299n4
disembodied, 12, 17, 48, 60, 71, 113,
119
divine/holy/virtuous, 109, 179, 271
evil/mischievous/vicious, 6, 8, 9, 12,
13, 26, 98, 257, 268, 270, 272, 275,
299n4
exquisite, 43, 44, 123
immortality/imperishability/permanence
of, 41, 43, 79, 81, 82, 84, 89, 92, 97,
102, 111, 117, 120, 121, 126, 127,
129, 256
characteristics/essence/origin/nature
of, 41, 87, 90, 119, 124

Index
extinction/extinguishment/perishing
of, xvii, xix, xxi, 41, 43–44, 48, 49,
52, 59, 61, 65–66, 67, 68–69, 70,
74, 75, 76, 84, 85, 89, 95, 102, 104,
106, 110, 113, 114, 115, 116, 118,
119, 123, 125, 126, 127
tablet, 104, 310n187
transmigration of, xix, 249, 289, 290,
291, 297
See also Way of the Spirit/Way of
Spiritual Beings
spiritual, 3, 10, 12, 13, 31, 101, 118, 225,
261, 275, 278, 279, 287, 291, 297,
consciousness/energy/intelligence, 6,
41, 43, 44, 45, 46, 114, 116, 118, 125
darkness, 13, 97, 128
ofﬁcers, 8, 10, 12
soldier(s), 3, 8, 10, 12
spiritual being(s), 9, 12, 26, 60, 116, 118,
119, 120, 121, 124, 146, 151, 204,
238, 248, 260, 291, 308n157
Spring and Autumn Annals (Chunqiu
jing), 97, 149
See also Five Classics
Spring and Autumn era, 287, 295
śramaṇas, xx, 19, 30–32, 35, 58, 61, 63,
133, 147, 166, 175, 180–182, 184,
185, 188, 189, 200, 201, 203, 205,
206, 208–210, 212, 215, 218–220,
222–224, 226, 227–232, 295
and bowing to the king, 175, 193–194,
196, 198–205, 207–210, 215, 217,
221–226
See also Buddhist(s), clergy/monk(s)
Śrīmitra, 190
Sudāna, Prince, 299n6
Śuddhodana, King, 233
Sui dynasty, 324n400
Sun Bin, 57, 304n99
Sun Chuo, 133
Sun En, 3, 6, 7, 9, 26

Sun Jian, 306n124
Sun Quan, 147, 295
Sun Sheng, 149
Sunshine, 175, 255–266
Sun Yi, 105–106
Sunzi, 11, 237
Supreme One. See Buddha
Supreme Thearch, 67, 71, 76, 178, 292
See also Celestial Thearch/Heavenly
Thearch; Five Thearchs
sutra(s), 29, 30, 43, 44, 45, 47, 150, 177,
184, 185, 239, 240, 246, 247, 248,
249, 251, 252, 253, 288, 303n70,
321nn352, 353, 358, 361; 326n428
See also scripture(s)
Sutra of the Twelve Gates (Shierman
jing), 240, 244, 320nn336, 348
Sutra on the Complete Accomplishment
of the Light Samādhi (Chengju
guangming dingyi jing), 245, 246
Sutra on the Formal Puriﬁcation (Zhengzhai jing), 242
Sutra on the Seven Buddhas (Qi fo jing),
147
Sutra on the Virtue of a Wise Person
(Xianshede jing), 245
Suzu. See Ming, Emperor
sword(s), 29, 51, 52, 65, 74, 75, 151,
258, 264, 272, 276, 286, 306n131,
312n232
Ganjiang, 286
Kunwu, 8
that can cut jade (kunyu), 265, 324n398

T

Taibo, 15, 30
Taigong Wang/Lü Shang, 51, 170
See also Lü Jiang
Taiping yulan, 304n89, 306n124
Taishi era, 16

361

Index
Taishō canon/Taishō shinshū daizōkyō,
xxii, 311n206, 320n340, 321n355,
322n367
Taiwu, 297, 327n445
Taiyuan. See four polar regions
Taiyuan era, 325n409
Taizi ruiying benqi jing, xxii, 123, 213,
246, 250, 301n38, 303nn72, 79;
310nn192, 197; 311n215, 321nn353,
357, 361; 322nn366, 371
Taizi Xudana jing, 299n6
talisman(s), 8–9, 12, 23, 25, 146, 148
huangshen and yuezhang, 13, 299n9
Tang dynasty, 299n1
Tangfu village, 165
Tang, King, 23, 59, 65, 72, 74, 75, 280,
283, 287, 291, 305n115, 318n319
See also Three Augusts
Tang/Tang Yao, 75, 87, 114, 166
See also Tao Tang; Yao/Yao, Emperor
Tanwuchen, 133
Tao Tang, 194, 231, 295
See also Tang/Tang Yao; Yao/Yao,
Emperor
Tathāgata, 36, 64, 85, 124, 138, 140, 177,
178, 184, 221, 259–260, 281–283,
288, 312n220
See also Buddha
ten directions, 82, 176, 235, 273, 276,
279, 283
ten evil acts, 238
ten wholesome acts, 107, 134, 150,
237–238, 250, 251, 258
See also precepts, ten
Three Augusts, 18, 22, 23, 32, 37, 118,
121, 138, 140, 143, 145, 178, 268,
283, 294
See also Tang, King; Wu, King; Yu,
King
Three Communicating Agencies, 271,
283, 326n419

362

threefold refuge, 235
three great elements (Heaven, Earth, and
the Way), 199, 207, 218
Three Kings/three sovereigns, 22, 120,
192, 291, 294, 316n294
three most revered people (ruler, father,
and teacher), 204, 206, 215, 216, 218
Three Ofﬁces, 8, 12
three periods of existence, xix, xxi, 25,
33–34, 80, 81, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88,
100, 103, 113, 118, 120, 122, 124,
125, 126, 127, 132, 139, 140, 142,
144, 145, 147, 178, 179, 207, 244,
253, 264, 290, 291, 292, 297
three revered ones. See Three Treasures
three sages, 79, 109, 117, 119, 122
See also Confucius; Laozi; Śākyamuni
three teachings, 253
See also Buddhism; Confucianism;
Daoism
three transcendental knowledges, 96, 184,
259
Three Treasures, xix, 3, 124, 148, 150,
160, 221, 228, 231, 236
Tianbo Temple, 232
Tian Chou. See Zitai
Tianzhu. See India
titles (Buddhist/Confucianist/Doaist):
Attendant of Scriptures, 10
Bandit of Ants, 10
Bandit of Grain, 10
Capped Female Ofﬁcials, 10
Concubine, 11
Controller of Wine, 10
Daoist Priest, 10
Deﬁcient of the Way, 10
Dharma Master, 10
Dharma Master of the Three Grottoes,
10
Dharma Preacher, 10
Family of the Grain, 10

Index
Father of the Way, 10
General of Five Proﬁts, 11
Heavenly Master, 10
Heir Master, 10
King of the Transcendent Lord, 10
Learned Elder(s), 10, 11
Libationer, 10
Lord of Earth, 11
Lord of Heaven, 11
Man of the Way, 10
Master of the Three Daughters, 10
Mother of the Way, 10
People of the Grain, 10
People of the Way, 10, 11
Spiritual Lord, 10
Succeeding Master, 10
Supervisor of Merit, 10
Teacher of Spiritual Beings, 11
True Lord’s Seed People, 10
Vassal, 11
Woman of the Way, 10
Tiying, 89, 302n232
transmigration, 27, 36, 141, 146, 219, 240,
246, 248, 256, 264, 289, 292, 297
See also birth and death; rebirth
Tungusic tribe, 135
two polarities, 105, 157, 199, 218, 262,
267, 269, 282
See also Heaven and Earth

U

udāna, 129, 265
Ultimate Source (Benyuan), 273

V

Vaiśālī, 164
Vaiśeṣika (Weishi), 106
Vaiśravaṇa, 272
vajra, 272, 278
Vajragarbha, 276, 281

vapor(s), 10, 133, 248, 257, 267, 268, 269
foul/poisonous/of vicious sprits, 268,
270, 272
life-giving, 206
primordial, 267, 324n399
yin-yang, xxi, 218, 256
Vasudhāra, 284
vehicle(s), 155, 260
three, 124, 219, 260, 283
two, 159, 282
See also One Vehicle
Vimalakīrti, 44, 85, 157, 164, 276
Vimalakīrtinirdeśa-sūtra, 17, 138, 144,
248, 251
Vimukticandra, 276, 281
Vinaya, xix, 185, 229
text(s), 150, 184, 185
Vipaśyin, 147
void/voidness, 9, 25, 155, 325n411
See also Grand Void
Vulture Peak (Gṛdhrakuṭa), 109, 130,
138, 160

W

waiting by a stump, metaphor of, 189
Wang Bin, 87
Wang Dao, 133
Wang Fu, 22
Wang Gai, 255
Wang Gong, 133
Wang Gongqi, 9
Wang Hong, 182, 189, 192
Wang Jian, 87, 88–89
Wang Jing, 113–115
Wang Jun, 51
Wang Lin, 103
Wang Lingqi, 10, 11
Wang Mang, 300n15
Wang Mao, 90–91
Wang Meng, 133

363

Index
Wang Mi, 138, 201, 202–203, 205–209,
211–214, 216–217
Wang Qi, 100
Wang Sengru, 94
Wang Sengshu, 116–117
Wang Shu, 258
Wang Tai, 95
Wang Tanzhi, 133
Wangxiang, 138, 311n212
Wang Xiang, 170, 171
Wang Yi, 57, 58, 94–95
Wang Ying, 82
Wang Yuan, 133
Wang Yun, 104–105
Wang Zhenguo, 126
Wang Zhi, 83
Wang Zhongxin, 96–97
Wang Zhou, 169
Warring States period, 16, 21, 137, 294,
295, 301n27, 308n154, 318n315
Water Transcendents, 3, 7
See also Sun En
Way, xix, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10–11, 13, 14, 15,
22–25, 35, 38–39, 42, 80, 87, 88,
92, 104, 109, 112, 115, 117, 125,
134, 137, 141, 157, 158, 162, 164,
165, 167, 168, 172, 176, 177, 182,
189, 199, 202, 204, 207, 208, 209,
211–213, 216, 218, 224, 226, 228,
240, 250–254, 261–263, 267–272,
274, 279, 280, 292, 294, 311nn208,
211
correct/right/true, 8, 33, 116, 167, 271
of ﬁlial piety, 17, 86, 87, 93, 95, 100
fundamental, 219, 222
highest, 23, 24, 109, 113, 118, 146, 212
profound/subtle, 118, 103
ultimate, 104, 105, 112, 166, 177, 213,
214, 253, 255, 262
Buddhist/of the Buddha/Śākyamuni/
Tathāgata, 17, 19, 20, 21, 28, 29, 33,

364

35–37, 42, 85, 90, 96, 103, 105,
107, 108, 110, 115, 117, 120, 128,
139, 143, 144, 157, 159, 160, 164,
166, 169, 175, 177–179, 181, 184,
185, 189, 194, 195, 208, 209, 213,
215, 218–223, 225, 228, 230–232,
236, 240, 246, 248, 252, 255,
259–261, 265, 266, 275, 280, 282,
283, 288, 289
See also Great Way
Way of Heaven, 6, 94, 106, 109, 122,
123, 307n147
Way of the Celestial Master, xxi
Way of the Divine Transcendents, 34, 254
Way of the Eastern Mountain, 268
Way of the Five Pecks of Grain, xxi, 3, 5,
8, 9, 10, 11, 25
Way of the Spirit/Spiritual Beings/Spiritual Intelligence, 7, 10, 19, 41, 48,
106, 118, 135, 194, 196, 207, 223,
227, 247, 255, 258, 267, 269
Wei dynasty/kingdom/period/state, 198,
201, 295, 318n319
See also Northern Wei dynasty
Wei Ke, 128, 191, 309n174, 316n293
Weimojie jing, 322nn364, 376, 378
Wei, Prince, 299n2
Wei River, 135, 220, 228
Wei Rui, 101
Wei Shidu, 261
Weimojie suoshuo jing, 303n80,
307nn138, 139; 311n213, 312n218,
313n240, 324nn394, 395, 396;
326n422
Wei Zhi, 171, 315n267
Wen, Duke, 128
Wen, Emperor:
of the Han dynasty, 51, 134, 178
of the Song dynasty, 131, 188
of the Sui dynasty, 324n400

Index
Wen, King, 59, 67, 70, 76, 314n258
of the Wei kingdom, 160
of the Zhou dynasty, 118, 180
Wen, Lord:
of Jin state, 288
of Wei state, 164
Wenxuan, King, 149, 312n227
West/Western region, 135, 137, 138
Western Jin dynasty, xx, 311n207
See also Eastern Jin dynasty; Jin
dynasty/state
wheel, golden, 96
See also Dharma, wheel
wheel-turning king, 138
White Horse Temple (Baimasi), 123
White Tiger Library (Baifuguan), 107
wisdom, 8, 14, 23, 24, 25, 38, 41, 57, 84,
96, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 110,
116, 140, 141, 150, 171, 173, 225,
250, 264, 266, 278, 280, 286, 289,
292, 294, 296, 308n158
axe of, 274, 277, 278
highest, 15, 120
seven factors of, 104, 283
sunlike, 112, 128
transcendental, 105, 155, 187, 260
See also prajñā
Wu (wife of Sun Jian), 306n124
Wu, Emperor, xx, 178, 193, 295, 318n319
of the Former Han dynasty/Han
dynasty, 4, 11, 153, 295, 299n2,
324n400
of the Liang dynasty, 41–42
of the Liu-Song dynasty, 7
of the Qi dynasty, 232
of the Song dynasty, 147, 315n281
Wu, King, 23, 72, 73, 74, 75, 114, 118,
120, 280, 283, 287, 291, 300n14,
314n258
See also Three Augusts

Wu area/region/Wu County, 3, 6, 10,
294, 148
Wu Ding, Emperor, 51, 295
Wugang, 202
Wu kingdom/state, 30, 50, 51, 66, 70,
147, 295, 304n326
Wuling, 164
Wulu Chongzong, 95, 307n149
See also Fan Zhen/Zizhen
wuwei (nonaction), 27, 32, 62, 283, 294,
319n326
as nirvana, 29, 227, 251, 260
Wuxing, 41
Wuzhong area, 30
Wuzi, 137

X

Xi, 242
See also Yangshe Xi
Xia dynasty, 72, 75, 80, 90, 105, 135,
138, 280, 287, 291, 294, 318n319
Xia Ge, 291
Xiahuanggong, 314n251
See also four bright men
Xiang, Prince, 154, 158
Xiang, Viscount, 173
Xiang Ji, 59, 59, 60
Xiangwang. See Wangxiang
Xiangyang, 178, 183
Xiang Yu. See Xiang Ji
Xianyuan tribe. See Huns
Xiao Ang, 92–93
Xiao Bing, 84
Xiao Chen, 48–49, 70, 86
Xiao Hong, 81
See also Linchuan, King of
Xiaojing, 59, 300n11, 302n62, 305n109,
306nn120, 125, 126; 309nn167,
168; 312n230
See also Canon of Filial Piety

365

Index
Xiao Mi, 93–94
Xiao Misu, 106–107
Xiao Mozhi, 131, 132,136
Xiaopin boreboluomi jing, 326n423
Xiao Wei. See Jian’an, King of
Xiao Yuanye, 81
Xiao Ziliang, 154
Xie Chuo, 101–102
Xie Fu, 133, 163, 164
Xie Guang, 193, 194–195
Xie Ju, 111–112
Xie Lingyun, 132
Xie Shang, 133
Xi Zaochi, 1176–178
Xie Zhong, 217
Xi He, 259
Xi Ke, 129
Xiuxing benqi jing, 301n39, 314n261,
321nn357, 261
Xuan, King, 48–49, 135, 180, 327n444
Xuanguang, xxi, 3
Xuanni, 41, 303n77
See also Confucius
Xuanyuan, 58, 104
See also Yellow Emperor
Xuanzhong ji, 325n407
Xu Fu, 4
Xu Gun. 88
Xu Mian, 84–85
Xunzi, 300n14
Xu You, 163, 164, 165, 166

Y

Yama, 64, 258, 271
Yan family, 308n158
Yangdu, 1
Yang Huo, 58, 59, 60
Yangshe, 242
Yangshe Xi, 320n342
See also Xi

366

Yan Guangi Ziling, 160, 163
Yang Xuanbao, 137
Yangzhou, 125
Yang Zhu, 90
Yangzi, 115
Yangzi River, 114, 130, 267, 294
Yan Hui, 242, 262
Yan Junping, 163, 313n246
Yanling, 66, 70, 74, 75
Yan region/state, 16, 115
Yan Shan, 127–128
Yan Yannian/Yan Yanzhi, 132, 253
Yan Yuan, 231
Yan Zhizhi, 110–111
Yanzi, 299n8
Yao/Yao, Emperor, 33, 35, 58, 61, 76,
104, 114, 152–153, 164, 165, 166,
179, 231, 265, 295, 300n24,
303n74, 313n235, 318n319,
319n328, 326n424
See also Fangxun; Five Thearchs;
Tang, Emperor; Tang/Tang Yao; Tao
Tang; Yao and Shun
Yao and Shun, 18, 23, 58, 75, 137,
179–180, 283, 295
See also Shun; Yao/Yao, Emperor
Yao Lüe, 149, 175
Yao Xian, 159
Yao Xing Zhilue/Ruler Yao, 158–159,
160–161, 162–163, 164
Ye, 135
Yellow Books (Huangshu),6, 9, 25, 299n5
Yellow Emperor, 58, 76, 104, 124, 138,
155, 156, 255, 318n319
See also Five Thearchs; Three
Augusts; Xuanyuan
Yellow River, 3, 23, 135, 163, 189, 267,
288
Yellow Turbans, 7, 210
Yi, Lord, 64

Index
Yijing, 300n20, 305nn110, 112, 113;
307nn143, 150; 308nn155, 156,
158; 309n166, 313n241, 315n273,
316n285, 317n310, 318n312,
320n334, 323nn388, 390; 327n433
See also Book of Changes
Yili (Ceremonies for Courtesy), 19
Yin dynasty/state, 51, 64, 72, 80, 90,
135, 181, 280, 287, 297, 300n14,
305n105, 318n319
See also Shang dynasty
yin and yang, 6, 10, 37, 39, 55, 267, 268,
325n403
vapor(s), xxi, 256
See also Daoism
Yin, Prince, 34, 278
Ying (city), 70, 263, 323n391
Ying, King, 16, 295, 304n86
Ying River, 166
Yin Ji, 133
Yin Jun, 6, 122
Yin Zhongwen, 215
Yi River, 294
Yi tribe, 9, 10, 294
Yixi era, 9
Yiyang, 200
Yi Yin, 64, 305n115
Yongjia, 131, 132
Yongping era, 179
Youruo/Youzi, 31
You Yu, 19, 116, 153
Yu, 51
Yu, Emperor/King, 16, 120, 183, 291,
294, 295, 318n319
See also Three Augusts
Yuan Ang, 83–84
Yuan dynasty, 315n277
Yuan, Emperor, 295, 307n149
Yuan Gui, 116
Yuan Rang, 34
Yu Bing, 193, 194–195, 199, 200, 202

Yu Chan, 85, 178
Yu Daosui, 133
Yue region, 51, 181
Yuezheng Zi Chun, 95
Yu Falan, 133, 148, 261, 312n225
Yu Heng, 215, 217
Yu Liang, Lord, 175
Yu Qianlou, 119–121
Yu Rang, 173
Yu Tanlong, 93
Yu Yong, 91–92
Yu/Yu Shun, Emperor, 75, 76, 87,
152–153
See also Shun, Emperor
Yu Yuangui, 133
Yuzhang, 92, 99, 104
Yuzhong, 15

Z

Zai Kai, 164
Zang Wen Zhong, 33, 294n86
Zeng Shen/Zengzi, 31, 64, 65, 80
Zengyi ahan jing, 302n51, 321n353
See also Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation of Buddhism
Zhan family, 135
Zhang Chang, 201, 317n308
Zhang family, 148
Zhang Fan, 125
Zhang Jia, 57, 58
Zhang Jiao, 9, 26
Zhang Liang, 58
Zhang Ling, 5–6, 9, 24, 25, 34
Zhang Lu, 3, 9, 10, 25
Zhang Mian, 122–124
Zhang Rong, 27, 156, 299n10
Zhang Xin’an, 179–180
Zhang Xuan, 133
Zhang Yi, 27
Zhang Yuanbo, 102

367

Index
Zhang Zi Lu, 7, 9, 10, 11
Zhao, King, 305n107
Zhao, Lord, 172
Zhao Ding, 57, 58
Zhao dynasty/state, 16, 173, 305n107,
308n153, 318n315
See also Later Zhao dynasty
Zhao Jianzi, 50, 65, 66, 68, 69, 70, 297,
327n443
Zhan Qin, 172
Zheng Daozi/Zheng Dun, 180–181
Zheng state, 49, 59, 60, 128, 233
Zheng Xuan, 21
Zhenzongjie (Admonitions on the Pillow), 269, 325n405
Zhi, 125
Zhibo, 37, 173
Zhi Daolin, 230, 319n325
Zhi Dun, xx, 261
Zhong ahan jing, 321n358
Zhongchu, 85
See also Yu Chan
Zhonghua, 58, 180
See also Shun, Emperor
Zhongjing mulu, xxii
Zhongni. See Confucius
Zhongrong, 270, 325n408
Zhongyong, 30, 119
Zhong You, 207
See also Zilu
Zhou, Duke of, 21, 66, 70, 71, 80, 98,
114, 115, 120, 138, 140, 145, 172,
178, 291–292
and Confucius, 20, 59, 111, 119, 142,
143, 145, 207, 210, 283, 288, 291
and Houji, 66–67, 70, 72
and King Wu, 114, 120, 291–292
Zhou, King, 72–73, 74, 75, 80, 135, 280,
287, 300n14, 305n105
Zhou Dan, 67, 72, 120
See also Zhou, Duke of

368

Zhou Dang, 163
Zhou dynasty, 21, 30, 41, 48, 72, 75, 90,
105, 118, 134, 135, 138, 180, 280,
287, 293, 300n14, 318n319,
327nn437, 444
Zhouguan, Zong Boshi section of Chunguan, 119
Zhouli, 119, 304n96, 309n173
See also Zhouguan
Zhou Yi, 133
Zhuangyan Temple, 80
Zhuang Zhou, 232
Zhuangzi, 21, 27, 34, 35, 38, 39, 66, 69,
70, 100, 118, 167, 192, 216, 217,
241, 265, 288, 309n180, 318n316
Zhuangzi, xx, xxi, 169, 170, 300n18, 21,
25; 301n31, 34, 40; 302nn56, 61;
303nn63, 65, 66, 67, 73, 75, 76;
304n97, 305n108, 306nn118, 133,
134; 309nn175, 180, 182; 310nn190,
191, 198; 311n205, 212; 312n219,
314n256, 315nn274, 278; 316n295,
317nn303, 307; 318n316, 319nn323,
324, 327; 320nn338, 339; 321nn359,
360; 322nn370, 372; 323nn380,
385, 386, 389, 391; 324nn393, 397;
325n411, 326nn420, 424, 429, 430;
327n442
Zhuanxu, 76
See also Five Thearchs
Zhu Daosheng, 187
See also Daosheng
Zhu Daoshuang, 267
Zhu Duo, 313n237
Zhu family, 148
Zhu Fahu, 133, 148, 261, 296
Zhu Faya, xxii
Zhuge Hui, 193, 195
Zhuge Kongming/Liang, 163, 165
See also Kongming
Zhuli. See four polar regions

Index
Zhulong, 129, 311n204
Zhu River, 109, 169
Zhu Shixing/Zixing, xx
Zhu Tuo, 153
Zhu Yun, 307n149
Zichan, 127, 233, 310n195
Zigao, 35
Zigong, 71, 318n329
Zilu, 67, 71–72, 137, 207
See also Jilu; Zhong You
Zi Ming, 9
Ziqi, 130, 319n323
Zitai, 173
Zixia, 38
Ziyou, 38, 319n323
Zizhou, 35

Zong state, 285, 326n424
Zong Bing, 132, 133, 148
Zong Shaowen. See Zong Bing
Zou region/state, 50, 139
Zun Zu, 171, 315n267
Zuochi. See Xi Zaochi
Zuozhuan, 30, 35, 116, 120, 135, 149,
179, 184, 299n8, 302nn48, 50;
303n64, 304nn85, 86, 87, 88;
305nn107, 111; 306n128, 307n151,
309n174, 310nn189, 200;
311nn201, 209; 312n231,
313nn233, 235; 314nn255, 264;
316nn286, 291, 293; 317n301,
320n342, 323n383, 324n401,
327nn444, 447

369

BDK English Tripiṭaka
(First Series)

Title

Abbreviations
Ch.: Chinese
Skt.: Sanskrit
Jp.: Japanese
Eng.: Published title

Ch. Chang ahan jing (長阿含經)
Skt. Dīrghāgama
Eng. The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses
(Volume I, 2015)
The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses
(Volume II, 2017)

Taishō No.

Ch. Zhong ahan jing (中阿含經)
Skt. Madhyamāgama
Eng. The Madhyama Āgama (Middle-length Discourses)
(Volume I, 2013)

1

26

Ch. Dasheng bensheng xindi guan jing (大乘本生心地觀經)

159

Ch. Zabao zang jing (雜寶藏經)
Eng. The Storehouse of Sundry Valuables (1994)

203

Ch. Xiaopin banruo boluomi jing (小品般若波羅蜜經)
Skt. Aṣṭasāhasrikā-prajñāpāramitā-sūtra

227

Ch. Fo suoxing zan (佛所行讃)
Skt. Buddhacarita
Eng. Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts (2009)

Ch. Faju piyu jing (法句譬喩經)
Eng. The Scriptural Text: Verses of the Doctrine, with Parables (1999)

371

192

211

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Jingang banruo boluomi jing (金剛般若波羅蜜經)
Skt. Vajracchedikā-prajñāpāramitā-sūtra

Taishō No.

Ch. Daluo jingang bukong zhenshi sanmoye jing
(大樂金剛不空眞實三麼耶經)
Skt. Adhyardhaśatikā-prajñāpāramitā-sutra
Eng. The Sutra of the Vow of Fulﬁlling the Great Perpetual
Enjoyment and Beneﬁting All Sentient Beings Without
Exception (in Esoteric Texts, 2015)

235

243

Ch. Renwang banruo boluomi jing (仁王般若波羅蜜經)
Skt. *Kāruṇikārājā-prajñāpāramitā-sutra

245

Ch. Miaofa lianhua jing (妙法蓮華經)
Skt. Saddharmapuṇḍarīka-sutra
Eng. The Lotus Sutra (Revised Second Edition, 2007)

262

Ch. Guan Puxian pusa xingfa jing (觀普賢菩薩行法經)
Eng. The Sutra Expounded by the Buddha on Practice of the Way
through Contemplation of the Bodhisattva All-embracing
Goodness (in Tiantai Lotus Texts, 2013)

277

Ch. Banruo boluomiduo xin jing (般若波羅蜜多心經)
Skt. Prajñāpāramitāhṛdaya-sutra

251

Ch. Wuliangyi jing (無量義經)
Eng. The Inﬁnite Meanings Sutra (in Tiantai Lotus Texts, 2013)

276

Ch. Dafangguang fo huayan jing (大方廣佛華嚴經)
Skt. Avataṃsaka-sutra

279

Ch. Shengman shizihou yisheng defang bianfang guang jing
(勝鬘師子吼一乘大方便方廣經)
Skt. Śrīmālādevīsiṃhanāda-sutra
Eng. The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of the Lion’s Roar (2004)

353

Ch. Guan wuliangshou fo jing (觀無量壽佛經)
Skt. *Amitāyurdhyāna-sutra
Eng. The Sutra on Contemplation of Amitāyus
(in The Three Pure Land Sutras, Revised Second Edition, 2003)

365

Ch. Wuliangshou jing (無量壽經)
Skt. Sukhāvatīvyūha
Eng. The Larger Sutra on Amitāyus (in The Three Pure Land Sutras,
Revised Second Edition, 2003)

372

360

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Taishō No.

Ch. Amituo jing (阿彌陀經)
Skt. Sukhāvatīvyūha
Eng. The Smaller Sutra on Amitāyus (in The Three Pure Land Sutras,
Revised Second Edition, 2003)

366

Ch. Fochuibo niepan lüeshuo jiaojie jing (佛垂般涅槃略説教誡經)
Eng. The Bequeathed Teaching Sutra (in Apocryphal Scriptures, 2005)

389

Ch. Banzhou sanmei jing (般舟三昧經)
Skt. Pratyutpanna-buddhasammukhāvasthita-samādhi-sutra
Eng. The Pratyutpanna Samādhi Sutra (1998)

418

Ch. Da banniepan jing (大般涅槃經)
Skt. Mahāparinirvana-sutra
Eng. The Nirvana Sutra (Volume I, 2013)

374

Ch. Dizang pusa benyuan jing (地藏菩薩本願經)
Skt. *Kṣitigarbhapraṇidhāna-sutra

412

Ch. Yaoshi liuli guang rulai benyuan gongde jing
(藥師琉璃光如來本願功徳經)
Skt. Bhaiṣajyaguru-vaiḍūrya-prabhāsa-pūrvapraṇidhāna-viśeṣavistara

450

Ch. Wenshushili wen jing (文殊師利問經)
Skt. *Mañjuśrīparipṛcchā
Eng. The Sutra of Mañjuśrī’s Questions (2015)

468

Ch. Mile xiasheng chengfo jing (彌勒下生成佛經)
Skt. *Maitreyavyākaraṇa
Eng. The Sutra that Expounds the Descent of Maitreya Buddha
and His Enlightenment (2015)

454

Ch. Weimojie suoshuo jing (維摩詰所説經)
Skt. Vimalakīrtinirdeśa-sutra
Eng. The Vimalakīrti Sutra (2004)

475

Ch. Yueshangnü jing (月上女經)
Skt. Candrottarādārikā-paripṛcchā

480

Ch. Damoduoluo chan jing (達磨多羅禪經)

618

Ch. Zuochan sanmei jing (坐禪三昧經)
Eng. The Sutra on the Concentration of Sitting Meditation (2009)

614

Ch. Yuedeng sanmei jing (月燈三昧經)
Skt. Samādhirāja-candrapradīpa-sutra

639

373

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Shoulengyan sanmei jing (首楞嚴三昧經)
Skt. Śūraṅgamasamādhi-sutra
Eng. The Śūraṅgama Samādhi Sutra (1998)

Taishō No.
642

Ch. Jinguang ming zuishengwang jing (金光明最勝王經)
Skt. Suvarṇaprabhāsa-sutra

665

Ch. Jie shenmi jing (解深密經)
Skt. Saṃdhinirmocana-sutra
Eng. The Scripture on the Explication of Underlying Meaning (2000)

676

Ch. Sishierzhang jing (四十二章經)
Eng. The Sutra of Forty-two Sections (in Apocryphal Scriptures, 2005)

784

Ch. Dasheng rulengqie jing (大乘入楞伽經)
Skt. Laṅkāvatāra-sutra

672

Ch. Yulanpen jing (盂蘭盆經)
Skt. *Ullambana-sutra
Eng. The Ullambana Sutra (in Apocryphal Scriptures, 2005)

685

Ch. Dafangguang yuanjue xiuduoluo liaoyi jing
(大方廣圓覺修多羅了義經)
Eng. The Sutra of Perfect Enlightenment
(in Apocryphal Scriptures, 2005)

842

Ch. Da Biluzhena chengfo shenbian jiachi jing
848
(大毘盧遮那成佛神變加持經)
Skt. Mahāvairocanābhisambodhi-vikurvitādhiṣṭhāna-vaipulyasūtrendrarājanāma-dharmaparyāya
Eng. The Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi Sutra (2005)

Ch. Jinggangding yiqie rulai zhenshi she dasheng xianzheng dajiao
wang jing (金剛頂一切如來眞實攝大乘現證大教王經)
865
Skt. Sarvatathāgata-tattvasaṃgraha-mahāyānā-bhisamaya-mahākalparāja
Eng. The Adamantine Pinnacle Sutra (in Two Esoteric Sutras, 2001)

Ch. Suxidi jieluo jing (蘇悉地羯囉經)
Skt. Susiddhikara-mahātantra-sādhanopāyika-paṭala
Eng. The Susiddhikara Sutra (in Two Esoteric Sutras, 2001)
Ch. Modengqie jing (摩登伽經)
Skt. *Mātaṅgī-sutra
Eng. The Mātaṅga Sutra (in Esoteric Texts, 2015)

374

893

1300

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Mohe sengqi lü (摩訶僧祇律)
Skt. *Mahāsāṃghika-vinaya

Taishō No.

1425

Ch. Sifen lü (四分律)
Skt. *Dharmaguptaka-vinaya

1428

Ch. Fanwang jing (梵網經)
Skt. *Brahmajāla-sutra

1484

Ch. Shanjianlü piposha (善見律毘婆沙)
Pāli Samantapāsādikā

1462

Ch. Youposaijie jing (優婆塞戒經)
Skt. Upāsakaśīla-sutra
Eng. The Sutra on Upāsaka Precepts (1994)

1488

Ch. Shizha biposha lun (十住毘婆沙論)
Skt. *Daśabhūmika-vibhāṣā

1521

Ch. Apidamojushe lun (阿毘達磨倶舍論)
Skt. Abhidharmakośa-bhāṣya

1558

Ch. Miaofa lianhua jing youbotishe (妙法蓮華經憂波提舍)
1519
Skt. Saddharmapuṇḍarīka-upadeśa
Eng. The Commentary on the Lotus Sutra (in Tiantai Lotus Texts, 2013)
Ch. Fodijing lun (佛地經論)
Skt. *Buddhabhūmisutra-śāstra
Eng. The Interpretation of the Buddha Land (2002)

1530

Ch. Zhonglun (中論)
Skt. Madhyamaka-śāstra

1564

Ch. Cheng weishi lun (成唯識論)
Eng. Demonstration of Consciousness Only
(in Three Texts on Consciousness Only, 1999)

1585

Ch. Yüqie shidilun (瑜伽師地論)
Skt. Yogācārabhūmi-śāstra

1579

Ch. Weishi sanshilun song (唯識三十論頌)
Skt. Triṃśikā
Eng. The Thirty Verses on Consciousness Only
(in Three Texts on Consciousness Only, 1999)

1586

375

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Weishi ershi lun (唯識二十論)
Skt. Viṃśatikā
Eng. The Treatise in Twenty Verses on Consciousness Only
(in Three Texts on Consciousness Only, 1999)

Taishō No.
1590

1593
Ch. She dasheng lun (攝大乘論)
Skt. Mahāyānasaṃgraha
Eng. The Summary of the Great Vehicle (Revised Second Edition, 2003)
Ch. Bian zhongbian lun (辯中邊論)
Skt. Madhyāntavibhāga

1600

Ch. Dasheng chengye lun (大乘成業論)
Skt. Karmasiddhiprakaraṇa

1609

Ch. Yinming ruzheng li lun (因明入正理論)
Skt. Nyāyapraveśa

1630

Ch. Jingangzhen lun (金剛針論)
Skt. Vajrasūcī

1642

Ch. Dasheng zhuangyanjing lun (大乘莊嚴經論)
Skt. Mahāyānasūtrālaṃkāra

1604

Ch. Jiujing yisheng baoxing lun (究竟一乘寳性論)
Skt. Ratnagotravibhāga-mahāyānottaratantra-śāstra

1611

Ch. Dasheng ji pusa xue lun (大乘集菩薩學論)
Skt. Śikṣāsamuccaya

1636

Ch. Zhang suozhi lun (彰所知論)
Eng. The Treatise on the Elucidation of the Knowable (2004)

1645

Ch. Jingangding yuqie zhongfa anouduoluo sanmiao sanputi xin lun
(金剛頂瑜伽中發阿耨多羅三藐三菩提心論)
Eng. The Bodhicitta Śāstra (in Esoteric Texts, 2015)

1665

Ch. Shimoheyan lun (釋摩訶衍論)

1668

Ch. Putixing jing (菩提行經)
Skt. Bodhicaryāvatāra

1662

Ch. Dasheng qixin lun (大乘起信論)
Skt. *Mahāyānaśraddhotpāda-śāstra
Eng. The Awakening of Faith (2005)

1666

376

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Naxian biqiu jing (那先比丘經)
Pāli Milindapañhā

Taishō No.
1670

Ch. Banruo boluomiduo xin jing yuzan (般若波羅蜜多心經幽賛)
Eng. A Comprehensive Commentary on the Heart Sutra
(Prajñāpāramitā-hṛdaya-sutra) (2001)

1710

Ch. Guan wuliangshou fo jing shu (觀無量壽佛經疏)

1753

Ch. Dasheng xuan lun (大乘玄論)

1853

Ch. Miaofalianhua jing xuanyi (妙法蓮華經玄義)
Ch. Sanlun xuanyi (三論玄義)
Ch. Zhao lun (肇論)

Ch. Huayan yisheng jiaoyi fenqi zhang (華嚴一乘教義分齊章)

Ch. Yuanren lun (原人論)

Ch. Mohe zhiguan (摩訶止觀)

1716
1852
1858
1866
1886
1911

Ch. Xiuxi zhiguan zuochan fayao (修習止觀坐禪法要)

1915

Ch. Guoqing bai lu (國清百録)

1934

Ch. Foguo Yuanwu chanshi biyan lu (佛果圜悟禪師碧巖録)
Eng. The Blue Cliff Record (1998)

2003

Ch. Liuzu dashi fabao tan jing (六祖大師法寶壇經)
Eng. The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch (2000)

2008

Ch. Tiantai sijiao yi (天台四教儀)
Eng. A Guide to the Tiantai Fourfold Teachings
(in Tiantai Lotus Texts, 2013)

Ch. Zhenzhou Linji Huizhao chanshi wulu (鎭州臨濟慧照禪師語録)
Eng. The Recorded Sayings of Linji (in Three Chan Classics, 1999)

Ch. Wumen guan (無門關)
Eng. Wumen’s Gate (in Three Chan Classics, 1999)

Ch. Xinxin ming (信心銘)
Eng. The Faith-Mind Maxim (in Three Chan Classics, 1999)

Ch. Huangboshan Duanji chanshi chuanxin fayao
(黄檗山斷際禪師傳心法要)
Eng. Essentials of the Transmission of Mind (in Zen Texts, 2005)

1931

1985

2005

2010
2012A

377

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Yongjia Zhengdao ge (永嘉證道歌)

Taishō No.

Ch. Chixiu Baizhang qinggui (勅修百丈清規)
Eng. The Baizhang Zen Monastic Regulations (2007)

2014
2025

Ch. Yibuzonglun lun (異部宗輪論)
Skt. Samayabhedoparacanacakra
Eng. The Cycle of the Formation of the Schismatic Doctrines (2004)

2031

Ch. Maming pusa zhuan (馬鳴菩薩傳)
Eng. The Life of Aśvaghoṣa Bodhisattva
(in Lives of Great Monks and Nuns, 2002)

2046

Ch. Posoupandou fashi zhuan (婆藪槃豆法師傳)
Eng. Biography of Dharma Master Vasubandhu
(in Lives of Great Monks and Nuns, 2002)

2049

Ch. Gaoseng zhuan (高僧傳)

2059

Ch. Ayuwang jing (阿育王經)
Skt. Aśokāvadāna
Eng. The Biographical Scripture of King Aśoka (1993)

2043

Ch. Longshu pusa zhuan (龍樹菩薩傳)
Eng. The Life of Nāgārjuna Bodhisattva
(in Lives of Great Monks and Nuns, 2002)

2047

Ch. Datang Daciensi Zanzang fashi zhuan (大唐大慈恩寺三藏法師傳) 2053
Eng. A Biography of the Tripiṭaka Master of the Great Ci’en
Monastery of the Great Tang Dynasty (1995)

Ch. Biqiuni zhuan (比丘尼傳)
Eng. Biographies of Buddhist Nuns
(in Lives of Great Monks and Nuns, 2002)

2063

Ch. Datang xiyu ji (大唐西域記)
Eng. The Great Tang Dynasty Record of the Western Regions (1996)

2087

Ch. Gaoseng Faxian zhuan (高僧法顯傳)
Eng. The Journey of the Eminent Monk Faxian
(in Lives of Great Monks and Nuns, 2002)

Ch. Youfangjichao: Tangdaheshangdongzheng zhuan
(遊方記抄: 唐大和上東征傳)

378

2085

2089-(7)

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Hongming ji (弘明集)
Eng. The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation
of Buddhism (Volume I, 2015)
The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation
of Buddhism (Volume II, 2017)

Taishō No.
2102

Ch. Fayuan zhulin (法苑珠林)

2122

Ch. Fanyu zaming (梵語雑名)

2135

Jp. Yuimakyō gisho (維摩經義疏)
Eng. The Expository Commentary on the Vimalakīrti Sutra (2012)

2186

Jp.

2203

Ch. Nanhai jigui neifa zhuan (南海寄歸内法傳)
Eng. Buddhist Monastic Traditions of Southern Asia (2000)
Jp. Shōmangyō gisho (勝鬘經義疏)
Eng. Prince Shōtoku’s Commentary on the Śrīmālā Sutra (2011)

2125

2185

Jp.

Hokke gisho (法華義疏)

2187

Jp.

Daijō hossō kenjin shō (大乘法相研神章)

2309

Jp. Risshū kōyō (律宗綱要)
Eng. The Essentials of the Vinaya Tradition (1995)

2348

Jp.

Hannya shingyō hiken (般若心經秘鍵)

Kanjin kakumu shō (觀心覺夢鈔)

2312

Jp. Tendai hokke shūgi shū (天台法華宗義集)
Eng. The Collected Teachings of the Tendai Lotus School (1995)

2366

Jp.

2377

Jp.

Kenkairon (顯戒論)

Sange gakushō shiki (山家學生式)

Jp. Hizōhōyaku (秘藏寶鑰)
Eng. The Precious Key to the Secret Treasury (in Shingon Texts, 2004)

Jp. Benkenmitsu nikyō ron (辨顯密二教論)
Eng. On the Differences between the Exoteric and Esoteric
Teachings (in Shingon Texts, 2004)

Jp. Sokushin jōbutsu gi (即身成佛義)
Eng. The Meaning of Becoming a Buddha in This Very Body
(in Shingon Texts, 2004)

2376

2426

2427
2428

379

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Taishō No.

Jp. Shōji jissōgi (聲字實相義)
2429
Eng. The Meanings of Sound, Sign, and Reality (in Shingon Texts, 2004)

Jp. Unjigi (吽字義)
Eng. The Meanings of the Word Hūṃ (in Shingon Texts, 2004)
Jp. Gorin kuji myōhimitsu shaku (五輪九字明秘密釋)
Eng. The Illuminating Secret Commentary on the Five Cakras
and the Nine Syllables (in Shingon Texts, 2004)

2430

2514

Jp. Mitsugonin hotsuro sange mon (密嚴院發露懺悔文)
Eng. The Mitsugonin Confession (in Shingon Texts, 2004)

2527

Jp. Fukan zazengi (普勧坐禪儀)
Eng. A Universal Recommendation for True Zazen
(in Zen Texts, 2005)

2580

Jp. Zazen yōjin ki (坐禪用心記)
Eng. Advice on the Practice of Zazen (in Zen Texts, 2005)

2586

Jp. Kenjōdo shinjitsu kyōgyō shōmon rui (顯淨土眞實教行証文類)
Eng. Kyōgyōshinshō: On Teaching, Practice, Faith, and
Enlightenment (2003)

2646

Jp. Kōzen gokoku ron (興禪護國論)
Eng. A Treatise on Letting Zen Flourish to Protect the State
(in Zen Texts, 2005)

2543

Jp. Shōbōgenzō (正法眼藏)
Eng. Shōbōgenzō: The True Dharma-eye Treasury (Volume I, 2007)
Shōbōgenzō: The True Dharma-eye Treasury (Volume II, 2008)
Shōbōgenzō: The True Dharma-eye Treasury (Volume III, 2008)
Shōbōgenzō: The True Dharma-eye Treasury (Volume IV, 2008)

2582

Jp. Senchaku hongan nenbutsu shū (選擇本願念佛集)
Eng. Senchaku Hongan Nembutsu Shū: A Collection of Passages
on the Nembutsu Chosen in the Original Vow (1997)

2608

Jp. Tannishō (歎異抄)
Eng. Tannishō: Passages Deploring Deviations of Faith (1996)

2661

Jp.

2682

Jp. Rennyo shōnin ofumi (蓮如上人御文)
Eng. Rennyo Shōnin Ofumi: The Letters of Rennyo (1996)

380

Ōjōyōshū (往生要集)

2668

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Taishō No.

Jp. Risshō ankoku ron (立正安國論)
Eng. Risshōankokuron or The Treatise on the Establishment
of the Orthodox Teaching and the Peace of the Nation
(in Two Nichiren Texts, 2003)

2688

Jp. Kaimokushō (開目抄)
Eng. Kaimokushō or Liberation from Blindness (2000)

2689

Ch. Fumu enzhong jing (父母恩重經)
Eng. The Sutra on the Profundity of Filial Love
(in Apocryphal Scriptures, 2005)

2887

Jp. Kanjin honzon shō (觀心本尊抄)
Eng. Kanjinhonzonshō or The Most Venerable One Revealed
by Introspecting Our Minds for the First Time at the
Beginning of the Fifth of the Five Five Hundred-year Ages
(in Two Nichiren Texts, 2003)

Jp. Hasshūkōyō (八宗綱要)
Eng. The Essentials of the Eight Traditions (1994)

2692

extracanonical

Jp.

Sangō shīki (三教指帰)

extracanonical

Jp.

Jūshichijō kenpō (十七條憲法)

extracanonical

Jp. Mappō tōmyō ki (末法燈明記)
Eng. The Candle of the Latter Dharma (1994)

extracanonical

381

