BUDDHACARITA
IN PRAISE OF BUDDHA’S ACTS

dBET PDF Version
© 2017
All Rights Reserved

BDK English Tripiṭaka Series

BUDDHACARITA
IN PRAISE OF BUDDHA’S ACTS
(Taishō Volume 4, Number 192)

Translated
by

Charles Willemen

BDK America, Inc.
2009

Copyright © 2009 by Bukkyō Dendō Kyōkai and
BDK America, Inc.

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored
in a retrieval system, or transcribed in any form or by any means
—electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise—
without the prior written permission of the publisher.
First Printing, 2009
ISBN: 978-1-886439-42-9
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 2009936282
Published by
BDK America, Inc.
1675 School Street
Moraga, California 94556

Printed in the United States of America

A Message on the Publication of the
English Tripiṭaka
The Buddhist canon is said to contain eighty-four thousand different teachings.
I believe that this is because the Buddha’s basic approach was to prescribe a
different treatment for every spiritual ailment, much as a doctor prescribes a
different medicine for every medical ailment. Thus his teachings were always
appropriate for the particular suffering individual and for the time at which the
teaching was given, and over the ages not one of his prescriptions has failed to
relieve the suffering to which it was addressed.
Ever since the Buddha’s Great Demise over twenty-ﬁve hundred years ago,
his message of wisdom and compassion has spread throughout the world. Yet
no one has ever attempted to translate the entire Buddhist canon into English
throughout the history of Japan. It is my greatest wish to see this done and to
make the translations available to the many English-speaking people who have
never had the opportunity to learn about the Buddha’s teachings.
Of course, it would be impossible to translate all of the Buddha’s eightyfour thousand teachings in a few years. I have, therefore, had one hundred thirtynine of the scriptural texts in the prodigious Taishō edition of the Chinese Buddhist
canon selected for inclusion in the First Series of this translation project.
It is in the nature of this undertaking that the results are bound to be criticized.
Nonetheless, I am convinced that unless someone takes it upon himself or herself
to initiate this project, it will never be done. At the same time, I hope that an
improved, revised edition will appear in the future.
It is most gratifying that, thanks to the efforts of more than a hundred Buddhist
scholars from the East and the West, this monumental project has ﬁnally gotten
off the ground. May the rays of the Wisdom of the Compassionate One reach
each and every person in the world.
NUMATA Yehan
Founder of the English
Tripiṭaka Project

August 7, 1991
v

Editorial Foreword
In January 1982, Dr. NUMATA Yehan, the founder of Bukkyō Dendō Kyōkai
(Society for the Promotion of Buddhism), decided to begin the monumental
task of translating the complete Taishō edition of the Chinese Tripiṭaka (Buddhist
canon) into the English language. Under his leadership, a special preparatory
committee was organized in April 1982. By July of the same year, the Translation
Committee of the English Tripiṭaka was ofﬁcially convened.
The initial Committee consisted of the following members: (late) HANAYAMA
Shōyū (Chairperson), (late) BANDŌ Shōjun, ISHIGAMI Zennō, (late) KAMATA
Shigeo, (late) KANAOKA Shūyū, MAYEDA Sengaku, NARA Yasuaki, (late) SAYEKI
Shinkō, (late) SHIOIRI Ryōtatsu, TAMARU Noriyoshi, (late) TAMURA Kwansei,
URYŪZU Ryūshin, and YUYAMA Akira. Assistant members of the Committee
were as follows: KANAZAWA Atsushi, WATANABE Shōgo, Rolf Giebel of New
Zealand, and Rudy Smet of Belgium.
After holding planning meetings on a monthly basis, the Committee selected
one hundred thirty-nine texts for the First Series of translations, an estimated
one hundred printed volumes in all. The texts selected are not necessarily limited
to those originally written in India but also include works written or composed
in China and Japan. While the publication of the First Series proceeds, the texts
for the Second Series will be selected from among the remaining works; this
process will continue until all the texts, in Japanese as well as in Chinese, have
been published.
Frankly speaking, it will take perhaps one hundred years or more to accomplish the English translation of the complete Chinese and Japanese texts, for
they consist of thousands of works. Nevertheless, as Dr. NUMATA wished, it is
the sincere hope of the Committee that this project will continue unto completion,
even after all its present members have passed away.
Dr. NUMATA passed away on May 5, 1994, at the age of ninety-seven, entrusting his son, Mr. NUMATA Toshihide, with the continuation and completion of the
Translation Project. The Committee also lost its able and devoted Chairperson,

vii

Editorial Foreword

Professor HANAYAMA Shōyū, on June 16, 1995, at the age of sixty-three. After
these severe blows, the Committee elected me, then Vice President of Musashino
Women’s College, to be the Chair in October 1995. The Committee has renewed
its determination to carry out the noble intention of Dr. NUMATA, under the leadership of Mr. NUMATA Toshihide.
The present members of the Committee are MAYEDA Sengaku (Chairperson),
ISHIGAMI Zennō, ICHISHIMA Shōshin, NARA Yasuaki, TAMARU Noriyoshi, Kenneth
K. Tanaka, URYŪZU Ryūshin, YUYAMA Akira, WATANABE Shōgo, and assistant
member YONEZAWA Yoshiyasu.
The Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research was established
in November 1984, in Berkeley, California, U.S.A., to assist in the publication of
the BDK English Tripiṭaka First Series. The Publication Committee was organized
at the Numata Center in December 1991. Since then the publication of all the volumes has been and will continue to be conducted under the supervision of this
Committee in close cooperation with the Editorial Committee in Tokyo.
MAYEDA Sengaku

Chairperson
Editorial Committee of
the BDK English Tripiṭaka

viii

Publisher’s Foreword
On behalf of the Publication Committee, I am happy to present this contribution
to the BDK English Tripiṭaka Series. The initial translation and editing of the
Buddhist scripture found here were performed under the direction of the Editorial
Committee in Tokyo, Japan, chaired by Professor Sengaku Mayeda, Professor
Emeritus of Musashino University. The Publication Committee members then
put this volume through a rigorous succession of editorial and bookmaking efforts.
Both the Editorial Committee in Tokyo and the Publication Committee in
Berkeley are dedicated to the production of clear, readable English texts of the
Buddhist canon. The members of both committees and associated staff work to
honor the deep faith, spirit, and concern of the late Reverend Dr. Yehan Numata,
who founded the BDK English Tripiṭaka Series in order to disseminate Buddhist
teachings throughout the world.
The long-term goal of our project is the translation and publication of the
one hundred-volume Taishō edition of the Chinese Buddhist canon, plus a few
inﬂuential extracanonical Japanese Buddhist texts. The list of texts selected for
the First Series of this translation project is given at the end of each volume.
As Chair of the Publication Committee, I am deeply honored to serve in
the post formerly held by the late Dr. Philip B. Yampolsky, who was so good
to me during his lifetime; the esteemed Dr. Kenneth K. Inada, who has had such
a great impact on Buddhist studies in the United States; and the beloved late
Dr. Francis H. Cook, a dear friend and colleague.
In conclusion, let me thank the members of the Publication Committee for
the efforts they have undertaken in preparing this volume for publication: Senior
Editor Marianne Dresser, Dr. Hudaya Kandahjaya, Dr. Carl W. Bielefeldt, Reverend
Kiyoshi Yamashita, and Reverend Brian Nagata, President of the Numata Center
for Buddhist Translation and Research.
John R. McRae

Chairperson
Publication Committee

ix

Contents
A Message on the Publication of the English Tripiṭaka
NUMATA Yehan

v

Editorial Foreword

MAYEDA Sengaku

vii

Translator’s Introduction

Charles Willemen

xiii

John R. McRae

Publisher’s Foreword

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts
Fascicle One
Chapter I. Birth
Chapter II. Life in the Palace
Chapter III. Disgust
Chapter IV. Renunciation
Chapter V. Leaving the City

Fascicle Two
Chapter VI. Chandaka’s Return
Chapter VII. Entry into the Forest of Asceticism
Chapter VIII. The Whole Palace in Grief
Chapter IX. The Search for the Crown Prince

Fascicle Three
Chapter X. King Bimbisāra Goes to the Crown Prince
Chapter XI. The Reply to King Bimbisāra75
Chapter XII. Visits to Ārāḍa and Udraka
Chapter XIII. Māra’s Destruction
Chapter XIV. Abhisaṃbodhi
Chapter XV. Turning the Wheel of the Law

xi

ix

3
13
19
25
31
39
45
51
59
69
83
93
99
107

Contents

Fascicle Four
Chapter XVI. King Bimbisāra and Disciples
Chapter XVII. Conversion of the Great Disciples
Chapter XVIII. The Conversion of Anāthapiṇḍada
Chapter XIX. The Meeting of Father and Son
Chapter XX. Acceptance of the Jetavana Pure Abode
Chapter XXI. Subduing the Maddened Elephant Dhanapālaka
Chapter XXII. Lady Āmra[pālī]’s Meeting with the Buddha

Fascicle Five
Chapter XXIII. Staying Alive through [the Buddha’s] Divine Power
Chapter XXIV. Farewell to the Licchavis
Chapter XXV. Parinirvāṇa
Chapter XXVI. The Great Parinirvāṇa
Chapter XXVII. The Eulogy of Nirvana
Chapter XXVIII. The Division of the Relics
Notes

Glossary

Bibliography
Index

A List of the Volumes of the BDK English Tripiṭaka (First Series)

xii

113
123
129
137
145
151
157
161
167
173
181
191
201
209
219
223
225

245

Translator’s Introduction
The Buddhacarita (Buddha’s Acts) is a complete biography of Śākyamuni, from
his birth until after his death, when his relics were distributed. The text was
composed by Aśvaghoṣa (early second century C.E.), the main author of kāvya
literature (poetic prose or ornate poetry) before Kālidāsa (late fourth–early ﬁfth
century C.E.). The text consists of twenty-eight chapters in both the Tibetan and
Chinese translations, but of the original Sanskrit text only fourteen chapters are
known today. In 1830 Amṛtānanda added the last part of Chapter Fourteen,
Chapter Fifteen, and Chapter Sixteen. The Tibetan translation was probably
made between 1260 and 1280 (see D. P. Jackson, “On the Date of the Tibetan
Translation of Aśvaghoṣa’s Buddhacarita,” Studia Indologiczne 4 [1997]: 54).
The author, Aśvaghoṣa, was a brahman from Sāketa in Central India who
converted to Sarvāstivāda Buddhism. His mother’s name was Suvarṇākṣī but
we know little of his life. He was deeply inﬂuenced by the ideas of the
Mahāsāṃghikas, much in the same way as another convert brahman from Sāketa,
Harivarman (ca. 300 C.E.). Harivarman was the author of the Chengshi lun
(Taishō 1646), or Prodbhūtopadeśa, often Sanskritized as Tattvasiddhi-śāstra.
Both authors were non-Vaibhāṣika Sarvāstivādins.
It is said that Aśvaghoṣa was a contemporary of Kaniṣka (probably second
century C.E.). He may have lived before the time that the Mahāvibhāṣā (Taishō
1545) was compiled by ﬁve hundred arhats in Kaśmīra, at the occasion of
Kaniṣka’s council. The end of the Chinese Buddhacarita mentions the First
Council, in Rājagṛha, and the compilation of the Sutra portion of the Tripiṭaka.
We also read that Aśoka was called Caṇḍa (“Fierce”) before his conversion, just
as Kaniṣka used to be called Caṇḍa during his conquering days. The end of the
Buddhacarita seems to allude to Kaniṣka, to the new king Aśoka, and to his
council. If so, Aśvaghoṣa may have been a contemporary.
The term Sautrāntika ﬁrst emerged in northwestern India with Kumāralāta
and the Mahāvibhāṣā. Kumāralāta was the ﬁrst teacher (mūlācārya) of the
Sautrāntikas. He was the author of the Kalpanāmaṇḍitikā (Taishō 201), for a
xiii

Translator’s Introduction

long time incorrectly called Aśvaghoṣa’s Sūtrālaṃkāra. While Aśvaghoṣa may
have lived before the advent of the Sautrāntikas, a posteriori he may doctrinally
be called a Sautrāntika—but what kind of Sautrāntika is not clear.
Aśvaghoṣa was fascinated by conversion. The Buddhacarita was composed
in order to convert, as the last words of the text clearly state. In addition,
Aśvaghoṣa’s other works—those certain to be of his authorship—deal with conversion. The Saundarānanda relates the conversion of the Buddha’s half-brother,
Nanda. This work may have been composed somewhat later than the Buddhacarita. His third great work, the Śāriputraprakaraṇa, is a nine-act play about
the conversion of Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana. As an excellent teacher and
propagator of the Law, Aśvaghoṣa could be called a bodhisattva. Excellent teachers were called bodhisattvas in China, a habit that may have originated in Dharmaguptaka circles.
The Buddhacarita reads like a play. The work is lyrical in its Indian original,
less so in the Chinese version. E. H. Johnston’s appreciation of the Chinese version in “The Buddha’s Mission and Last Journey: Buddhacarita XV–XXVIII”
is quite accurate:

The author . . . in addition to some misunderstandings of the original . . .
has paraphrased . . . the poem. . . . [T]he translator . . . was evidently a
pious Buddhist, keen on matters of legend or moral, but with little taste
for literature. . . . [H]e evades textual niceties, contenting himself with
giving the general sense. . . . (2004: XIII)

In other words, while the Sanskrit version belongs to the corpus of world
literature, the Chinese version is more suited to the average reader.
Ōminami Ryūshō, author of the Busshogyōsan, the latest Japanese translation
and study of the Chinese Buddhacarita, makes use of all existing studies of the
text and revisits the Chinese catalogues as well. He concludes that Sengyou’s
information is sound, and that the author of the Chinese Buddhacarita is the
Chinese monk Baoyun (376–449), not the Indian Tan Wuchen.
Baoyun was from Liangzhou. He traveled to Central Asia, Khotan (Hotan),
and India around 397. There he met Faxian and other Chinese pilgrims. In India
he studied languages, then returned to Chang’an and became a follower of
Buddhabhadra (359–429). Buddhabhadra was in Chang’an from 406–408.
Baoyun then followed Buddhabhadra south to Mount Lu, and ultimately to

xiv

Translator’s Introduction

Jiankang (Nanjing). His good friend Huiguan accompanied Baoyun throughout
the entire journey. All three men stayed at Daochang Temple in Jiankang. Baoyun
later moved to Liuheshan Temple, outside of Jiankang. It was at these two
temples that he made his translations, reading the Indian text and translating
orally. In this way the Buddhacarita was rendered in 421 C.E. (Yongchu 2 of
the Liu Song), at Liuheshan Temple.
Alternative Chinese titles of the Buddhacarita are the Maming pusa zan
(Bodhisattva Aśvaghoṣa’s Kāvya) and the Fo benxing zan (Buddhacarita-kāvya).
Sengyou also mentions a Fo benxing jing (Buddhacarita-sūtra). Hikata Ryūshō
thinks that this text was written shortly after Zhi Qian (third century) but before
Kumārajīva (344–413?). Fei Changfang mistook this sutra for the kāvya, and
this mistake has found its way into the colophon of the Taishō edition.
Tan Wuchen (385–433) was from Central India. The “sound translation,”
i.e., phonetic rendering, of his Indian name is Tanwuchen but this is probably
better rendered as Tan Wuchen, which gives it the appearance of a real Chinese
name. The actual Chinese translation of the name is “Dharma Abundance,”
Dharmarddhin in Sanskrit, though some think Dharmavṛddhin is more likely.
Tan Wuchen is phonetically quite possible in either case. A variant phonetic
rendering is Tanmoluochen, where the luo renders an “r.” Tan Wuchen’s biography informs us that he was versed in incantations and magic, and that he had
the nickname Da Zhoushi, “Great Spell Master.” This information points to the
name Dharmarddhin.
Tan Wuchen arrived in Guzang in 412, where he did translation work
between 414 and 421. Guzang is known as Liangzhou, in present-day Wuwei
district, Gansu province. There in 421 he brought out his famous translation of
the Mahāparinirvāṇa-sūtra (Taishō 374), known as the northern version. That
same year Baoyun brought out his Buddhacarita near Jiankang. Tan Wuchen’s
translation of the Mahāparinirvāṇa-sūtra was revised in Jiankang during the
Yuanjia era (424–453). This text (Taishō 375) is known as the southern version.
It was completed after the Chinese Buddhacarita.
Baoyun’s good friend Faxian, with the help of Buddhabhadra, had also produced a version of the Nirvana Sutra in Jiankang in 418 (Taishō 376). The ﬁfth
of the ﬁve volumes of the Chinese Buddhacarita corresponds with the contents
of the Nirvana Sutra. It seems that Tan Wuchen’s name was added to the Buddhacarita for a number of reasons. For example, both texts are dated to 421; the

xv

Translator’s Introduction

northern Nirvana Sutra was being studied in Jiankang and another version had
just been brought out there; and an important section of the Buddhacarita, the
last part, agrees with the Nirvana Sutra. Finally, Baoyun was from Liangzhou
(Guzang).

The Chinese Text

As the result of Baoyun’s oral “translation,” the text shows us his understanding
and his explanation of the original Sanskrit. The explanation of early Sāṃkhya
in Chapter Twelve, stanzas 14–33, is a good example. One must be careful not
to draw any hasty conclusions for the original Sanskrit on the basis of the Chinese
text. Baoyun’s Sanskrit text was probably not the same as the Nepalese texts
we have now, but the differences are so numerous that one can say that Baoyun
gave his own oral version of the contents, at the same time making the contents
clear to his Chinese audience.
The text has many stock phrases of technical terminology. Its pentasyllabic
verse is split up into two- and three-character, or three- and two-character,
phrasing. This requirement explains many compounds and redundant terms,
such as jin (now), ji (immediately, then), youruo (as if), ze (then), etc. The text
has many Chinese grammatical particles, pronouns, and so on, unusual in poetry
but commonplace in colloquial language. Sometimes the grammatical elements
are used to render Sanskrit morphology, for example, the instrumental and
locative cases. Indian praeverbia are often rendered as one Chinese character.
Compounds are the norm. The language here is quite different from that of the
Confucian Classics.
Baoyun leaves out many of the descriptive parts that make the Sanskrit text
so beautiful and lively. Hindu mythology is simpliﬁed, probably to make it more
easily understandable to a Chinese readership. The circumstances of the Buddha’s
birth (conception, childbirth) are not related as mythological but are described
much more realistically. The role of women is explained but abbreviated, and
described in modest terms. The characteristics of Baoyun’s text can be explained
at length but the conclusion one draws is that the Chinese is not as poetic and
lyrical as the Sanskrit; rather, it is more explanatory, in a vernacular style. Of
course, Baoyun used some terms and transcriptions of names that were well
known at the time. This established terminology was probably based on a Prakrit
language, though Baoyun’s text was in Sanskrit.

xvi

Translator’s Introduction

Some examples of passages in the text that are clearly marked by Baoyun’s
knowledge of Chinese mythology and history:

“His robe of the Law helped the morning freshness arise, just as when the
sun is shining from the mulberry tree.” (Chapter X, stanza 18)

Chinese mythology holds that the sun comes up far to the east, underneath a
giant mulberry tree, which has one root but two mutually supporting trunks. This
tree, the rodhra tree, has yellow ﬂowers, like the color of the robe of the Law.
“An execution underneath a banner in the eastern marketplace. . . .” (Chapter
XI, stanza 31)

During the Han era the eastern market in Chang’an was a place where executions were carried out.
Furthermore, Mount Tai, a Chinese place name, is often mentioned in the text.
Chapter Twenty-four, stanza 26, mentions “the unique vehicle” (ekayāna).
This deﬁnitely gives the impression that Baoyun shared Huiguan’s ideas in Jiankang. The concept of “unique vehicle” comes from the Lotus Sutra, and was
propagated by Huiguan.
These examples all point to Baoyun as the author of the Chinese Buddhacarita.

xvii

BUDDHACARITA
IN PRAISE OF BUDDHA’S ACTS
Composed by
Bodhisattva Aśvaghoṣa
Translated by the Indian Tripiṭaka Master Tan Wuchen,1
during the Northern Liang

1a

Fascicle One
Chapter I

Birth

1. The unconquerable king of the Śākyas, the progeny of Ikṣvāku, was
endowed with virtue and pure riches, and so his name was Śuddhodana.
2. Living beings happily looked up to him, as to the moon which had
just risen. The king was like Śakra, ruler of the gods, and his wife was like
Śacī.
3. Her steadfastness was as solid as the earth, and her thoughts were as
pure as a lotus ﬂower. By way of comparison she was called Māyā, but she
was beyond compare.
4. In that godlike queen a spirit descended and dwelled in her womb.
The mother was completely free from sorrow. She did not have any illusory
thoughts.
5. In her weariness she railed at the commonplace and longed to stay in
a secluded forest, in the excellent garden of Lumbinī, where springs ﬂowed
and ﬂowers and fruits were luxuriant.
6. She wanted to meditate in quietude and beseeched the king for permission to travel there. The king understood her earnest wish and thought
that it was wonderful.
7. He ordered that both her own and her external retinue should go to
that garden. Queen Māyā perceived that the time of delivery was at hand.
8. She lay down on an excellent couch, with numerous ladies waiting
upon her. On the eighth day of the fourth month the moment was serene and
the atmosphere harmonious.
9. She observed the fast and developed her pure qualities, and the Bodhisattva was born from her right side. Saving the world with his great compassion, he did not let his mother suffer.
3

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

1b

10. King Aurva was born from the thigh. King Pṛthu was born from the
hand. King Māndhātṛ was born from the head and King Kakśīvat was born
from the armpit.
11. The Bodhisattva was just like that, born from the right side. When
in due course he had issued from the womb, his light shone everywhere.
12. As if he had fallen down from the sky, he did not pass through the
portal of birth. Having cultivated virtue for countless eons, he was born fully
conscious, without any confusion.
13. Established and immovable in the truth, his brightness was quite
majestic. With luster he appeared from the womb, like the sun that was just
rising.
14. While observing his utter brilliance one’s sight remained uninjured.
Even though one looked at him, his light did not blind one, as when observing
the moon in the sky.
15. The light of his person was shining, just like the sun outshining the
light of a lamp. In the same way the Bodhisattva’s body of true gold was
shining all around.
16. Upright and clear of mind, he walked seven steps with dignity. On
the bottom of his feet his level soles were well placed. His brightness was
as penetrating as the seven stars.2
17. Stepping like a lion, king of the animals, he observed the four directions. With thorough insight into the meaning of the truth, he thus spoke with
the fullest assurance:
18. “As this birth is a buddha’s birth, it is my last birth. Just in this one
birth I shall save all!”
19. At this occasion two pleasant streams came pouring down from the
sky. One was warm and the other cool. They poured down on his head, so
that he felt physically happy.
20. Dwelling in his precious palace, he lay on his couch of beryl. The
celestial kings supported four legs of the couch with golden lotuses in their
hands.
21. The gods waited upon him in the sky, holding a precious parasol.
Acknowledging his majesty, the spirits were full of praise and they urged
him to complete the Buddha’s path.
22. The dragon kings were ﬁlled with joy, thirsting for the most excellent

4

Chapter I

Law. They had served the buddhas of the past, and now they met the Bodhisattva.
23. They scattered mandāra ﬂowers, offering joyful worship with all
their hearts. As the Tathāgata appeared in the world, the gods of the pure
abodes3 rejoiced.
24. Having done away with the joy of desire they were pleased with the
Law, as it would let living beings, who ﬂounder in the sea of suffering, obtain
deliverance.
25. The king of the precious mountain, Sumeru, was holding this great
earth in his ﬁrm grip, but when the Bodhisattva appeared in the world, it was
swayed by the storm of his qualities. It quaked heavily all around, just like
a boat struck by waves in a storm.
26. Fine powder incense of sandalwood and a multitude of precious
lotus receptacles ﬂoated in the sky, blowing in the wind. They fell and scattered
in profusion.
27. Celestial garments descended from the sky, and upon touching them,
one was thrilled. The sun and the moon were as usual, but [the Bodhisattva’s]
radiance doubled their light.
28. Fires ﬂared up spontaneously, without any fuel, all over the world.
Cool wells with clean water sprang up here and there all by themselves.
29. The multitude of ladies in the inner palace were astonished at this
wonder. They rushed to compete with one another to drink from or bathe in
them, and all had happy thoughts.
30. Countless spiritual beings4 and gods rejoiced in the Law and they
all gathered together like clouds. In Lumbinī garden they thronged in the
grove. A multitude of wonderful ﬁne ﬂowers blossomed out of season.
31. The various kinds of ﬁerce beings momentarily had friendly thoughts,
and diseases in the world disappeared by themselves, without any cure
applied.
32. The birds and animals with their confused cries fell silent, not making
any sound. The ten thousand rivers all stopped ﬂowing and muddy waters
all became clear. In the sky there were no clouds, and celestial drums sounded
all by themselves.
33. All the worldly beings were safe and happy, just as when a country
in upheaval suddenly has obtained a wise and able ruler.

5

1c

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

2a

34. The Bodhisattva was born to save the world from suffering. Only
the celestial king Māra was full of sorrow and did not rejoice.
35. When the king, his father, saw the birth of his son, he was amazed
in wonder. Although ordinarily his disposition was serious, he was startled
and his usual countenance changed. In his anxiety he had mixed feelings of
both joy and distress.
36. When his wife saw that her son was not born in the usual way—a
woman being timorous by nature—she felt contradictory emotions in her
distress. She did not distinguish an auspicious mark from an inauspicious
one but became even more fearful.
37. The old women were confused and prayed to the spirits. Each one
of them beseeched the spirit that they usually served, praying for the safety
of the Crown Prince.
38. At that time there was a brahman in the grove, a discerner of signs.
He had a digniﬁed demeanor and was endowed with learning. He was eloquent
and had a lofty reputation.
39. He beheld the signs and rejoiced in his heart, overjoyed at the wonder.
He knew that the king felt distress, and he informed the king of the truth:
40. “When one is born into the world, [the parent] wants only an excellent
son. O king, you should feel great joy now, as [you would at the celebration
upon] a full month [after birth]!
41. “You now have a wonderful son. His light will most certainly make
your clan famous. Be assured and pleased, and do not feel uncertain anymore!
42. “Good luck will be concentrated in your house and country. From
now on you will be increasingly prosperous. The excellent son born to you
will certainly be the world’s salvation.
43. “Yes, this superior person is gold-colored and very bright. With such
excellent signs he most certainly will attain perfect awakening. Or he will
bring happiness in the world, certain to be a wheel-turning king.
44. “All around he will be a ruler of the great earth, a brave and righteous
ruler. He will rule the four worlds, governing over all kings, just as the light
of the sun is superior among any kind of light in the world.
45. “If he dwells in the forests in the mountains and seeks deliverance
with all his heart, he will accomplish true wisdom and shine everywhere in
the world.

6

Chapter I

46. “Just as Mount Sumeru is the king among mountains and just as
gold is superior among all precious things, just as the sea is superior among
all streams, and
47. “Just as the moon is superior among the stars and the sun is superior
among all luminous bodies, when the Tathāgata dwells in the world he is the
most honored one among two-legged beings.
48. “His pleasant eyes are long and wide, opening and closing with long
eyelashes. His eyes are blue, shaped like half-moons. How could these signs
be negative, as they are all causes of excellence!”
49. The king then said to the twice-born one, “If it is as you say, why
would such wonderful signs not be associated with a former king but be manifested in my progeny?”
50. The brahman said to the king: “Do not speak like that! Learning or
wisdom, fame or career, for such four things there must not be any question
of former or later.
51. “The speciﬁc natures of things are each produced arising from a
cause. I shall now give you parallels. O king, listen carefully now!
52. “In each of the families of the two seers Bhṛgu and Aṅgiras, an excellent son was born after a very long period:
53. “Bṛhaspati and Śukra. They composed royal treatises5 not derived
from [those produced by] their families.
54. “After the scriptures had long ceased, the seer Sārasvata produced
Parāśara, who continued the scriptural texts of the Vedas. When knowledge
is produced in the present, it is not necessarily connected with the deceased.
55. “The seer Vyāsa composed many scriptural texts. The ﬁnal heir
Vālmīki extensively collected stanzas, sections, and verses.
56. “The seer Atri did not understand medical treatises. Ātreya, who
was born later, was well versed in curing the hundred illnesses.
57. “As for brahmanhood, the seer Kuśika was not trained in its heretical
treatises. Later, King Gādhin completely understood the heretical doctrine.
58. “The original family of King Ikṣvāku could not regulate the tide of
the sea, but when King Sagara raised a thousand princes, he could regulate
the tide of the great sea so that it did not exceed the usual limit.
59. “The seer Janaka obtained the path of meditation without any teacher.
Every attainment of fame is produced by one’s own efforts.

7

2b

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

2c

60. “Either the former ones were excellent and the later ones weak, or
the former ones were weak and the later ones excellent. Kings and divine
seers do not need a family inheritance. Therefore, there should not be any
question of former and later in any world!
61. “The same now applies to you, great king. You should have joyful
thoughts! As your thoughts are joyful, you will always be free from suspicion!”
62. When the king heard the seer’s exposition, he became joyful and his
worship increased. “The excellent son born to me now will succeed to the
position of wheel-turning [king]!
63. “In my years of decline I will go forth and develop pure conduct. I
will not let my noble prince renounce the world and wander in mountain
forests!”
64. At that moment in the garden nearby there was an ascetic seer. His
name was Asita, and he was skillful in the interpretation of signs.
65. When [the seer] came to the gate of the king’s palace, the king
thought, “Applied to brahmadeva, he practices asceticism and ﬁnds happiness
in the Right Law. These two characteristics are both obvious.”
66. The king then greatly rejoiced, as [the seer] was endowed with the
signs of pure conduct. The king immediately invited him into his palace, and
made offerings with reverence.
67. As he was led into the inner palace, [the seer] was happy just to see
the prince. Even though there was a multitude of ladies, he behaved as if in
a secluded forest.
68. When [the seer] was seated on the seat of the Right Law, [the king]
increased his reverence and respectfully waited upon him, just as King Antideva had waited upon Vasiṣṭha.
69. The king then said to the seer, “I am most fortunate now. I thank you
and submit to you, great seer. You deign to come and receive me. I ask for
your timely instruction about all that should be done!”
70. Thus urged, the seer was very happy. “Splendid, ever victorious
king! You are completely endowed with a multitude of qualities!
71. “I am happy that you have come with a request. You are generous
and full of respect for the Right Law. You are kind and wise, of a most excellent family, humble, and very courteous.

8

Chapter I

72. “You have previously planted many ﬁne causes and their excellent
fruition is now seen. Listen to my explanation of the present causality!
73. “I heard a celestial voice in the sky coming from the path of the sun.
It explained that you, King, will have a crown prince who will complete the
path of right awakening.
74. “Moreover, having seen previous auspicious signs, I have come here
now on purpose. I would like to see the Śākya king who will raise the banner
of the Right Law.”
75. When the king heard the seer’s explanation, he became certain and
free from the net of doubt. He asked the Crown Prince to be summoned to
be shown to the seer.
76. The seer observed that the Crown Prince had a wheel with a thousand
spokes [on the soles of] his feet. His ﬁngers and toes had membranes, and
between his eyebrows was a white tuft of hair.
77. He was characterized by cryptorchidism, like a horse, and his complexion was ablaze with light. Seeing that [the prince] had these wonderful
signs, [the seer] let his tears ﬂow and sighed deeply.
78. When he saw the ascetic’s tears, the king trembled in his heart, as
he held his son dear. Sadness ﬁlled his heart. He felt alarmed and ill at ease.
79. [The king] spontaneously rose from his seat, bowed at the feet of
the seer, and addressed him: “This son’s birth is wonderful.
80. “His complexion is utterly majestic, almost like that of a celestial
being. As he shows promise of superiority among humans, why would he
cause grief?
81. “My son must not be short-lived, causing me grief! I have been thirsting for a long time to obtain immortality, but will it yet be rejected?
82. “He must not lose my wealth, bring my family to ruin, and destroy
the country! If I have an excellent son who will stay, I have someone to whom
to entrust the country’s inheritance.
83. “When I die, I will be joyful in my heart. I shall happily be reborn
in another world. I will be like someone who has one eye closed [in sleep]
and the other [open] in awakeness.
84. “One must not be like a ﬂower in the autumn frost. Even though it
may open it cannot achieve fruition. Concerning one’s close family, the depth

9

3a

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

3b

of one’s love for a son is unsurpassed. It is the proper time to give me an
explanation, so that I may again breathe freely.”
85. The seer knew that the king, the father, was very sorrowful in his
heart, and immediately said to the great king, “Do not be afraid now, King!
I have told you before, Great King! Do not have any doubt!
86. “The present signs are as before. You should not have any other thought!
I consider that the evening of my life is worse than my earlier sad tears.
87. “Now that my end is drawing near, this son will rule the world. He
is born in order to end birth. Such a person is rarely encountered.
88. “He will give up his position of noble king, unattached to the objects
of the ﬁve desires. He will strenuously develop asceticism, open up to awakening, and obtain the truth.
89. “He will permanently dispel the darkness of delusion for living
beings. Always ablaze in the world, his wisdom is the light of the sun.
90. “Beings drown in a sea of suffering, and their illnesses are as heaps of
froth. Decay and old age are giant waves, and death is the biggest wave in the
sea. In his light boat of wisdom he will cross the difﬁculties of these currents.
91. “His wisdom will go against the current and his pure morality will be
the shore. His samādhi will be a cool pond, rightly receiving wondrous birds.
92. “So very deep and wide is the great river of the Right Law. When
thirsty beings drink from it, they are revived.
93. “Deeply attached to the objects of the ﬁve desires, one is harassed
by suffering. Lost in the wilderness of birth and death, no one knows where
to turn. But the Bodhisattva has arisen in the world, opening the path of deliverance.
94. “As the ﬁre of worldly desires burns and as the ﬁrewood of the
objects [of desire] is ablaze, he raises the clouds of his great compassion.
The rain of the Law will fall and cause its extinction.
95. “The gate of delusion has two parts and desire is the bolt. It conﬁnes
living beings. The way to escape is the gate of deliverance. With the pincers
of his adamantine wisdom he will pull out the adverse awl of lust.
96. “Entangled in the web of delusion one suffers, without anything to
rely on. When a king of the Law has stood up in the world, he can undo the
bonds of [living] beings.

10

Chapter I

97. “Do not give rise, O King, to the calamity of grief because of this
son! You should [instead] feel sorrow for the beings who are attached to
desire and who disregard the Right Law!
98. “I am destroyed now by old age and death, far removed from any
noble quality. I may have obtained the trance states but I did not obtain their
beneﬁts.
99. “I will never hear the Right Law from this Bodhisattva. When my
body is destroyed, after my life’s end I shall certainly be reborn in the three
difﬁcult heavens.”
100. When the king and his retinue heard the seer’s explanation, he knew
that he was distressed for himself. His fear was completely eradicated.
101. “Having this wonderful son, my heart is completely at ease. [But]
his going forth, giving up worldly splendor, his practice of the path of a seer,
and the fact that he will not succeed to the throne of the land still make me
unhappy.”
102. Then the seer spoke the truth to the king. “It certainly will be as you,
O King, anxiously think. He will complete the path of right awakening.”
103. Having appeased the minds of the king and his retinue, [the seer]
himself ascended into the sky through his divine power and departed.
104. Having seen the wonderful characteristics of his son and having
heard Asita’s decidedly truthful explanation, King Śuddhodana then held his
son in reverence. He redoubled his protection and always held him dear.
105. He issued a general pardon in the world and all prisons were thrown
open. When a person of this world has a son, he may accept or reject the fact,
according to what is proper. Everything is done relying on the instructions
found in the scriptural texts.
106. When ten days after the birth of his son had passed, the king felt
secure and calm at heart. He made all the sacriﬁces to the celestial spirits
and he gave liberal offerings to the virtuous.
107. The śramaṇas and brahmans offered incantations and prayed for
good fortune for [the king’s] close family and for all his ministers, and also
for the poor of the land.
108. A group of women from villages and towns, cows, horses, elephants,
money and material goods—all were provided according to everyone’s needs.

11

3c

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

109. [The king] selected an auspicious time through divination and moved
his son back to his own palace. The white tusks of the elephants, the chariot
adorned with the seven precious things, and precious stones of variegated
colors—their brilliance was utterly bright.
110. His wife held the Crown Prince in her arms and did obeisance to
the celestial spirits all around. She then mounted her precious chariot, with
a multitude of ladies waiting upon her.
111. The king and his ministers all accompanied her, like Śakra, the ruler
of the gods, surrounded by a multitude of gods.
112. Just as Maheśvara, to whom was unexpectedly born a six-faced
6
son, and who then arranged for every kind of preparation and provision and
asked for blessings, likewise the king, whose crown prince was now born,
arranged for all the preparations in the same way.
113. When the celestial king Vaiśravaṇa had Nalakūbara, the whole multitude of gods was ﬁlled with great joy.
114. The Crown Prince was now born to the king, and the whole population of the land of Kapilavastu was likewise ﬁlled with joy.

12

Chapter II

Life in the Palace
1. In the royal house of Śuddhodana, as he had a noble son, his close family
and namesake brethren and his ministers were all devoted then.
2. Elephants, horses and precious chariots, national riches, and vessels
with the seven precious things—these steadily increased day by day and were
accordingly amassed.
3. Countless hidden treasures spontaneously emerged from the earth. A
herd of maddened white elephants arrived on their own, without any call,
from the pure Snowy Mountains, and became subdued by themselves, not
curbed by any person.
4. All kinds of horses of variegated colors, their bodies utterly majestic,
with red manes and delicate, long tails, soared as swiftly as if they were
ﬂying. Born in the wilds at dawn, they arrived on their own at this occasion.
5. Unspotted, calm, ﬁne cows, strong, sturdy, and beautiful of body, all
gathered in great numbers with gentle steps and gave fragrant milk at this
occasion.
6. Enemies became peaceful, and neutrality gradually turned into pure
friendship. The sincere became close friends. Any rebellion was completely
eliminated.
7. It rained in due time with a gentle breeze, and the thunder did not roll.
Plants did not wait for their time [but bloomed out of season], and at the harvest the yield was double.
8. The ﬁve types of grains were fresh and fragrant, light and easy to
digest. All who were with child were content and physically at ease.
9. Except for those who experienced the fourfold attitudes of the noble,7
for all other people in the world goods were freely produced for each one.
They did not have any further needs.
10. There was no arrogance, stinginess, or envy, and no noxious thoughts
either. All men and women were as adept as anyone in the eon.

13

4a

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

4b

11. The temples of the gods and the monasteries, gardens, springs, and
ponds were all like heavenly things, emerging spontaneously on this occasion.
12. No one went hungry. Weapons disappeared and epidemics ceased.
The whole population in the land was like a close family, with mutually affectionate reverence.
13. With love for the Law [the people] indulged in mutual pleasures and
did not have any tainted desire. They sought after riches with righteousness,
free from any covetous thought.
14. They practiced generosity for the sake of the Law, and did not think
of seeking for any reward. They practiced the fourfold pure conduct,8 dispelling any noxious thought.
15. In the past, when the crown prince Āditya was born to King Manu,
the whole country met with good fortune and all evil was at once appeased.
16. When the Crown Prince was born to the present king, his virtue was
also like this. Because [the prince] was endowed with the meaningfulness
of all virtues, he was called Siddhārtha.
17. Then, when Lady Māyā saw that the son she had given birth to was
as beautiful as a celestial youth, completely endowed with everything beautiful, she was overcome with an excess of joy. Her life ended and she was
reborn in heaven.
18. Mahāprajāpātī Gautamī saw that the Crown Prince was a celestial
youth, that his virtuous appearance was wonderful in the world. After the
life of his natural mother ended, she raised him with affection, as if he were
her own son, and the child respected her as if she were his own mother.
19. Just as the glow of the sun and moon begins faintly but gradually
shines more brightly, the Crown Prince grew up, daily renewed. The same
applied to his virtuous appearance.
20. Priceless was his fragrance of sandalwood and his famous treasure
of jāmbūnada.9 Medicines of divine seers protected him and necklaces adorned
him.
21. When the dependent states in the region heard that the king had a crown
prince, they offered precious things, oxen and sheep, deer, horses, and carts.
22. Precious objects and ornaments help make the mind of a crown
prince joyful but, even though he had ornaments and the amusing toys of an
infant,

14

Chapter II

23. the Crown Prince’s nature was serious. His body was young but his
mind was mature. His mind was ﬁxed on a higher, excellent object, untainted
by [worldly] splendor.
24. When he studied arts and various skills, he surpassed his instructors
after hearing [their teachings] only once. Seeing his intelligence, the king,
his father, was deeply worried about the revelation that [the boy] would go
beyond the worldly.
25. [The king] inquired far and wide among the famous nobility about
a family with propriety and righteousness, instructed in deportment. The
maiden with the ﬁnest appearance was called Yaśodharā.
26. She was ﬁt to become his wife, the consort of a crown prince, alluring
him and holding his attention. But the Crown Prince’s view was lofty. His
virtue was great and his appearance clear and bright. He was like Sanatkumāra, the eldest son of a Brahma.
27. The beauty of the worthy consort and her attractive and fair disposition
were as captivating as a celestial queen’s. While dwelling together they were
joyful night and day.
28. They had a pure palace put up for them, spacious and beautiful, and
with the utmost in adornment. It rose high in the sky, just like a white cloud
in autumn.
29. As its temperature was adapted to the four seasons, [the prince] chose
the best dwelling for each season. He was surrounded by a group of singing
women, playing celestial music. He did not have any fondness for vulgar
music and women, which would raise a notion of disgust for the world.
30. Lady musicians played celestial sounds, just like celestial gandharvas
in their natural, precious palace. Their singing and beauty were dazzling to
the mind and eyes. Their music was like this while the Bodhisattva dwelled
high in his palace.
31. The king, his father, developed pure qualities for the sake of the
Crown Prince, dwelling in tranquility. Kind and friendly, he was converted
by the Right Law. He befriended the worthy and kept away from bad inﬂuences.
32. His mind was not tainted by lust. He believed that desire was poison.
Controlling his feelings, he restrained his faculties and dispelled any ﬁckle
intention.

15

4c

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

5a

33. He heard disputes well, with a serene countenance. He gave instructions in a friendly way and was disgusted by any animosity. His pronouncements converted heretics, and he put a stop to any rebellious plotting.
34. He taught the way to save the world, that all people might obtain
happiness. “Just as my son is happy now, may all people be the same!”
35. He made offerings to ﬁre and served the spirits. He held his palms
together and drank soma. He bathed in the waters of the Ganges and cleansed
his mind with the water of the Law. His prayers for good fortune were not
for his own preservation but indeed for his son and for all people.
36. His pleasant words were not without meaning, and his meaningful
words were not unpleasant. His pleasant words were not untrue, and his true
words were not unpleasant.
37. If he could not speak truthfully because he was ashamed, he did not,
concerning anything pleasant or unpleasant, rely on any notion of covetousness
or anger.
38. His purpose was to maintain silence. He was just and put a stop to
contentious disputes not by means of a gathering to bring sacriﬁces to the
gods, but by excelling in merit when deciding a matter.
39. When he saw beings with many aspirations, he gave abundantly,
beyond their expectations. In his mind there was no thought of hostility. He
subdued the enemy with virtue.
40. By disciplining one, he protected the seven. Free from the seven, he
guarded the ﬁve. Having obtained the three, he understood the three. Knowing
the two, he gave up the two.10
41. When someone interceded, he excused himself. Toward someone
who had received a death sentence, he was kind and forgiving. He did not
speak harshly but gave instructions with soft words. In his compassion he
was generous with his riches, pointing out the way to depend on them.
42. Trained in the path of divine seers, he dispelled any angry thought.
His fame and virtue were known all around, and his worldly ties were forever
severed.
43. When a master craftsman develops his bright virtue, the entire land
carries on the practice. In the same way, when someone’s mind is tranquil,
his four limbs and his faculties follow.

16

Chapter II

44. As the years passed, Yaśodharā, the worthy consort of Śuddhodana’s
Crown Prince, eventually [beame pregnant] and gave birth to Rāhula.
45. King Śuddhodana thought to himself, “My crown prince has a son.
My posterity will continue. The right changes will never end.
46. “Because the Crown Prince has a son, his love for his son will be the
same as mine. He will no longer consider going forth but will determinedly
develop goodness. My mind is now greatly at ease, just like the happiness
[one feels on] rebirth in heaven.”
47. Similar to the path on which the seer kings at the beginning of the
eon dwelled, he observed pure actions, and when offering sacriﬁces he brought
no injury to any living creature.
48. He developed numerous excellent actions. The king mastered the
excellence of pure conduct. His clan and its wealth were excellent. He was
valiant and possessed great skills.
49. He shone brightly in the world, just like the sun’s thousand-rayed
brightness. The way in which he was a king of humans was only to reveal
his son.
50. Revealing his son was [a boon] for his clan, bringing splendor to his
family through his fame. When one’s fame is great, one obtains rebirth in
heaven, and being reborn in heaven, one’s happiness is complete.
51. Being happy, wisdom increases. One gains insight into the path and
spreads the Right Law. When one’s ancestors have excelled in learning, one
may observe many ﬁne paths. [The king] wished only that the Crown Prince
would love his son and not renounce his family.
52. While a son is still young, no king lets him rule the land, considering
that [the son’s] mind may yet be negligent. When one gives reign to one’s
emotions and is attached to worldly happiness, one cannot continue the royal
lineage.
53. But now that the king had a crown prince, he indulged him in the
ﬁve desires at his whim. He wished only that [his son] would enjoy worldly
splendor. He did not want to let him apply himself to the path.
54. The bodhisattva kings of the past, even though their path was very
ﬁrm, wanted to develop the happiness of worldly splendor and have sons to
continue their posterity. Only then did they enter a mountain forest and
practice the path of silence.

17

5b

Chapter III

Disgust

1. Outside [the palace] there were gardens, ﬂowing springs, and cool ponds.
Various trees with ﬂowers and fruits were planted in rows, casting deep shade.
2. Wondrous birds of different kinds ﬂew and sported about. Four kinds
of ﬂowers, on water and land, gave out their ﬁne wafting fragrance with blazing colors.
3. Singing women accordingly played music, and their music and songs
attracted the Crown Prince. While the Crown Prince was listening to these
sounds, he admired the gardens.
4. Inwardly he felt profound joy and he wanted to make an excursion
[outside the palace] and have a look, just as a chained maddened elephant
constantly longs for the wilderness.
5. When the king, his father, heard that the Crown Prince wanted to make
an excursion to the gardens, he ordered his ministers to display ornamentation
and prepare ceremonial plumes.
6. He had the main royal road made level and anyone offensive removed:
the aged, the sick and deformed, the weak, and those suffering in poverty.
He did not want his young, happy son see anything that would raise disgust.
7. When the adornments were duly prepared, [the prince] stated his
request and asked to take leave. On the Crown Prince’s approach, the king
patted his head and gazed long at his face. [The king’s] feelings of sadness
and joy were intermingled. He gave his verbal permission, but in his mind
he held back.
8. As for [the prince’s] high chariot ornamented with a multitude of precious things, the four swift horses paced slowly. He was worthy and virtuous
and had expert skills. He was youthful with a beautiful appearance. He wore
a ﬁne, pure garment with fresh ﬂowers, and riding in the same chariot was
the one who held the reins.
9. The streets were strewn with ﬂowers, and precious drapery covered the
sides of the road. Trees lined the road, forming a fence, adorned with precious
19

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

5c

objects. A profusion of silken parasols and pendant streamers waved in the
wind.
10. Spectators crowded all along the road, bowing. Their eyes were
bright and they gazed without blinking, resembling lines of blue lotuses.
11. [The prince’s] entire retinue of subjects followed him, just as stars
follow the ruler of the constellations. From many mouths came the same
sound of admiration, extolling the wonder in the world.
12. Noble and base, rich and poor, young and old and middle-aged—all
reverentially did obeisance and wished only for [the prince’s] good fortune.
13. When in the villages and in the ﬁelds they heard that the Crown
Prince was going out, both the worthy and those of low status did not wait
to take leave, and those who were awake did not [take time to] notify those
who were asleep.
14. One did not waste time gathering the six domestic animals. Material
possessions were not important enough to safeguard and no one made fast
the doors. They hurried to the side of the road.
15. In the high pavilions and in the trees on the embankments, in the
windows and at the crossroads, pressing together to see his face, they gazed
steadily, tirelessly watching.
16. Spectators on high thought they had been dropped to the ground,
and those on foot thought they had ascended into the sky. In their singlemindedness they did not realize that both body and spirit were ﬂying, as it
were. They reverently watched [the prince], full of respect for his appearance,
without any thought of negligence.
17. “His round members and straight limbs, their color is like a lotus in
full blossom. Now he has left the grove where he lives, wishing to become
a seer of the noble Law.”
18. When the Crown Prince saw the well-kept roads, the adornments,
and the crowds of attendants, the fresh brightness of the garments and the
carriages, he was pleased and joyful at heart.
19. When the people of the land gazed at the Crown Prince, at his digniﬁed deportment and his excellent attendants, who were like a crowd of
royals, they saw that a god had been born as their crown prince.
20. Then the king of the gods of the pure abodes suddenly transformed
by the side of the road into an old person, inducing thoughts of disgust.

20

Chapter III

When the Crown Prince saw the old man, he was startled and questioned
his charioteer:
21. “What kind of a person is this? His hair is white and his back bent.
His eyes are bleary and his body trembles. He is weak and walks with a
stick. Did his body change all of a sudden, or did he receive this form quite
naturally?”
22. The charioteer hesitated and did not dare answer truthfully. [The god
of] the pure abodes increased his divine power, so that [the charioteer] revealed
the words of the truth.
23. “His beauty has gone and he has lost his vigor. He has many sorrows
and few pleasures. Joys are forgotten and the faculties have become weak.
These are the so-called characteristics of old age.
24. “He once was an infant, nourished by his mother’s milk. As a lad
he was outgoing. He was handsome and indulged in the ﬁve desires. As the
years passed, his appearance withered. Now he is destroyed by old age.”
25. The Crown Prince gave a deep sigh and asked the charioteer, “Is he
just the only one who has old age, or shall we also be like that?”
26. The charioteer replied, “Your Highness will also know this fate. As
time changes, one’s appearance naturally changes. It will certainly happen,
without any doubt. There is no strong youth who does not age. The whole
world knows [this truth], but still hopes otherwise.”
27. The Bodhisattva had long developed pure actions of wisdom and
had widely planted roots of merit. Their agreeable fruition was now ocurring.
Hearing the explanation about the suffering of old age, he trembled and his
hair stood on end.
28. When thunder makes a loud sound, animals ﬂee in fear. The same
was true for the Bodhisattva. Shaken by fear, he sighed deeply.
29. Steadily and intently gazing on the suffering of old age, he shook
his head. “With this suffering of old age in mind, what happiness can a
worldling know?
30. “One is destroyed by the signs of old age. They touch all without
exception. One may possess youth, beauty, and strength, yet there is no one
who does not change. Seeing these characteristics realized in front of one’s
eyes, how can one not feel disgust?”

21

6a

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

6b

31. The Bodhisattva said to his charioteer, “Quickly turn the chariot and
go back! As old age is constantly approaching, what joy could these gardens
afford?
32. “My life rushes on like the wind. Turn back to my palace with ﬂying
wheels!” With thoughts dwelling upon that object of decay, he returned to
an empty tomb, as it were.
33. Touched by the matter and unable to hold back his emotions, he
found no rest at all within his home. When the king heard that his son was
unhappy, he urged him to make another excursion. He immediately ordered
his ministers to make the adornments even more excellent than before.
34. The god further transformed into a sick person, barely clinging to
life by the side of the road. He was emaciated but his belly was swollen. As
he breathed he gasped deeply. His hands and feet were spasmodic and [the
skin was] parched. He wept sadly and groaned.
35. The Crown Prince asked his charioteer, “What kind of a man is this
then?” He replied, “This is somone who has disease. His four elements are
in disorder. He is weak and ﬁt for nothing. When one turns to one’s side, one
relies on someone else.”
36. When the Crown Prince heard the explanation, he immediately felt
grief in his heart. He asked, “Is just this man sick, or would others also be
like that?”
37. [The charioteer] replied, “For all in this world it is the same. Having
a body, one must endure ailment. Yet in one’s foolishness one may enjoy the
joys of the court.”
38. When the Crown Prince heard this explanation, he immediately
became very afraid. His body trembled and his mind was disturbed, just as
the moon appears in rippling waves.
39. “Dwelling in this receptacle of great suffering, how can one be at
ease? Alas! People in the world are misled by foolishness and impeded by
delusion. Even though the thief of illness may arrive at any time, they have
happy thoughts.”
40. Thereupon he turned the chariot and went back, in sadness, thinking
of the suffering of illness. [The prince] was like a man who is badly beaten
and who curls up and waits for the next blow. He went to rest in his secluded
palace and wanted only to turn his back on worldly happiness.

22

Chapter III

41. When the king again heard that his son had returned, he asked why.
He was told, “He has seen a sick person.” The king was afraid, as if he might
lose his life. After severely reprimanding the one who was supposed to have
cleared the road, his heart was constrained and he was unable to speak.
42. Again [the king] increased the number of singing women. Their
music was twice as excellent as before. Rejoicing in those sounds and sights,
[the prince] might experience common pleasures and not become weary of
family life. Night and day he was offered music and women, but his heart
did not even begin to rejoice.
43. The king went out on an excursion himself, and sought even harder
for excellent ﬁne gardens. He selected ladies who were charming and who
had an utterly licentious manner. They were artful and knew how to be of
service. They were attractive, capable of misleading men.
44. He took special care of the royal highway, guarding it against anything
unpleasant, and he ordered a ﬁne charioteer to be on the lookout and choose
the way as he went.
45. Then the god of the pure abodes further transformed into a dead person.
The funeral bier carried by four men appeared in front of the Bodhisattva. No
one else noticed anything, but the Bodhisattva and his charioteer saw it.
46. He asked, “What kind of a bier is this? Streamers and ﬂowers, and
various decorations! The attendants are all grieving, walking along with
disheveled hair and bitterly weeping.”
47. A celestial spirit instructed the charioteer to reply, “This is a dead
person. His faculties are ruined and his life has ended. His mind and consciousness have departed. His spirit is gone and his body is parched, as rigid
as a dead log.
48. “His relatives and friends were bound by their love before, but now
no one is happy to see him. They will abandon him in an empty tomb.”
49. When the Crown Prince heard the word “dead,” he felt grief and his
thoughts were constrained. He asked, “Is only this person dead, or does the
same apply to all in the world too?”
50. The reply came, “All are the same everywhere. With a beginning
there certainly will be an end. Old and young and middle-aged, having a
body they all go to ruin.”

23

6c

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

51. The Crown Prince was startled and leaned against the front of his
chariot. His breathing almost stopped and he sighed, “How mistaken are the
people in the world!
52. “They openly see the obliteration of the body, yet negligence arises.
In one’s mind it is neither a dead log nor a stone, yet no one ever considers
its impermanence.”
53. He immediately ordered [the charioteer] to turn the chariot and go
back. “There is no more time for excursions. Life is fragile and death unexpected. Why indulge in an excursion?”
54. But the charioteer had received an order from the king. He was afraid
and did not dare turn back. He drove on and swiftly urged on [the horses].
He went straight to the gardens.
55. The streams in the grove were majestic and clean, and the ﬁne trees
were all blossoming. Divine birds and wondrous animals ﬂew and ran about,
singing joyfully and harmoniously. Their radiance was a joy for one’s ears
and eyes. It looked like the Celestial Nanda Garden.11

24

Chapter IV

Renunciation
1. When the Crown Prince entered the garden, a multitude of maidens came
to welcome him. They all gave rise to the idea that [such beauties] are rarely
encountered. Rivals in attractiveness, they presented their subtle sincerity.
Each one exhausted her ingenious poses, waiting upon him as was ﬁtting.
2. Some grasped his hands and feet and some fondled him all over. Others
laughed in response and some showed a sad countenance. They planned to
please the Crown Prince, so that he would have happy thoughts.
3. When the multitude of maidens saw the Crown Prince’s bright complexion
and his appearance, which was that of a celestial ﬁgure, and which did not
require any ornamentation but whose plain person surpassed all adornment,
they all looked on and thought that Candramas, the celestial son, had come.
4. They devised all kinds of means [to please him] but they did not move
the Bodhisattva’s mind. Looking at each other, they became ashamed and
fell silent, not uttering a word.
5. There was the son of a brahman called Udāyin. He said to the ladies,
“You are all beautiful.
6. “You are intelligent and very skillful, but the power of your beauty
is not permanent. You fully understand the worldly and its secret ways to
comply with desire.
7. “Your appearance is wonderful, as if you have the look of jade ladies.
When gods see you they may reject their queens, and divine seers would
waver because of it. Why would it be impossible for the son of a human king
to be moved by his emotions?
8. “Even though this royal crown prince’s self-control may now be ﬁrm,
he may be pure and just, and endowed only with virtue, he is not superior to
the power of women.
9. “Long ago, Sundarī was able to destroy a great seer.12 She led him to
indulge in desire and stepped on his head with her foot. Dīrghatapas Gautama
was also ruined by a celestial queen.
25

7a

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

7b

10. “The son of the seer Vibhāṇḍaka13 indulged in desire and he subsequently went along with the currents [of samsara]. The brahman seer Viśvāmitra cultivated the path for tens of thousands of years. He became deeply
attached to a celestial queen and was suddenly destroyed in one day.
11. “If the power of those beautiful maidens overcame pure conduct, all
the more can your skills move the prince! Apply yourselves even more diligently and do not let the royal succession be interrupted!
12. “A woman may be low by nature, yet the worthy will subsequently
be overcome by her. Why do you not exhaust your tricks so that he may have
tainted thoughts?”
13. Then, when the crowd of ladies had merrily heard Udāyin’s explanation, they increased their joy, just as when a ﬁne horse is ﬂogged with a
whip. They went before the Crown Prince and each one presented several
kinds of tricks.
14. They sang and danced, or talked and laughed, raising their eyebrows
and showing their white teeth. They glanced sidelong at him with their beautiful
eyes, and their sheer garments made their white bodies visible. Daintily moving
with a mincing gait, feigning affection, one after the other attended to him.
15. In their desire they were genuine at heart, and fully carried out the
words of the great king. With dissolute appearance, irreverent and vulgar,
they forgot their sense of shame.
16. But the Crown Prince’s mind was ﬁrm. He was unyielding and did
not change his countenance. He was like a great dragon-elephant, surrounded
by a herd of elephants.
17. They could not confuse his mind. He dwelled among the multitude
as if he were residing in solitude, just like Śakra, ruler of the gods, surrounded
by celestial maidens. While the Crown Prince was in the garden, he was surrounded in the same way.
18. Some arranged their dress for him, and some washed his hands and
feet. Some applied perfume, and some adorned themselves with ﬂowers.
19. Some strung necklaces, and some embraced him closely. Some rested
on their couches, and some murmured conﬁdentialities with heads inclined.
20. Some engaged in common diversions, and some talked of a multitude
of amorous things. Some assumed a lustful appearance, trying to move his
heart.

26

Chapter IV

21. The Bodhisattva’s heart remained pure, ﬁrm and difﬁcult to change.
Hearing the words of the ladies, he felt neither sorrow nor joy.
22. He doubled his considerations of disgust. He sighed, thinking all
this was strange. He knew for the ﬁrst time that lustful thoughts of women
were so abundant.
23. “They do not know that youthful beauty is ruined in a moment by old
age and death. Alas! Such great delusion! Foolishness obscures their minds.
24. “They should consider old age, illness, and death, and night and day
apply and exert themselves! While a sharp sword hangs over their neck, how
can they still have fun?
25. “They see the old age, illness, and death of others but do not know
how to observe themselves. They are people of mud and wood—what anxieties would they have?
26. “When, for instance, there are two trees in the wild, both with luxuriant ﬂowers and leaves; when one is cut down, the other one does not know
fear. These people are just as unwitting.”
27. Then Udāyin came to where the Crown Prince was. He saw that he
was quietly meditating in silence, his mind free from any notion of the ﬁve
desires.
28. He then said to the Crown Prince, “Earlier I was ordered by the great
king to be a good friend for his son. I shall offer you some honest words now.
29. “There are three kinds of friends. One may do away with what is
unproﬁtable. One may accomplish what is proﬁtable for someone else. And
one will not abandon you in adversity.
30. “If, after having been called your good friend, I were to abandon my
duty as a man and if my words do not fully reveal my feelings, why use the
term ‘three gains’? I shall therefore speak true words now in order to show
my sincerity.
31. “If one’s years are in a time of abundance and one is fully endowed
with a beautiful complexion but does not esteem women, this is not the style
of a superior man. They may just bring about unreal thoughts, but you should
strive to be receptive!
32. “You should have yielding thoughts and captivate them with courtesy!
Desire increases pride, and nothing surpasses that of a woman. Your thoughts
may be averse now, but you should strive to comply with their way!

27

7c

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

8a

33. “When you are courteous to a maiden, her heart is happy. Courtesy
is an ornament. If one forsakes courtesy, one is like a tree without ﬂowers
and fruits.
34. “Why the need for courtesy? In order to receive their services! You
have obtained hard-to-obtain sense objects. Do not give rise to any idea of
contempt!
35. “Desire is ﬁrst and foremost. Even the gods cannot forget about it!
Even Lord Śakra had an illicit affair with the wife14 of the seer Gautama.
36. “The seer Agastya practiced asceticism for a long time, but because
he wanted a celestial queen his wishes were consequently unrealized.
37. “The seer Bṛhaspati and the celestial son Candramas, the seer Parāśara
and Kapiñjalāda, all such, out of many others, were ruined by women.
38. “In addition, regarding your own sense objects now, would you be
unable to enjoy them? Having planted meritorious roots in your past lives,
you have obtained these numerous beauties. The whole world is attached to
happiness, but your heart, on the other hand, does not value this.”
39. Then, when the royal Crown Prince had heard the specious words
and ﬂuent eloquence of his friend Udāyin, skillfully explaining the characteristics of the world,
40. He answered, “Udāyin, I am moved by your sincere explanation. I
will say something to you now. Listen attentively!
41. “I do not despise ﬁne sense objects and I know that they give people
in the world happiness, but because I see that they are characterized by impermanence, I am weary of them in mind.
42. “If [such sense objects and pleasures] would permanently stay this
way, without the suffering of old age, illness, and death, I too would experience
happiness and never feel any disgust.
43. “If one might [make fast] the beauty of the maidens, without ﬁnal
decay, even though desire is an error I might yet entertain my human feelings.
44. “If someone experiences old age, illness, and death, he himself should
not be happy, much less feel any attachment for someone else!
45. “Impermanent are the objects of the ﬁve desires, and the same also
applies to one’s own person. But if one lets thoughts of happiness arise, one
is on a level with birds and beasts.
46. “The seers you mentioned were attached to the ﬁve desires. One

28

Chapter IV

should immediately be weary of them. They were ruined because they
indulged in desire.
47. “You have further extolled that excellent king who was attached to
the objects of the ﬁve desires, but he too was ruined in the same way. Know
that he was not excellent!
48. “If you skillfully say that one should pretend, make an effort, and
attend to them out of courtesy, if one indulges in them, then one really is
attached. Why use the term ‘effort’?
49. “Considering deceit to be courtesy, I do not do such a thing. To someone who is really courteous, this is wrong.
50. “Such thoughts are hard to repress. One becomes attached according
to the circumstances. If one is attached, one does not see any error. Why
make an effort for [the sake of] courtesy?
51. “A devious mind with idle courtesy—I do not see that it is right.
Know that old age, illness, and death are a mass of great suffering!
52. “Advising me to fall into that—these are not the words of a good
friend. Alas, Udāyin! You really are very sincere!
53. “The ailments of birth, old age, illnesss, and death—this suffering
is very dreadful. The eyes see that all decays, yet one ﬁnds happiness in their
pursuit.
54. “I am utterly wearied now, and this heart of mine is constrained too.
Considering that old age, illness, and death suddenly arrive, unanticipated,
night and day I forget to sleep. Why would I indulge in the ﬁve desires?
55. “Old age, illness, and death are ablaze. They will surely arrive,
without any doubt. If one still does not know any sadness, one’s heart really
is made of wood or stone.”
56. While the Crown Prince was explaining to Udāyin with all kinds of
ingenious means that desire is a profound ailment, he did not notice that the
sun was setting.
57. As their music and ornaments all were useless, the multitude of ladies
then felt shame and returned to the city.
58. When the Crown Prince saw that the decorations in the garden were
all withdrawn and that the singing women had all returned home, the place
completely deserted, he doubled his thoughts about impermanence and quickly
returned to his palace.

29

8b

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

59. When the king, his father, heard that the Crown Prince was averse
to the ﬁve desires, he was utterly and deeply grieved, as if a sharp dart had
pierced his heart.
60. He immediately summoned his ministers and asked them to devise
a means. They all said, “It is not the case that what the ﬁve desires are capable
of will hold his attention.”

30

Chapter V

Leaving the City
1. The king further increased all kinds of exquisite provisions for the ﬁve
desires. He hoped to gladden the Crown Prince’s heart with pleasures night
and day.
2. The Crown Prince was profoundly weary and completely without any
feeling of happiness. He considered only the suffering of birth and death,
like a lion struck by an arrow.
3. The king had the famous brethren of the nobility and of his chief ministers, young in years and of excellent appearance, intelligent and with digniﬁed manners, accompany the Crown Prince night and day in order to capture
his heart.
4. And so, after a little while, [the prince] informed the king that he
would go out on another excursion. Mounted on a swift horse, decorated
with a multitude of precious things, and surrounded by the sons of the nobility,
they all left the city.
5. Just as the four kinds of ﬂowers all open when the sun shines, the
Crown Prince dazzled the divine scene and his attendants all received his
brightness.
6. As he left the city and traveled through the gardens, the long road was
wide and level. The ﬂowers and fruits on the trees were luxuriant. He was
happy at heart and consequently forgot to return.
7. He saw plowmen by the side of the road. As they cultivated the soil
they [inadvertently] killed insects. He felt sad at heart, and the pain was
greater than that of a dart piercing his heart.
8. He further saw the farmers toiling, their appearance drawn. Their hair
was disheveled and they dripped with sweat, their bodies foul with dirt.
9. The plowing oxen were exhausted too, with lolling tongues, panting
heavily. The Crown Prince’s nature was compassionate and he felt utter pity
in his heart.

31

8c

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

9a

10. Deeply sighing with sadness, he dismounted, stooped to the ground,
and sat down. While observing all this suffering, he considered the law of
birth and extinction.
11. “Alas for the entire world! One is foolish and absolutely unable to
wake up.” He comforted the crowd of people and bade each one sit down
where they were.
12. He himself was sitting upright in the shade of the jambū tree, given
to right consideration. He observed that all birth and death, origination and
extinction, were changing through impermanence.
13. His mind was concentrated, ﬁrmly established. The wide cloud of
the ﬁve desires had dissipated. With adjusted and discursive thinking he
entered the ﬁrst trance without impurity.
14. Free from desire, he produced joy and happiness, rightly experiencing
samādhi. “The world is very painful, ruined by old age, illness, and death.
15. “One’s whole life is experiencing great suffering, yet one still does
not realize this. Disgust with the old age, illness, and death of others, this is
a serious ailment.
16. “I will now seek for the excellent Law; I must not do the same as
the world! I myself am entangled in old age, illness, and death, but I ﬁnd
[the situation of] others rather worse.
17. “Such is the observation of the truth. Youth, beauty, strength, and
long life are constantly and ceaselessly renewed. In the end they disappear
[according to] the law of destruction.”
18. Neither joyful nor sorrowful, neither doubting nor confused, neither
sleepy nor attached to desire, without aversion or contempt for others, he
was quiet, free from any hindrance. The light of his wisdom steadily increased
its brightness.
19. Then the god of the pure abodes transformed into the appearance of
a bhikṣu. He came to where the Crown Prince was and the Crown Prince
respectfully rose to welcome him.
20. The Crown Prince asked, “Who are you?” He replied, “I am a śramaṇa.
In fear of old age, illness, and death I have gone forth in search of deliverance.
21. “Beings grow old, fall ill, and die. Their ruin does not stop even for
a while. Therefore I seek the happiness of permanence, without either extinction or birth.

32

Chapter V

22. “Friend or foe, my mind remains even. I do not devote my efforts
to riches or beauty. I am only at ease in a mountain forest, living in isolation
and managing nothing.
23. “My unclean notions have stopped and I am quietly engaged in seclusion. I do not choose between ﬁne and coarse [food]. I beg in order to support
myself.” In front of the Crown Prince, [the śramaṇa] then suddenly ascended
into the sky and departed.
24. The Crown Prince was joyful at heart, thinking only of the buddhas
of the past. They had established this digniﬁed demeanor, their bequeathed
likenesses visible in the present. Sitting upright and given to right consideration, he obtained mindfulness of the Right Law.
25. “What means should I apply myself to for a lasting going-forth, as
I wish to?” Controlling his feelings and restraining his faculties, he slowly
rose and returned to the city.
26. His whole retinue followed, thinking he would stop and not go far.
While sympathy internally arose, he strived to surpass the worldly external.
27. Even though his body followed the way back, his mind really
remained in a mountain forest, just like a chained maddened elephant who
constantly thinks of wandering through the wilderness.
28. When the Crown Prince then entered the city, men and women welcomed him, jamming the road. The elderly wished he were their son and the
young wished to be his wife. Some wished to be his brothers, his friends, or
his inner retinue.
29. “If I were to comply with their wishes, their accumulated expectations
would be annihilated.” The Crown Prince was joyful in his heart, suddenly
hearing the words “annihilation” and “accumulation.”
30. “I am happy with these words. This expectation will be accomplished!” He profoundly considered the happiness of annihilating accumulation, and increased his thoughts about nirvana.
31. His body was like a peak of the golden mountains, and his straight
arms were like an elephant’s. He sounded like the thunder in spring and his
blue eyes were like an ox king’s.
32. The Law without end was on his mind, and his face was as bright
as the full moon. With the gait of a lion king, he slowly entered his palace.

33

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts
9b

33. Resembling a son of Lord Śakra, his mind was respectful and his
appearance was reverential too. He went to the king, his father, prostrated
before him, and asked him if he was well. He also stated his fear of birth and
death, and entreated him, wishing to go forth.
34. “All the worldly, when united, certainly will be separated. Therefore
I wish to go forth and seek true deliverance.”
35. When the king, his father, heard that [his son] would go forth, he
immediately started trembling inside, just as when a large maddened elephant
moves a sapling’s twig. He approached and seized the hands of the Crown
Prince. His tears ﬂowed and he said:
36. “Stop this talk! It is not yet the right time to rely on the doctrine! In
youth the mind is not steady. One makes many mistakes in the practice of
the Law.
37. “Wonderful are the objects of the ﬁve desires. Your mind is still not
disgusted with them. If you go forth and practice asceticism, you will not
yet be capable of a settled mind.
38. “In the wilderness, in seclusion, your mind will not yet be tranquil.
Even if your mind were happy with the Law, you would not yet have reached
my stage [of life].
39. “You should direct affairs of the state, so that I may go forth ﬁrst. It
is wrong to abandon your father and interrupt our posterity.
40. “You should put a stop to the intention of going forth, and assume
your worldly duties. When you are happy, with ﬁne fame, only then may you
go forth!”
41. The Crown Prince declined with reverential submission, and further
said to the king, his father, “Only if you will preserve four things will I relinguish my intention to go forth.
42. “If, preserving me, your son, my life will always be maintained, if I
will be without any illness and free from aging, and if none of my possessions
will be destroyed, I will accept your command and desist from going forth.”
43. The king, his father, said to the Crown Prince, “Do not say these words!
Such four things, who could preserve one so that one does not have them!
44. “If you seek for these four wishes, you will rightly be ridiculed by
others. Now, put a stop to your intention to go forth, and submit to the ﬁve
desires!”

34

Chapter V

45. The Crown Prince further informed the king, “If the four wishes
cannot be preserved, you must allow me, your son, to go forth! I wish you
would not make any difﬁculties.
46. “When your son is in a house on ﬁre, why not allow him to leave?
Since my analysis is [in accord with] the eternal truth, who could not honor
my request?
47. “In escaping the coming self-destruction, there is nothing like transcending it with the Law. If one did not transcend with the Law, who could
maintain onself in the face of death?”
48. The king, the father, knew that his son’s mind was certain and could
not be changed. He just had to do his utmost to hold him back. “Why the
need for more words!”
49. He increased the exquisite happiness of the ﬁve desires with the
ladies even more. Night and day suffering was warded off, so that [the Crown
Prince] would certainly not wish to go forth.
50. The ministers in the land came to the Crown Prince and extensively
spoke of the rules of propriety, urging him to comply with the king’s command.
51. When the Crown Prince saw that the king, his father, was sad and
wept, his tears ﬂowing, he momentarily returned to his palace. Sitting upright,
he pondered in silence.
52. The ladies in the palace held him dear. They surrounded him and
waited upon him. They observed him, gazing at his face. They gazed at him
unblinking, just like a deer in the autumn forest, looking straight at the hunter.
53. The Crown Prince’s whole complexion was like a mountain of real
gold. The singing women all looked at him and, listening for his instructions,
waited for the expression of his voice. They observed his thoughts with reverence, just as that deer in the forest.
54. Gradually sunset arrived. The Crown Prince dwelled in the dark
night, but his light was very bright, just as the sun shining on Mount Sumeru.
55. While he was sitting on his seat with the seven precious things, perfumed with ﬁne sandalwood, the multitude of ladies surrounded him and
played gandharva music. It was just like the son of Vaiśravaṇa and the many
ﬁne sounds of celestial music.
56. What the Crown Prince had on his mind was the highest happiness
of renunciation. Even though [the ladies] brought many ﬁne sounds, they
still were not in his heart.
35

9c

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

10a

57. Then the celestial sons of the pure abodes knew that the Crown
Prince’s time had come, and that he would surely go forth. They suddenly
transformed and descended. Disdainful of the multitude of singing women,
they caused them all to fall asleep.
58. The bearing [of the women] was uncontrolled. [With bodies] bent
and lax, they showed their ugly appearance. They were numb, their faces
alternately turned downward or upward. Their musical instruments were
scattered in disarray. Some leaned sideways or had fallen over, and others
looked as if they had been dropped into an abyss.
59. Their necklaces were like dragging chains, and their garments were
swathed around their bodies. Some were lying down on the ﬂoor, clasping
the zither, like someone who is experiencing suffering. Their yellow and
green garments were spread out, just like broken karṇi[kāra] ﬂowers.
60. With loose limbs they leaned against the walls, eyes closed, their
shape like a hanging horn-bow. Some held on to a window with their hands
and looked like strangled corpses. They groaned incessantly and gasped
deeply. They were repugnant, sniveling and salivating.
61. With disheveled hair they showed their ugly appearance. They looked
like mad people. Flower garlands were hanging across their faces. Some
were lying face down on the ﬂoor, and some were trembling all over, just
like a lone shivering bird.
62. Their bodies bent, they leaned on each other like pillows, hands and
feet entwined. Some knit their brows and frowned, and some closed their
eyes and opened their mouths. All kinds of bodies were dispersed, scattered
about like corpses after an untimely death.
63. The Crown Prince then sat up and observed the ladies. They had all
been utterly majestic before, talking and laughing, their thoughts ingratiating
and clever. They had been bewitching and ingenious in seduction, but now
they all were repugnant.
64. “If the nature of woman is such, how can one hold them dear? When
bathing and making use of ornaments, they deceive the minds of men. I have
understood now! I will certainly go forth, without any doubt!”
65. Then the gods of the pure abodes came down and opened the gate
for him. The Crown Prince then slowly rose and left the room of the ladies.
He hesitated in his inner chambers and said to Chandaka:

36

Chapter V

66. “My mind is thirsty now. I want to drink from the spring of immortality. Put a cover on my horse and quickly bring it here! I want to reach the
region of deathlessness. I am fully conscious and my mind has decided. It
is ﬁrm and adorned with a solemn oath.
67. “The ladies once were beautiful, but now they all show an ugly
appearance. The doors were closed before, but now they have all opened of
themselves. I observe that these auspicious signs are a snare for the highest
meaning.”
68. Chandaka pondered whether he should obey the Crown Prince’s
instructions. If he did not inform the king, the father, he would then be charged
with a serious fault.
69. The gods increased their divine power and brought the horse, unobserved. The swift, ﬁne horse, [the Crown Prince’s] usual mount, was
equipped with gear inlaid with precious things.
70. [The horse had] long bright blue [plumes] and a long mane and tail,
a curved back and short hair and ears, the belly of a deer, and the neck of a
goose king. Its forehead was wide and its nose round, like a gourd.
71. [It had] the throat of a dragon. Its kneecaps and chest were square.
It was endowed with the marks of a thoroughbred. The Crown Prince stroked
the horse’s neck and, patting it, he said:
72. “The king, my father, has often mounted you, and, descending on
his enemies, has swiftly overcome his foes. I now want to rely on you to
cross the distant ford to immortality.
73. “In battle one has numerous troops, and in the happiness of prosperity
one has many companions. When a merchant seeks for precious things, those
who happily follow him are numerous too.
74. “But when one encounters suffering, a good friend is hard to ﬁnd.
When striving for the Law, one certainly has few friends. He who is supported
by these two friends will obtain peace in the end.
75. “I now want to go out to save suffering beings. If you now want
what is good for you, and also to save the people, you should exert yourself
and gallop away! Do not be tired!”
76. Having urged it on, he slowly mounted his horse. He took control
of the reins and at once rode off into the morning. His human shape was
ﬂoating like the sun’s palace, and the horse ﬂoated like a white cloud.

37

10b

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

10c

77. Controlled and without exertion, with bated breath it did not neigh.
Four spirits came and held up its feet, in secret, silently, without a sound. The
heavy gates and their ﬁrm bolts were opened by the celestial spirits themselves.
78. Their reverence for the father was unsurpassed, but their affection
was deeper for no one than for the son. They and their external retinues were
bound by love too. Leaving his feelings behind, but without leaving his memories, he swiftly went beyond the city walls.
79. With eyes like pure lotuses springing from the mud, he looked back
at the palace of the king, his father, and spoke the words of his farewell, “If
I do not cross over birth, old age, and death, I will never have a reason to
travel here!”
80. The multitude of all the gods, dragons, and spirits in the sky rejoiced
and they said in praise, “Splendid! Yes, these are true words!”
81. The gods and the host of dragons and spirits rejoiced at his acquisition
of a mind that is difﬁcult to acquire. Each guided him with the light of his
power, assisting him with their brightness.
82. Man and horse both were keen-spirited and hurried on like a shooting
star. Before it dawned in the east, they had advanced three yojanas.

38

Fascicle Two
Chapter VI

Chandaka’s Return
1. The night had passed in a moment and the light in the eyes of the beings
had come up. He looked back and saw the dwelling of the seer Bhārgava
among the trees of the forest. The forest and the rivers were utterly clear, and
birds and animals were kind to people.
2. The Crown Prince was glad at heart when he saw this, and his physical
suffering was naturally appeased. “This then is a lucky sign. I shall certainly
obtain wonderful beneﬁt!”
3. He further saw that the seer was someone he should worship, and,
keeping his digniﬁed demeanor, he dispelled any trace of pride.
4. He stepped down from his horse and patted it on the head. “You have
taken me across now.” With friendly eyes he looked at Chandaka, as if bathing
him with cool water.
5. “My swift horse’s speed is like the fast ﬂight of a bird, but you have
always been close behind the horse. I am moved by your profound reverence
and diligence.
6. “My other concerns may be countless, but, yes, I recognize your sincerity. Your heart is respectful and you appear is very diligent. These two, I
now see them for the ﬁrst time.
7. “Some are utterly sincere, but their corporal strength is inadequate;
or their strength is adequate but their heart is not sincere. You are endowed
with both now.
8. “You have rejected splendid worldly recompense. You have walked
out and followed me. Who does not turn toward beneﬁt! If there is no beneﬁt,
relatives separate. But you have followed me now for nothing. You did not
seek for any recompense in the present world.
39

11a

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

11b

9. “Why would one raise a son? In order to continue the clan. The reason
one pays respect to a father is because he has raised his son. All seek beneﬁt,
but you alone have traveled with me, unconcerned about beneﬁt.
10. “What is there to understand with more words! I shall now summarily
tell you: Your service to me has ended. Mount the horse now and return! The
place that I have wanted for a long time, I have now obtained it.”
11. [The prince] immediately took off his precious necklaces and gave
them to Chandaka. “I take these and present them to you, to soothe your grief.”
12. The light of the maṇi atop of his precious crown shone. He immediately took it off and placed it in his palm. It was like the sun lighting up
Sumeru.
13. “Chandaka, take this pearl and return to the king, my father! Do obeisance at the king’s feet with this pearl in order to show my respect. State my
request to the king for me: I wish that he would give up his feelings of love!
14. “In order to do away with birth, old age, and death, I have entered
the forest of asceticism, but I do not seek rebirth in heaven. It is not the case
that I do not have a loving heart. Nor do I feel any dislike. I want only to
give up grief.
15. “Having accumulated love for a long time, one will certainly know
separation. Because there is always separation I seek the cause of deliverance.
When I am delivered I shall never be separated from my relatives.
16. “I leave my family to put a stop to affection. He must not feel sorrow
for me, his son! The ﬁve desires are the root of sorrow. One should feel
sorrow for those who are attached to desire!
17. “The purpose of the excellent kings, our ancestors, was ﬁrm and did
not change. I have now inherited all their riches except for the Law, and I
reject that which is not proper.
18. “When someone’s life has ended, his riches are all left to his son. Sons
mostly covet mundane proﬁt, but I am happy with the riches of the Law.
19. “If one says that the strength of youth is not the right time to go out
to study, know that the search for the Right Law is without any right time.
It is not the case that there is a right time.
20. “Impermanence does not know any ﬁxed period. The enemy death
is always in pursuit. Therefore I have decided that today is the right time to
seek the Law.

40

Chapter VI

21. “All such statements, pronounce them all for me! I do wish that you
would free the king, my father, from any further love for me!
22. “If you were to defame me because of my appearance, so that the
king would give up his loving thoughts, do not be sparing of those words,
and do not let the king’s affection remain uninterrupted!”
23. When Chandaka had received his instructions, he was ﬁlled with
sadness and his emotions were in turmoil. He held his palms together, knelt
down, and replied to the Crown Prince:
24. “If I make a full pronouncement as you have ordered, I am afraid I
may increase his grief even more. His grief will become even deeper, just
like an elephant sinking deeper into the mud.
25. “When one’s love decidedly has left, who among those who have a
heart would not grieve? Even metal and stone break down. How much more
so when one is sunk into grief!
26. “You have grown up within your palace, O Prince. Your youth was
happy and your person is soft. If you submit to a thorny grove, how could
you bear the austerities!
27. “When you initially ordered me to bring your horse, I was already
uneasy in my mind. A celestial spirit forced me and ordered me to quickly
adorn it.
28. “What could I have had in mind when I let you, Crown Prince, decide
to give up your inner palace! The people of Kapilavastu, the whole land, will
grieve!
29. “The king, your father, is already old. He holds his son dear and his
love is deep. If you decide to give up your family, this is not as it should be.
If in your wrong view you have no parents, then there is no further discussion.
30. “Gautamī has nourished you. She has suckled you, leaving her body
dried up. Her kindness is hard to forget. Do not be ungrateful!
31. “The meritorious mother of your infant is of an excellent family and
she has served you well. If one has obtained her excellence but abandons
her, one is not an excellent person.
32. “The excellent son of Yaśodharā will inherit the country and rule
according to the Right Law. He is still young. You should not abandon him
either. You have already disregarded the king, your father, and also your
family and retinue.

41

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

11c

33. “And do not abandon me! I do not wish to leave your worthy feet!
My feelings are like boiling water on a ﬁre. I cannot bear to return to our
country alone.
34. “If I would now abandon you in the wilds, Crown Prince, and return,
I would be the same as Sumantra who abandoned Rāma.
35. “If I now return to the palace alone, what shall I say to the king?
When the whole palace reprimands me, with what words shall I answer then?
36. “You told me, Crown Prince, that as a means I may defame your
appearance. But how could I speak falsely about the qualities of a muni!
37. “Because of deep shame my tongue would be unable to utter a word.
Even if it could utter a word, who in the world would believe it?
38. “If I were to say that the light of the moon is hot, some in the world
would believe it. But there are none who would believe that their crown
prince’s acts do not constitute right behavior.
39. “Your heart, Crown Prince, is tender. You have always been compassionate for all. Being deeply affectionate, yet abandoning us—this goes
against your past thoughts. I wish that you would consider returning to the
palace as a comfort to my foolish sincerity.”
40. When the Crown Prince heard Chandaka’s sad words and earnest
admonitions, his mind was stable and increasingly ﬁrm. He further said:
41. “You now have given rise to the suffering of separation because of
me. You should give up this sadness and soothe your mind!
42. “Each being has a different destination. The principle of separation
is, of course, permanent. Even if it would not let me give up my family today,
death will arrive and my body and spirit will be separated. How then would
I be held back?
43. “When my kind mother bore me, she loved me profoundly, constantly
embracing her suffering. But when she had given birth to me, her life immediately ended. She could never raise her own son. Preservation and destruction
each take a different road. Where would I seek her now?
44. “On a prominent tree in the wilderness a ﬂock of birds gathers to
roost. They assemble at sunset and scatter at dawn. The worldly separates
in the same way.
45. “When ﬂoating clouds rise on a high mountain, they accumulate on
the four sides in the sky. In a moment they are scattered again. The same
principle applies to people.
42

Chapter VI

46. “The worldly actually separates by itself. One meets for a while,
entangled in love. One gathers and is scattered like a dream. One must not
rely on one’s own relatives.
47. “For instance, a tree that comes to life in spring gradually grows
branches and leaves. But in the frost of autumn they consequently fall down.
They are physically the same but still they are separated. All the more so
when people unite for a while! Why would relatives always stay together?
48. “Do appease your grief! Comply with my instructions and return! Your
purpose in returning may yet preserve me! Return, and I may still go back later!
49. “When the people of Kapilavastu have heard that my mind is made
up, you must pronounce my words to those who care for me and who hold
me dear!
50. “I will come back only after I have crossed the sea of suffering of
birth and death. If my earnest wish is not fulﬁlled, my body will be extinguished in a mountain forest.”
51. When the white horse heard the Crown Prince say these true words,
it knelt down and licked his feet. Breathing deeply, it was given to tears.
With his webbed hand, its palm [bearing] a wheel, [the Crown Prince] patted
the head of the white horse.
52. “Do not feel any grief! I now apologize to you. The merits of your
efforts, my ﬁne horse, are now completed. The suffering of your woeful destination is long appeased, and a ﬁne fruition appears now.”
53. Chandaka always followed him with his sword adorned with precious
things. When the Crown Prince drew the sharp sword, it was shining bright,
like a dragon.
54. His dark hair, contained in his precious crown—he shaved it off and
placed it in the sky. It ascended into the freezing sky, ﬂoating like a soaring
phoenix.
55. The celestial sons of the Trāyastriṃśa [Heaven] returned with the
hair to their celestial palace. They had always wanted to serve him at his feet.
All the more now that they had obtained the hair of his head! They wholeheartedly increased their worship, all the way till the end of the Right Law.
56. The Crown Prince then thought to himself, “Even when all my ornaments are removed and I have only a garment of plain silk, I still do not have
the deportment of someone who has gone forth.”

43

12a

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

12b

57. When he knew the Crown Prince’s thoughts, a celestial son of the
pure abodes then transformed himself into the image of a hunter. He held a
bow and carried sharp arrows at his waist. With his body covered by a kāṣāya
garment, he went before the Crown Prince.
58. The Crown Prince thought that this garment, a dyed pure robe, was
the exquisite ornamentation of a seer, and was not ﬁt for a hunter.
59. He immediately gave a shout before the hunter, and with soft words
said to him, “Concerning this garment, you look untainted by covetousness.
Let me trade my own clothing with you!”
60. The hunter said to the Crown Prince, “It is not the case that I do not
feel for this garment. I have used it as a decoy with deer, to lure and kill
them. But if it is what you need, I shall trade it with you now.”
61. When the hunter had received the ﬁne garment, he returned to his
celestial body. When the Crown Prince and Chandaka saw this, they thought
that it was wonderful.
62. “This garment certainly is correct. It is surely not the clothing of a
worldling.” Their inner feelings greatly rejoiced and they doubled their reverence for the garment.
63. [The Crown Prince] then separated from Chandaka, wearing his
kāṣāya garment. It was like an ochre cloud surrounding the disk of the sun
or moon.
64. With digniﬁed and careful steps he entered a seer’s cave. As Chandaka’s gaze followed him, he disappeared and was not seen any more.
65. “My master has given up the king, his father, his retinue, and me
too. Wearing the kāṣāya garment he has entered the forest of asceticism.”
66. [Chandaka] raised his hands and called out to the gods. In low spirits
he fell to the ground. He rose and clasped the neck of the white horse. His
hopes gone, he turned back on his way.
67. In his hesitation he frequently looked back. His body went [forward]
but his mind hurried back. He was lost in thought and was distracted; he
looked up and down, leaning over; he fell over and rose again. Sadly weeping,
he went on his way back.

44

Chapter VII

Entry into the Forest of Asceticism
1. As the Crown Prince was about to enter the place of seers, having sent
Chandaka away, his majestic person was radiant, shining all around in the
forest of asceticism.
2. Being endowed with all that was meaningful, he complied with the
meaningful and went there. He went like a lion, king of the animals, entering
among a herd of beasts.
3. His common appearance was completely abandoned. He showed only
the true appearance of the path. The anchorites unexpectedly saw the wonder
and they were discerning and pleasantly surprised. They held their palms
together and stared straight at him.
4. Men and women gazed directly at him as they managed their affairs,
without any change in their deportment. When the gods observe Lord Śakra
they gaze at him without blinking, and the seers looked at him in the same
way, not moving a foot.
5. As they managed their heavy burdens with their hands, they kept looking, not stopping their activities. Just like an ox in shaft and yoke, their bodies
were bound but they relied on the mind. And the divine seers, full of application, all said they had never seen such a thing.
6. Flocks of birds, peacocks and others, soared and cried out in confused
voices. Brahmans who kept the precepts of deer followed the deer and wandered into a mountain forest.
7. Deer glance about by nature, but seeing the Crown Prince they looked
straight at him. The brahmans who were following the deer likewise looked
directly at him.
8. The lamp of Ikṣvāku was twice as bright, like the ﬁrst light of the sun.
It caused the milk cows to give more sweet-scented milk.
9. The brahmans were pleasantly surprised and said to each other, “Is
he the eighth Vasu god?15 Is he one of the two Aśvins?16

45

12c

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

13a

10. “Is he the sixth King Māra?17 Is he a brahmakāyika god?18 Is he the
celestial son of the sun or of the moon who has descended here?
11. “In short, we should respect him! Let us hurry and strive to bring
worship!” The Crown Prince still remained humble. He respectfully declined
and made polite inquiries.
12. The Bodhisattva observed the brahmans all over the forest. They
were practicing all kinds of meritorious actions. They were all seeking for
the happiness of rebirth in heaven.
13. He asked elder brahmans about the true path he should practice. “I
have just now arrived here. I do not yet know which way to practice. Consequently I beseech you to please give me your explanation!”
14. Then the twice-born consequently and in due order spoke about the
austerities they were practicing and about the fruition of their asceticism.
15. Some ate roots, stalks, and leaves, things that were not produced in
a village, or things that grew in clear water. Others ate ﬂowers and fruits.
Several paths, each one different, and the food they consumed was not the
same either.
16. Some cultivated the life of birds. They pecked their food like twolegged creatures. Some followed deer and ate herbs. Serpent-seers inhaled
the wind.
17. Some did not eat things that were pounded with wood or a stone.
Biting with two teeth, they made lesions. Some begged for their food and
gave it to others, accepting remnants as their own food.
18. Some constantly submerged their heads in water, and some worshiped
ﬁre. Seers who practiced like ﬁshes dwelled in water. Such were the various
kinds [of practices].
19. When a brahman practices asceticism, he is reborn in heaven when
his life has ended. Because of his asceticism he will obtain a pleasant fruition.
20. When the worthy one, the most honored one among two-legged
beings, heard about these austerities, he did not see their real meaningfulness
and his inner feelings were not pleased. In his consideration he felt grief for
them. In his mind and verbally he said to them:
21. “Alas, for your great austerities! You seek only for recompense as
a human or god. As the wheel revolves, you turn to birth and death. The suffering will be plentiful but the happiness little.

46

Chapter VII

22. “When one disregards relatives, gives up excellent objects, and
decides to seek celestial happiness, even if one may avoid some small suffering
one will ﬁnally be bound by great suffering.
23. “You let your bodies wither and practice austerities, but while seeking
to experience rebirth you increase the cause of the ﬁve desires. Because you
do not contemplate birth and death, you seek suffering by means of suffering.
24. “All kinds of beings are constantly afraid of death in their heart. If
you strenuously seek to experience rebirth, you will, being reborn, meet with
death. Even though you may be afraid of suffering, you will be submersed
in the sea of suffering for a long time.
25. “This life is utterly wearying, and in a future life one will not rest
either. While you endure suffering, you seek happiness in the present but the
search for rebirth in heaven is wearisome too. A mind that seeks happiness
is inferior. In both cases one falls into meaninglessness.
26. “You give way to something utterly base. Exertion is excellent, but
it is still better to develop knowledge. When one rejects both, one is forever
unconditioned.
27. “If it is right to let the body suffer, happiness would be wrong. If
one is happy after the practice of what is right, the result that relies on what
is right is wrong.
28. “Origination and extinction in one’s corporal practice all come from
the mind’s strength. If it is without a mind, this body is like a dead log. Therefore, subdue the mind! If the mind is subdued, the body is naturally right.
29. “If eating something pure brings merit, then birds and animals and
poor persons, who usually eat fruits and herbs, should thus be meritorious.
30. “If one says that austerities are the cause of merit when a ﬁne mind
has come into existence, why are the happy practices not produced by a ﬁne
mind? If happiness is not produced by a ﬁne mind, that which is ﬁne is not
the cause of suffering either.
31. “If heretics consider water to be a puriﬁcation, the evil actions of
the beings that enjoy dwelling in water should constantly be pure.
32. “The place where a seer with ﬁne basic qualities dwells is held in
esteem by the wider world, because a seer with qualities is living there. One
should honor the qualities! One should not hold the place in esteem!”

47

13b

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

13c

33. Thus [the Bodhisattva] gave an extensive explanation of what was
right, and eventually came the sunset. He saw that some were making offerings
to ﬁre. Some were using friction or blowing [to make] a ﬁre. Some were
sprinkling ghee, and some were chanting incantations with raised voices.
34. It was like that all night and day. He observed those practices, but
as he did not see their real meaningfulness, he then wanted to reject them.
35. The brahmans then all came and invited him to stay. They had regard
for the Bodhisattva’s qualities and fondly and diligently urged him:
36. “You have come from a place of the wrong law to the forest of the
Right Law, yet you want to abandon it. So we urge you to stay!”
37. The elder brahmans had disheveled hair and wore garments of vegetation. As they followed behind the Bodhisattva, they beseeched him to pay
attention for a while.
38. When the Bodhisattva saw that the elder ones were pursuing him
and they were physically tired, he stopped underneath a tree, comforted them,
and sent them on their way back. The brahmans, young and old, surrounded
him, held their palms together, and beseeched him:
39. “You came here unexpectedly, and the grove was ﬁlled in a ﬁne way,
but now you abandon us and go away. It will consequently become a wilderness.
40. “Just as someone who loves life does not want to give up his body,
we are like that too. Please, stay for a while!
41. “The brahman seers here, royal seers and celestial seers, all rely on
this place. It is furthermore near the edge of the Snowy Mountains. No place
surpasses this to increase one’s asceticism.
42. “Many anchorites were reborn in heaven along this way. All
anchorites, seeking merit, have turned to the north from here. Having received
the Right Law, the wise do not go south.
43. “If you believe that we are lazy and not vigorous, and practice
unpleasant ways, and if you do not want to stay, we should all go away, but
you may stay here.
44. “These brahmans are always seeking for a companion in asceticism.
If you are excellent in asceticism, why would you abandon them?
45. “If you can stay here, they will serve you as Lord Śakra, and as the
gods serve Bṛhaspati.”

48

Chapter VII

46. The Bodhisattva explained to the brahmans what he himself wished
for in his heart. “By developing right application, I want only to extinguish
all existence.
47. “Your intentions are upright, and in your practice of the Law you
were tranquil and silent. You are kind to a visitor and I am really happy in
my heart.
48. “Beautiful words may move one’s heart. They bathe all who hear
them. Upon hearing your words, they increase my feeling of happiness with
the Law.
49. “You have all turned to me, thinking that I am your good friend of
the Law. But abandoning you now, I feel very sorry.
50. “Previously I disregarded my own relatives, and now I am separating
from you. The suffering of uniting and separating—that suffering is equal
and without any difference. It is not the case that my heart is not happy. And
I do not see any other error either, but the fact is that
51. “In your asceticism you all seek only the happiness of rebirth in
heaven. I seek to extinguish the three existences,19 rejecting [physical] form
and contrary to the mind’s [normal tendencies].
52. “As for the Law you are practicing, you yourselves practice the
actions of your former teachers. I will extinguish all accumulation in my
search for the Law without accumulation. So it will never be right to stay
longer in this grove.”
53. When the brahmans heard the Bodhisattva’s explanation, his true
and meaningful words, eloquent in expression and eminent in principle, they
were very joyful at heart then, and profoundly increased their feeling of
respect.
54. There then was a brahman who was constantly lying down in dirt.
With twisted locks he was clothed in tree bark. [He had] yellow eyes and a
long, high nose.
55. And he said to the Bodhisattva, “Your purpose is ﬁrm and your wisdom is bright. You will decidedly complete your passage beyond birth. Knowing how to be free from rebirth, one is at ease.
56. “Nonattachment to the good fortune of rebirth in heaven and an
earnest search for eternal extinction of the person, this is wonderful. I see it
only in this one person.

49

14a

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

57. “Offering sacriﬁces, praying to celestial spirits, and with all kinds
of austerities, everyone seeks the happiness of rebirth in heaven, but they
are not yet free from objects of desire.
58. “If one can ﬁght desire and earnestly search for true deliverance,
one is a human being, certainly a person of right awakening.
59. “It will not do to stay in this place. Go to the Vindhya Mountains.20
There is a great muni called Ārāḍa.21
60. “Only he has obtained ﬁnal certitude, the highest and most excellent
eye! Go to him and you will hear the true path!
61. “He can make your heart rejoice. You have to practice his way! But
when I observe your resoluteness, I am afraid you may not be assured either.
You will give up on him too and go away, seeking for more learning.
62. “A high nose and wide, long eyes. Red lips and white, sharp teeth.
Light skin and a face that is bright. The red tongue is long, soft, and thin.
Those with such ﬁne characteristics will all drink jñeya water.22
63. “You will cross an unfathomable depth and be unequaled in the
world. You will obtain that which the elder seers will not obtain.”
64. The Bodhisattva accepted his words and left the seers. The multitude
of seers circumambulated him to the right and each took their leave and
returned.

50

Chapter VIII

The Whole Palace in Grief
1. As Chandaka led the horse back, his hopes were lost and his heart was
ﬁlled with sadness. He wept all along the way, unable to come to his senses.
2. Previously, [traveling] with the Crown Prince, it had been a straight
road for one whole night but now, having abandoned the Crown Prince and
returning, and because his celestial protection had been taken away from his
life, he walked to and fro with an anxious heart, and reached the city after
eight days.
3. The ﬁne horse once had been swift. It had exerted itself and was characterized by majesty. As it staggered along it looked behind, but it did not
see the Crown Prince appear.
4. [The horse] let its tears ﬂow and its four limbs hung loose. It was distressed and had lost its brightness. It walked in circles, mourning and neighing
sadly. Night and day it forgot about water and grass.
5. Having lost their ruler who would save the world, they returned to
Kapilavastu. The land was completely desolate, as if they had returned to an
empty village. When, for instance, the sun is screened off by Sumeru, the
whole world is obscured in the heavy darkness.
6. Springs and ponds were not clear, and ﬂowers and fruits did not ﬂourish. Men and women in the alleys and streets were sad and had lost their
joyful appearance.
7. Chandaka and the white horse were dispirited and unable to move
forward. When asked about the matter, he could not answer. They walked
slowly, like corpses.
8. When the crowd saw that Chandaka had returned and when they did
not see the Śākya prince, [the people] loudly wept with raised voices, as if
he [were the one who had] returned having abandoned Rāma.
9. Some people came to the side of the road and, heads bowed, asked Chandaka, “The prince is loved by the world. He is the life of the people in the whole
world. You suddenly took him away and led him off. Where is he now?”
51

14b

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

14c

10. Chandaka restrained his sad thoughts and he answered the people,
“I pursued him with affection. I did not abandon the prince.
11. “The prince abandoned me, and he has rejected his mundane deportment. He has taken the tonsure, wears the garment of the Law, and has entered
the forest of asceticism.”
12. When the crowd heard that [the prince] had gone forth, they were
startled and amazed. They sobbed and cried. Mucus and tears came down in
mixed streams.
13. One said to the other, “What shall we do?” They all talked it over.
“We must all follow him. If someone’s life faculty is ruined, the form and
the spirit separate when the person has died.
14. “The prince is our life. Having lost our life, how shall we live? These
villages will become a forest, and that forest will become our villages. This
city has lost its majestic quality, as if one had killed Vṛtra.”23
15. When it was falsely reported to the men and women in the city that
the prince had returned, they hurried out to the head of the road, but they
saw only that his horse had returned alone. Nobody knew whether he was
alive or dead, and they wept in all kinds of voices.
16. Leading the horse on foot, Chandaka returned, sobbing and letting
his tears fall. He felt grief at the loss of the Crown Prince. The fear in his
heart increased, just as when a warrior has destroyed the enemy and sends
his captured foe before the king.
17. As he entered the gate his tears came down like rain. They ﬁlled his
eyes and he could not see a thing. He looked up to heaven and bitterly wept.
The white horse neighed sadly too.
18. When the various birds and animals in the palace and the horses in
the inner stables heard the sad neighing of the white horse, they cried out in
response. They cried out thinking that the Crown Prince had returned, but
when they did not see him they ceased their cries.
19. The ladies of the palace heard the horses, birds, and animals cry out.
Their hair was disheveled, their faces were pallid. Their ﬁgures became emaciated and their lips dry. Their torn clothes were unwashed, and they were
dirty and unbathed.
20. Their ornaments were all dispensed with, spoiled and dull. Their
whole bodies had lost their brightness, just like stars fading at night’s close.

52

Chapter VIII

Their garments were ruined and ragged. They looked as if they had been
robbed.
21. When they saw Chandaka and the white horse, they wept and went
back without any hope. They were moved [to tears] and wailed bitterly, as
if they had just lost a relative. They were disordered and disturbed, like a
herd of cows that had lost its way.
22. When Mahāprajāpātī Gautamī heard that the Crown Prince had not
returned, she ﬂinched and fell to the ground, her four limbs all bruised.
23. She was like a gold-colored plantain tree broken by a gale of wind.
When she further heard that her son had gone forth, she sighed deeply and
her sadness increased.
24. “His soft hair, turning to the right, grows one hair per pore. It is black
and pleasant, fresh and bright. It lies scattered on the ground, ﬂowing evenly.
Now lying shaven on the grassy ground, to what purpose was it ﬁtted with
a celestial crown?
25. “[He has] straight arms and the gait of a lion, the long and wide eyes
of an ox king, a body bright like a golden blaze, a square chest, and a pure
voice.
26. “With these exquisite characteristics he has entered the forest of
asceticism. What little merit did the world have that it has lost this noble
ruler of the earth?
27. “His soft feet with ﬁne membranes have the color of a pure lotus. A
thorny forest with earth and rocks, how could they walk on it?
28. “He has grown up within his palace, dressed in warm and soft clothes.
He bathed in fragrant warm water, and his body was powdered with incense.
Now he is exposed, braving the wind. How could he bear the cold or heat?
29. “As a great man of nobility he is prominent and superior in learning.
Endowed with virtue, his fame is great. He is always generous, without wanting anything. Why would he suddenly beg for his food to live on?
30. “He lay on a pure, precious couch, awakened from his sleep by music.
How can he lay himself down on the grassy ground in a mountain forest?”
31. Holding her son dear, she felt grief in her heart and fell to the ground
in low spirits. Her servants helped her up and wiped away her tears.
32. The other ladies let their four limbs hang with grief. Inwardly upset,
they were miserable in their hearts. They stood still, just like painted ﬁgures.

53

15a

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

15b

33. Then Yaśodharā severely reprimanded Chandaka. “This person on
my mind, where would he be now? The three of you, men and a horse, went
together, but now only two have come back.
34. “I am utterly fearful in my heart, trembling and ill at ease. You are
an improper person. You are not close to me, and you are not a good friend.
35. “Even though my misfortune is very grave, you laugh. I consider
your weeping to be just that! You were about to go away but you return in
tears. Your reversal is not ﬁtting.
36. “You were held dear, a companion of my sovereign, but you have
an indulgent mind, following your liking. So you did not let the noble prince
return, once he was gone.
37. “You must be very glad now! Having done evil, its result is already
accomplished. It would be better to approach a wise enemy than to frequent
a foolish friend.
38. “You were falsely called a good friend. Inwardly you really feel
enmity. You have now suddenly and completely destroyed this excellent
royal house.
39. “These noble ladies are mournful and have spoiled their beauty. They
are out of breath from weeping and tears stream down all across their faces.
40. “When their master was still in the world, they relied on him as if
he were the Snowy Mountains. His mind was as ﬁrm as the great earth. They
are almost saddened to death.
41. “Even more so for those who are sadly weeping and loudly crying
in the windows! Life and death, their proper place is natural, but how could
they bear this suffering?”
42. She said to the horse: “You are not righteous. You have taken away
someone whom people esteem in their hearts, just like an evil thief who has
stolen precious things in the dark.
43. “When he rode you into battle, he could endure all: swords, spears,
and sharp arrows. But what is there he cannot endure now?
44. “The most excellent one of my noble family! You have taken away
my heart by force. You are a noxious creature! You have done improper
actions!
45. “Today you cry out loudly, and your cries ﬁll the royal palace. But
when you previously took away the one I hold dear, why then were you mute?

54

Chapter VIII

46. “If you had let out a sound then, the whole palace would have woken
up. If it had woken up then, I would not be suffering now.”
47. When Chandaka heard these painful words, he swallowed his breath
and his breathing froze. He rubbed away his tears, held his palms together,
and answered, “Please listen to my plea!
48. “Do not disparage the white horse, and do not hate me either! We
are both without fault. It was the doing of a celestial spirit.
49. “I was utterly afraid of the king’s law but I was compelled by celestial
spirits. They quickly led the horse to him, and they both went away as swiftly
as if they were ﬂying. [The spirit] calmed [the horse’s] breathing so that it
did not make a sound, and its feet did not touch the ground either.
50. “The gate of the city opened by itself and the sky was naturally
bright. All this was the doing of celestial spirits. How could this be through
my efforts?”
51. When Yaśodharā heard his words, she thought it was astonishing. It
had been the doing of celestial spirits and it was not the case that they were
to blame.
52. Her thoughts of disparagement were eliminated. Her burning, great
suffering was appeased. She fell to the ground and sighed with resentment
that the pair of mandarin ducks24 had separated.
53. [She addressed the Crown Prince:] “I have lost my support now!
You have brought separation in the practice of our common duties. You found
happiness in the Law and you have abandoned our common practice. Where
would you further be seeking for the Law?
54. “Our former excellencies of the past, King Mahāsudarśana and others,
all applied themselves to the path together with their wives, wandering through
the forests and the wilds, but you have now abandoned me. What kind of a
law would you seek?
55. “In the code for brahmans about offering sacriﬁces, the wife must
practice together [with her husband]. The duties they perform together are
a cause and in the end they experience the result together. Why are you alone
miserly of the Law, abandoning me and wandering on your own?
56. “Either you see me as jealous and still seek someone who is not jealous, or you must feel contempt for me and further seek a pure celestial maiden.
57. “For what beauty with excellent virtue are you practicing asceticism

55

15c

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

16a

and have brought about separation from me, your wife, because of my despicable life?
58. “Why do you not take Rāhula on your knee? Alas, unfortunate gentleman! Your appearance is gentle but your heart is hard.
59. “The abundant light of your excellent family is splendid. Even an enemy
respects it. But when a son is born but no infant yet, one can discard it forever.
60. “I do not feel any sympathy either. You, my husband, have abandoned
me and are wandering through a mountain forest. You cannot destroy yourself.
You are a person of wood or stone.”
61. After [speaking] these words, her heart was confused. She wailed
or talked frantically. Or she gazed, lost in thought. She was choked with sobs
and could not control herself. She was mournful and, lying in the dirt, her
breathing almost stopped.
62. When the group of ladies saw her, they felt grief. They were like
ﬂourishing lotuses [that have been] broken by storms and hail and made pale.
63. The king, the father, had lost his crown prince, and night and day
his heart sadly yearned. He observed the fast and requested the celestial
spirits, “Please, let my son quickly return!”
64. After he had uttered his wish and his plea, he left through the gate
of celestial sacriﬁces. When he heard the weeping voices he was startled and
bewildered, like a herd of elephants stampeding in disarray when there is
great thunder and lightning in the sky.
65. After he had seen Chandaka and the white horse, and after extensive
questioning, he knew that [his son] had gone forth. His body fell to the ground,
just like the crumbling of the banner of Lord Śakra.
66. His ministers slowly helped him up and, as was right, they urged
him to be at ease. After a long while he returned to consciousness and said
to the white horse:
67. “I have frequently ridden you into battle. I remember that you were meritorious every time, but now I detest you, twice as much as when I held you dear!
68. “My beloved, meritorious son—you unexpectedly carried him away.
You discarded him in a mountain forest and came back alone, by yourself.
69. “Quickly go to him with me! If not, go and bring him back! If you
do not do either of these two, my life will not be preserved. There is no other
cure left. Yes, the expectation of my son is my medicine.

56

Chapter VIII

70. “Just like the brahman Saṃjaya killed himself over the death of his
son, the loss of my son who is practicing the Law will naturally make me
lose my life.
71. “The ruler of the beings, Manu, also felt constant sorrow for his son.
How much less could I, an ordinary man, feel at ease with the loss of my son?
72. “In ancient times, when his dear son was wandering through a mountain forest, King Aja was deeply affected and his life ended. He was immediately reborn in heaven.
73. “But I am unable to die now. For a long time I will dwell in grief.
The whole palace held my son dear, but I long for him in vain, just like a
hungry ghost.
74. “I am like someone who is thirsty and looking for water. When he
wants to drink, one takes it away. I will keep my thirst and die with it. I will
certainly be reborn in the destination of hungry ghosts.
75. “My thirst is completely in vain now. Having obtained water, my
son, I have lost it again. Quickly tell me the whereabouts of my son, before
my life ends!
76. “Do not let me die of thirst and fall among the hungry ghosts! My
determination and strength once were strong. I was as hard to move as the
great earth. But, having lost my son, my heart is troubled, just like King
Daśaratha25 in the past.”
77. The royal preceptor, a scholar of learning, and the chief minister, wise
and intelligent, both admonished the king, with neither laxity nor coercion:
78. “Please, calm your emotions! Do not hurt yourself with sorrow! The
excellent kings of old abandoned their countries as if they were scattered
ﬂowers.
79. “Your son is now applying himself to the path. Why would this make
you suffer grief! Remember Asita’s prediction! His just fate should yet be
like that!
80. “In celestial happiness or as a wheel-turning king, he will be quiet
and not afﬂicted. How could a worldly ruler change his precious mind?
81. “You should let us search for him now, and go to him. We will make
an effort and earnestly reprove him in order to show our sincerity. We wish
to lessen his determination in order to soothe your royal grief!”

57

16b

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

82. The king was glad and immediately answered, “Yes, go quickly!
Like a large bird26 circling in the sky for his son, my anxious mind is just
like that, holding my crown prince dear now.”
83. After the two men received [the king’s] order, the minds of the king
and his retinue were somewhat cooler. [The king] felt relieved and food and
drink were circulated.

58

Chapter IX

The Search for the Crown Prince
1. As the king told his preceptor and his chief minister of his grief, they were
moved. As if lashed to ﬁne horses they rushed out like a swift current. They
became fatigued but did not stop their efforts. They went straight to the forest
of asceticism.
2. Giving up their customary ﬁve ceremonial ornaments27 and keeping
their faculties well under control, they entered the pure dwelling of brahmans
and respectfully did obeisance to the seers. The seers invited them to sit
down, expounded the Law, and comforted them.
3. They then informed the seers: “We have some inquiries in mind. We
are preceptor and minister to King Śuddhodana, extolled as pure and a famous
descendant of Ikṣvāku. We dutifully instruct him in matters of canonical
rules.
4. “The king is like Śakra, lord of the gods, and his son is like Jayanta.28
In order to cross over old age, illness, and death he has gone forth, and he
may have come here. You should know, worthy ones, that we are here because
of him!”
5. The [seers] replied, “There was such a man, with long arms and the
characteristics of a great man. He chose some of our practices, which follow
the law of birth and death. He has gone to Ārāḍa to seek excellent deliverance.”
6. After [the preceptor and minister] had obtained certainty [about the
prince’s whereabouts], they honored their king’s urgent command, not daring
to consider it tiresome. They asked the way and hurried there.
7. They saw that the Crown Prince was dwelling in a forest. He had completely given up his customary ceremonial ornaments. His actual body was
still radiant, like the sun emerging from a black cloud.
8. The national preceptor, who serves celestial spirits, and the chief minister, who holds the Right Law, abandoned their usual digniﬁed demeanor,
dismounted, and advanced on foot.
59

16c

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

17a

9. They were like the royal Vāmadeva and Vasiṣṭha the seer,29 who went
to a mountain forest to see Prince Rāma. Each reverently did obeisance, complying with their actual duty, and made polite inquiries.
10. They were like Śukra and Āṅgirasa,30 who waited upon Śakra, lord
of the gods, wholeheartedly and with great respect.
11. The prince was respectful to the royal preceptor and the chief minister
too, just like Lord Śakra comforting Śukra and Āṅgirasa.
12. [The prince] then ordered the two men to sit before him, just like
the twin stars of Punarvasu waiting upon the moon at its side.
13. The royal preceptor and the chief minister stated their request to the
prince, just like Bṛhaspati addressing Jayanta.31
14. “The king, your father, holds his crown prince dear. A sharp dart has
pierced his heart, as it were. He is in disarray and disordered, lying in the
dirt. Night and day his sad thoughts increase, and his tears ﬂow constantly,
like rain.
15. “He has given me his command. Please, listen attentively [to his
words]! ‘I know that your feelings of happiness with the Law are certain,
without any doubt.
16. “‘But you have entered the forest refuge at a wrong time. A longing
is burning in my heart. If you hold the Law dear, you should grieve for me.
17. “‘The feeling [of relief] for which I have traveled far, hoping to be
at ease—lessen my sense of being far away from it! Do not let the waters of
my grief make the banks of my heart crumble!
18. “‘It is like the calamities of a storm, of the sun, of ﬁre and hail, for
clouds, water, grass, and mountains. My grief means four ailments: it sways,
dries up, burns, and destroys the heart.
19. “‘Return and live in the land! When the right time has come, you
may still travel to the seers. If you do not care for your relatives and also
reject your parents, how could this be called the compassion that covers all!
20. “‘The Law is not necessarily in a mountain forest. One may practice
in seclusion while remaining part of the family too. Gaining insight and diligence in one’s application, this is called going forth.
21. “‘Suppose one takes the tonsure, wears a dyed garment, and wanders
in a mountain refuge, yet feels fear. How could such a person be called an
anchorite?

60

Chapter IX

22. “‘I wish to completely embrace you. When I have let water rain
down on your head, have crowned you with a celestial crown, and have
placed a parasol over you, once I have observed you [thus] with my own
eyes, only then might I leave the family!
23. “‘Druma, the Senajit kings, Anuja, Āṣāḍha, Vajra, Bāhu, Vaibhrāja,
Antideva, Janaka of Videha, Nārāyaṇa, and Śālvadruma—
24. “‘Such kings all wore a celestial crown. They adorned themselves
with necklaces, and they wore pearls and rings on their hands and feet. They
enjoyed a multitude of ladies but did not disregard the cause of deliverance.
25. “‘You may return home now. May you fully develop two things:
Cultivate the superior Law in your mind, and be a superior ruler of the land!
26. “‘As my tears fall, agree with me and let me pronounce such words!
After you have heard this command, heed my instructions and return!’
27. “The king, your father, is drowning in a sea of grief because of you,
without any rescue, without any support, and without a way to console himself.
You must be his boatmaster and ferry him to a safe place!
28. “Upon hearing their father’s command, Prince Bhīṣma and the two
Rāmas32 respected his command. You should now also be like that!
29. “The love with which your kind mother has brought you up, for your
whole life your gratitude should be endless! Like a cow that has lost her calf,
she cries out sadly and forgets to sleep or eat.
30. “You should quickly return now to save her life! When a solitary
bird is separated from the ﬂock, it grieves. When a dragon-elephant wanders
alone, it suffers. When someone who is reliant [upon another] has lost her
protection, one should think about coming to the rescue!
31. “Your only son is like a young orphan. No one knows how to express
the suffering he experiences. Spare him from the grief of being left alone,
like someone who is saved from a lunar eclipse.
32. “The suffering of separation felt by the men and women in the whole
country is burning. The smoke of their sighs rises to the sky. It fogs their
wisdom and their eyes are obscured. I want only to see that the water that is
you extinguishes this ﬁre, and that their eyes see clearly.”
33. When the Bodhisattva heard the urgent instructions of the king, his
father, and heard that he was utterly full of sorrow, he sat up, making right
consideration, and courteously answered, as was ﬁtting:

61

17b

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

17c

34. “I too know that the kind thoughts of the king, my father, are more
than genuine, but I have disregarded his endless love because I fear birth,
old age, illness, and death.
35. “Who would not, knowing of the separation in the end, hold his parents in esteem? Yes, the living may hold on to one another, but death will
come. No one can stay. Therefore, knowing what to esteem, I have long since
taken leave and gone forth.
36. “Hearing of the grief of the king, my father, a greater longing cuts
through my heart. But we meet only for a while, just as in a dream, and we
at once turn to impermanence.
37. “You most certainly know that beings are by nature not the same.
Grief does not necessarily come from a son or a relative. As for the reason
why the suffering of separation is brought about, it arises in any case from
delusion.
38. “Suppose some people are walking along a road: they may meet
halfway for a while, but in an instant they each separate. The principle of
separation is actually natural.
39. “One unites and becomes a relative for a while, but following the
principle of causality, one naturally separates. Profoundly comprehending
that relatives [only] pretend to be united, one should not give rise to grief!
40. “Having disregarded one’s beloved in this generation, one still wishes
for relatives in another generation. But [even if one may have] relatives for
a while, one is separated again. Nowhere is there no relative. One is constantly
united [with one’s relatives] and constantly parts [from them]. How would
it do to grieve for every parting?
41. “While dwelling in the womb, one gradually changes. With every
separation one dies and is born again. There is death at any time. How could
it be a wrong time for [taking refuge in] a mountain forest?
42. “At any time one may experience the ﬁve desires, and the same
applies to the time to seek for riches. Because one may die at any time, there
is no ‘right time’ to seek the way to do away with death.
43. “As you wish to make me your king, it is hard to disregard your
kindness, but it is just like taking the wrong medicine when sick. Therefore
I am not ﬁt for that. High or low, foolishness dwells there, and while being
careless one complies with love or hate.

62

Chapter IX

44. “My whole life I would constantly be afraid, anxious that my body
and spirit will grow tired. By complying with the crowd, my mind would
disregard the Law. A wise one does not do that.
45. “In a ﬁne palace with the seven precious things a great ﬁre is ablaze,
and in the food of a hundred ﬂavors [produced in] a celestial kitchen, there
are various poisons. In a cool pond with lotuses there are many insects.
46. “A high position is an abode of calamities. The wise do not dwell
there. When the previous excellent kings of the past saw many transgressions
while dwelling in the land, increasing hardship for beings, they felt disgust
and went forth.
47. “So, know that the contentment of practicing the Law is better than
the suffering of royal rule! It would be better to dwell in a mountain forest
and eat herbs like the birds and animals than to endure dwelling deep in a
palace, sharing the pit with black venomous snakes.
48. “If one gives up a royal position and the ﬁve desires and wanders in
a mountain forest enduring suffering, this then is ﬁtting. Happy with the Law,
one gradually increases one’s understanding.
49. “If I now abandon the forest of solitude, return to my family, and
experience the ﬁve desires, night and day the law of suffering will increase.
This is not ﬁtting.
50. “A great man of a famous family ﬁnds happiness in the Law and
goes forth. He forever turns his back on his famous family, establishing the
determination of a great man. Abandoning his [ﬁne] appearance and wearing
the robe of the Law, he ﬁnds happiness in the Law and wanders in a mountain
forest.
51. “If I were now to abandon the robe of the Law, I would have to disregard the shame in my heart. Even a celestial king must not do this. How
much less could I return to my excellent human family?
52. “If one has vomited up greed, anger, and delusion, then returns and
partakes of them, he is like someone who again eats his own vomit. How
could he bear this suffering?
53. “When someone’s house is on ﬁre, he does his best to get out. How
would he be a clever person if he returned a moment later and reentered [the
burning house]?

63

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

18a

54. “When I saw the passing of birth, old age, and death, I was disgusted
and went forth. If I were now to return and reenter that, my foolishness would
be the same.
55. “If one tries to develop deliverance while dwelling in a palace, one
is not in the right place. Deliverance is produced by quietude. Kingship adds
to hardship.
56. “Quietude dispenses with royal majesty. Royal rule is separate from
deliverance. Movement and tranquility are like water and ﬁre. How could
one have the two principles together?
57. “I have decided to develop deliverance and I will not dwell in a royal
position. If you say that one may dwell in a royal position and develop deliverance, this would be a wrong decision. Deliverance is certainly not like that!
58. “After one has made such a wrong decision, one may have left [home]
but he will return. I have now made my decision to break with the enticements
of relatives. Having correctly applied myself to go forth, why would I return?”
59. The chief minister inwardly considered the resolute determination
of the Crown Prince. He was very conscious that [the prince’s] virtue would
be in compliance and that his explanation made sense. He said to the Crown
Prince, “It is as you, Prince, have explained.
60. “The search for the Law should be that way! But now is just not the
right time. The king, your father, is aged and feeble. Affection for his son
increases his grief.
61. “Though you say ‘I ﬁnd happiness in deliverance,’ still you do what
is wrong. Even though you ﬁnd happiness in going forth, it is without wisdom.
You do not consider a very ﬁne principle! While you do not see the cause, yet
you seek for the fruition. You merely reject contemplating the present.
62. “Some say there is a later world; on the other hand, some say there
is not. As that existence is not yet decided on, why reject present happiness?
63. “If there will be a later world, one will endure what will be obtained.
If one says that a later world is nonexistent, its nonexistence means deliverance.
64. “Some say that there is a later world but they do not explain a cause
for deliverance. Just like earth that is ﬁrm, ﬁre that is warm, water that is
moist, and wind that moves, a later world is like that too. It is by nature thus.

64

Chapter IX

65. “Some explain that pure and impure both arise through their speciﬁc
natures. It would be a foolish explanation to say that one may strive for change.
66. “When faculties proceed in their objects, their speciﬁc natures are
in any case ﬁxed. What is agreeable or disagreeable, their speciﬁc natures
are ﬁxed in the same way.
67. “The suffering of old age, illness, and death—who would strive to
make them such? Water can extinguish ﬁre, and ﬁre causes water to dry up.
One speciﬁc nature causes the destruction of another, but when natures are
harmonious they complete a being.
68. “If one dwells in the womb, hands, feet, the limbs, and consciousness
are naturally produced. Who has to do that [himself]?
69. “Who causes a thorn to be sharp? It is naturally like that. And all the
birds and animals do not wish themselves to be as they are.
70. “Every birth in the heavens is caused by the god Īśvara, as well as
by other creators. There is no one who is how he wishes by his own power.
71. “If there is a cause for birth, that could also cause extinction. Why
the need to strive and seek deliverance?
72. “Some say that a self causes birth, and further that a self causes
extinction, too. Some say there is no cause of birth and one is extinguished
if one strives.
73. “If one raises one’s child and is not burdened by one’s ancestors, if
one studies the scriptures bequeathed by the seers and serves the gods with
great sacriﬁcial offerings, if one is not burdened by these three things, one
is called delivered.
74. “One may seek deliverance with these three, as transmitted in the
past and present. If [one seeks deliverance] through any other effort, one
toils in vain and without fruition.
75. “If you want to seek deliverance, just develop superior application!
The grief of the king, your father, will be appeased, and your path of deliverance will be immediate.
76. “You have given up your family and wander in a mountain forest,
but returning is still not wrong. In the past, King Ambarīṣa dwelled in the
forest of asceticism for a long time. He had given up his crowd of followers
and his retinue, but he returned home and resumed his royal position.

65

18b

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

18c

77. “Rāma, son of the king of the land, left the kingdom and dwelled in
a mountain forest. When he heard that the customs of the land were being
forsaken, he returned and maintained the right [generational] changes.
78. “The king of the Śālvas was called Druma. Father and son wandered
through mountain forests, but in the end both returned to their country.
79. “The munis Vasiṣṭha and Antideva practiced pure conduct in a mountain forest, but after a long time they returned to their country.
80. “The right ways of such previous excellent ones are very famous.
They all returned to their royal territories and shone in the world like lamps.
Therefore, it is not wrong to give up the mountain forest and to be converted
to the right way.”
81. When the Crown Prince had heard the chief minister’s kind words
and his exposition for his own good, he answered him with the constant truth,
without any confusion, unhindered and digniﬁed, with ﬁrm determination
and tranquil words:
82. “I am doubtful about existence or nonexistence. My double-mindedness is increased by suspicion. I will decidedly not accept your theory
about existence and nonexistence. Purifying my knowledge and developing
asceticism, I will certainly come to know for myself!
83. “In the world, doubtful argumentation is spread and handed down.
I am not at ease with your [explanation of the] true meaning of existence and
nonexistence.
84. “Someone who sees clearly distinguishes true from false. How could
belief come from someone else? It is as if a person who was born blind takes
a blind man as his guide. Where would he go to in the absolute darkness of
the night?
85. “Concerning the way of purity or of impurity, the world has its uncertainties. If one does not see the truth, one should practice a pure path. It is
better to practice the austerities of a pure way than to enjoy the practice of
what is impure.
86. “Contemplating the theories received from someone else, not one
is marked by certainty. When true words are accepted with an open mind,
one is forever free from any wrong. A wise one does not pronounce erroneous
words or false theories.

66

Chapter IX

87. “You mention that Rāma and the others gave up their families and
developed pure conduct, but in the end they returned to their countries and
indulged in the ﬁve desires. This is lowly behavior and a wise one does not
rely on that.
88. “I will now brieﬂy explain to you the essential meaning. The sun or
moon may fall to the ground, and Sumeru and the Snowy Mountains may
change, but I myself will never change and retreat to the wrong place!
89. “Rather than returning to my country and entering the blaze of the
ﬁve desires, if my goal is not accomplished it would be better to throw myself
into a great ﬁre.”
90. Having revealed this important solemn oath, he slowly rose and took
his leave. The sharpness of the Crown Prince’s eloquence was as blazing as
an abundance of sunlight.
91. There was no way the royal preceptor and the chief minister could
be victorious in the discussion. Telling themselves that they had tried everything, they could only withdraw and return.
92. They felt deep reverence for the Crown Prince and did not dare bring
any stronger pressure on him, but out of respect for the king’s command they
did not dare return quickly and paused halfway. As they walked along the
way, they went slowly while looking back.
93. They chose a clever person, a careful and ingenious man, to conceal
himself and secretly observe [the prince]. Only then did they give up and
go back.

67

19a

Fascicle Three
Chapter X

King Bimbisāra Goes
to the Crown Prince
1. When the Crown Prince had taken leave from the royal preceptor and the
righteous chief minister, he braved the current and crossed the Ganges River,
then followed the road to Vulture Peak.
2. Its base hidden among the ﬁve mountains, it was magniﬁcent, standing
alone among the peaks. Its trees had luxuriant ﬂowers and fruits, and rivers
and springs separated warm from cool. [The Crown Prince] entered the city
of the ﬁve mountains as quietly as if it were beyond the heavens.
3. When the people of the land saw that the virtues in the Crown Prince’s
appearance were profound and bright, that the ﬁgure of the youth was bright,
with an unequaled manly appearance, they all thought it was wonderful, as
if they were seeing Īśvara’s banner.
4. Those who passed him stopped, and those who were behind all quickly
rushed on. Those who were advancing in front all turned back and watched
him, tirelessly and with wide-open eyes.
5. As they saw the primary and secondary marks of his four limbs, their
eyes did not move. They reverently came to welcome him. They did obeisance
with palms held together and made polite inquiries.
6. They were all very joyful and made worship as ﬁtting. They looked
up to his worthy and excellent countenance, and they looked down in shame
at their own different appearances.
7. They adjusted their former impetuous deportment and increased their
respect in silence. They wished to undo their dislikes and their kind feelings
suddenly increased.

69

19b

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

8. Men and women all at once withdrew from their public or private
occupations. Full of respect for [the Crown Prince’s] appearance, they honored
his qualities and completely forgot to return [to their activities] as they
watched.
9. The mark of the white tuft of hair between his eyebrows, his long and
wide blue eyes, the golden radiance of his whole person, his pure, webbed
hands. Even though he had the appearance of someone who had gone forth,
he had the marks associated with a noble king.
10. The men and women of the city of Rājagṛha, both young and old,
all felt ill at ease. “Even this person has gone forth! What common joy could
there be for us?”
11. At that moment King Bimbisāra sat high on an observation pavilion.
He saw that the people were agitated, not behaving as usual.
12. He summoned someone from outside and asked him details about
the reason [for the disturbance]. [The man] respectfully knelt below the king’s
pavilion and fully informed him of what he had seen and heard:
13. “It has been made known in the past that the Śākya clan has a wonderful and excellent son. His divine wisdom surpasses the worldly external,
and as a king he would lead in the eight directions. He has gone forth and is
here now. Everyone is welcoming him.”
14. When the king heard this, he was pleasantly surprised in his heart.
His demeanor was unchanged but his spirit was already racing. He ordered
a messenger to go quickly and secretly observe the propriety of [the Crown
Prince’s] destination. After [the messenger] had received his instructions, he
secretly followed [the Crown Prince], observing his behavior.
15. [The Bodhisattva’s] gaze was tranquil and he looked straight ahead.
Walking with dignity, he showed his true deportment. When he entered a
neighborhood on his almsround, he was ﬁrst among the beggars.
16. He controlled his appearance, his mind unconfused. Whatever the
conditions around him, he was not ill at ease. He accepted what he received,
whether ﬁne or coarse. With his bowl in his hands he turned to a secluded
grove. After his meal he rinsed his mouth in a clear stream. Enjoying the
tranquility, he felt at ease on Mount Pāṇḍava.
17. Green groves lined the high cliffs and red ﬂowers grew among them.
Birds, peacocks and other kinds, ﬂew about, crying in confusion.

70

Chapter X

18. His robe of the Law helped the morning freshness arise, just as when
the sun is shining from the mulberry tree.33 When the [king’s] messenger
saw that [the Crown Prince] was staying [in the grove], he gave a full report
in due order.
19. When the king heard [the messenger’s report], his mind quickly
became respectful. He immediately had his carriage adorned and went on
his way. With his celestial crown, his girdle with pendants, and his ornamented
garments, he walked like a lion king.
20. He selected several elders, tranquil and careful gentlemen, and led
a large crowd. Like a rising cloud, they ascended Mount Pāṇḍava.
21. He saw the digniﬁed demeanor of the Bodhisattva, who had quieted
his sense faculties. He was sitting upright in his hut on a cliff, just like the
moon in the blue sky. His ﬁne beauty was pure and majestic, like a transformed
body of the Law.
22. Respectful thoughts reverently arose [in the king’s mind] and he
gradually drew near with reverential steps, just like Śakra, ruler of the gods,
who went to Maheśvara.
23. With controlled appearance and digniﬁed manners, he respectfully
asked [of the Crown Prince] if he was well. The Bodhisattva moved with
care and repaid him the courtesy.
24. When the king had completed his polite questions, he then sat down
on a clean rock. He gazed and stared at [the Bodhisattva’s] divine deportment.
His countenance was serene and his feelings were mixed with joy.
25. “I have humbly heard that you have inherited the abundant qualities
of your famous family. My feelings of esteem have been accumulating for
a long time, but now I want to settle some doubts.
26. “While Āditya is your original ancestor, your position has been high
for ten thousand generations, so that their qualities have continually been
bequeathed, widely collected in the present. You are wise and able, but you
are yet youthful. Why have you gone forth?
27. “As a noble prince who surpasses the worldly, you beg for alms and
do not abide in splendor. Your ﬁne person should be perfumed. Why do you
wear the kāṣāya? Your hand should control the land, but [instead] you receive
despicable food with it.

71

19c

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

20a

28. “If you will not succeed the king, your father, and receive his land,
I will now divide my country in half. It is my earnest hope that I may somehow
entertain your interest.
29. “As you avoid compelling likes or dislikes, with the passing of time
one will comply with what should be followed. Show consideration to my
sincere words! When one’s wish is obtained, one is a good neighbor.
30. “You may rely on your famous and excellent family, and ability and
virtue may be combined in your demeanor. If you would not wish to subdue
your noble character, or if you yield and accept the goodness of others, I
shall provide you with valiant men, weapons, and resources for a military.
31. “Widely winning over others by one’s own strength, who in the
world would not promote this? When a bright person knows the right time
and makes his choice, his duty, his riches, and his ﬁve desires are increased.
32. “If one does not obtain these three gains, one will always toil in vain.
One may respect duty and reject riches and beauty, but riches are for people
in the whole world.
33. “If one is wealthy and has given up duty and desire, one will preserve
one’s wealth. But if one is poor and forgetful of one’s duty, who could ﬁnd
joy in the ﬁve desires?
34. “Therefore, if the three things go together, virtue spreads and the
path is propagated. When one is endowed with duty, riches, and the ﬁve
desires, one is called a great man in the world. Do not let your person bearing
the marks of perfection be without any merit, toiling in vain!
35. “The wheel-turning king Māndhātṛ ruled over the four worlds and
Lord Śakra shared half his throne with him, but his power could not rule
over heaven. Your straight, long arms are quite sufﬁcient to seize the regions
of humans and gods now.
36. “Not relying on my royal power, I wish to compel you to stay with
us! I see that you have abandoned any fondness for your appearance, and
that you wear the garment of someone who has gone forth.
37. “I have respect for your virtue, but I grieve and feel for you as a
man. You now go begging for alms. I wish you would accept the land!
38. “In youth one may experience the ﬁve desires, and in middle age
one may indulge in riches to enjoy. When one’s faculties have matured in
old age, that is the time to comply with the Law.

72

Chapter X

39. “One may hold on to the riches of the Law in one’s youth, but one
will certainly be destroyed by desire. When older, one’s vigor is lessened
and one may be courteous and seek silence. When one is in old age and
ashamed of one’s desire for riches, and practices the Law, one is honored by
the whole world.
40. “In youth one’s mind is ﬁckle and rushes to the objects of the ﬁve
desires. One is bound by the plight of one’s associates, and in the exchange
of feelings one’s affection for others is deep.
41. “As one grows old one has fewer sentimental attachments, and one
is honored by those who comply with the Law. The ﬁve desires have all withdrawn and one increases one’s thoughts of happiness with the Law.
42. “Respect the law of the ruler, and serve the celestial spirits in a great
gathering! You will ride upon a celestial dragon and ascend to heaven, experiencing happiness!
43. “The previous excellent noble kings adorned themselves with precious
necklaces. They arranged for great gatherings, offering sacriﬁces. In the end
they took refuge and experienced the good fortune of heaven.”
44. Such was the explanation of King Bimbisāra using all kinds of means,
but the determination of the Crown Prince remained ﬁrm, as immovable as
Sumeru.

73

20b

Chapter XI

The Reply to King Bimbisāra
1. After King Bimbisāra had urged [the prince] in a courteous and comforting
way, the Crown Prince respectfully expressed his appreciation, deeply moved
by the words addressed to him.
2. “You have worldly propriety! Your exposition is not baseless. As a
descendant of the famous Haryaṅka family, you are a virtuous friend. With
righteousness in your heart and false thoughts completely ended, you have
spoken thus, as is your duty.
3. “The common [people] in the world cannot dwell in kindness and
righteousness. Having few qualities, they approach the facts with foolishness.
How would they comprehend anything famous and excellent!
4. “But carrying on your excellent ancestral tradition, you revere propriety
and practice respectful deference. In the middle of hardship you can bring
rescue for all, without abandoning anyone. This is the characteristic of a true
virtuous friend in the world!
5. “When the riches of a good friend bring relief for all, that person is
called a secure treasure. When one is parsimonious and hoards one’s own
proﬁts, they will certainly quickly disappear!
6. “The riches of the land are an impermanent treasure. Generosity is a
meritorious action. If one is also generous toward one’s virtuous friends, one
will not have any regrets later, even after they have been scattered.
7. “Because I know that you are generous in your heart, I will not argue
against you. I shall tell you now with all my heart what I have seen.
8. “I am afraid of birth, old age, illness, and death, and I wish to seek
true deliverance. I have given up my relatives and left my loved ones. Why
would I return to indulging in the ﬁve desires?
9. “I am not afraid of venomous snakes, freezing hail, or ﬁerce ﬁres, yet
I am afraid of the objects of the ﬁve desires. As they proceed, they weary
my mind.

75

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

20c

10. “The thieves of impermanence, the ﬁve desires, steal one’s ﬁnest
precious things. They are deceitful, fake and unreal, just like apparitions.
They make a man deluded when he considers them even for a while. All the
more so when one constantly dwells in them!
11. “The ﬁve desires are a considerable hindrance, always impeding the
Law of tranquility. When even celestial happiness is impossible, how much
more so when one dwells in human desires?
12. “The ﬁve desires bring about a thirst that will never know a moment
of satisfaction, just like a ﬁerce ﬁre in the wind. One may throw on ﬁrewood
but it will not be enough!
13. “Of all meaningless things in the world, none surpasses the objects
of the ﬁve desires. Because beings are foolish and covetous, they are attached
to them and do not realize it. A wise one is afraid of the ﬁve desires and does
not fall into their meaninglessness.
14. “Even if one would rule [everywhere] within the four seas, one would
still strive for more beyond them. Desire is like the great ocean. It never has
a moment of satiety.
15. “As for the wheel-turning king Māndhātṛ, the wide heavens rained
gold and he ruled the four worlds, but he further strove for Trāyastriṃśa
Heaven, sharing Lord Śakra’s throne. His intentions caused his life to end.
16. “Nahuṣa practiced asceticism and ruled over the thirty-three gods.
Indulging in his desire, his mind became haughty and [he had] seers draw
his chariot. Because of this negligent behavior, he immediately fell among
the serpents.
17. “The wheel-turning king Aiḷa34 went out to Trāyastriṃśa Heaven.
He chose a celestial maiden as his queen and he demanded gold from the
seers. The anger of the seers was like a curse. His country was destroyed and
his life ended.
18. “Bali35 and the great Lord Śakra, the great Lord Śakra and Nahuṣa,
from Nahuṣa back to Lord Śakra—how could a celestial ruler know permanence? His land is not ﬁrm, even though great power may dwell there.
19. “Wearing a garment of herbs, eating fruit, and drinking from a stream;
having long hair, as if hanging down to the ground; remaining silent, without
any aspiration.

76

Chapter XI

20. “Practicing asceticism in this way, one may be destroyed by desire
in the end. Know that the objects of the ﬁve desires are the enemies of one
who is practicing the path!
21. “The very powerful king with a thousand arms36 was valiant and hard
to confront, but he was killed by the seer Rāma, also because of his desire.
22. “How much less would I, from a kṣatriya lineage, not be led by
desire! Desire for tasteless objects and a lasting increase in posterity are
detested by the wise. Who would partake of the poison of desire?
23. “Through all kinds of suffering one seeks beneﬁt, all caused by covetousness. If one is without desire, hardship does not arise. A wise one sees
that suffering is wrong while dispelling desire.
24. “The world may think it is good, but in any case it is a bad way. That
which is coveted by beings brings every reason for negligence, and the negligent hurt themselves. When dead, they will fall into a woeful destination.
25. “[The objects of desire] are obtained by diligent effort and guarded
with effort. Without diligence they are naturally lost, but it is not the case
that through effort one can detain them. They are like borrowed objects, and
a wise one is not attached to them.
26. “When desire is sought for through hardship, once obtained it
increases attachment. When scattered by impermanence, it increases suffering
more and more. Holding its torch, one may yet burn oneself. A wise one is
unattached.
27. “A foolish and mean person burns his mind with the poison of stinginess. Throughout his whole life he experiences lasting suffering and never
obtains happiness. Covetousness and hatred are like the poison of a snake.
Why would a wise one approach them?
28. “In hardship one may chew on a dry bone, but it has no ﬂavor and
one is not nourished. One wears out one’s teeth in vain. A wise one does not
try to taste it.
29. “Kings and robbers are different, like water and ﬁre, but evil sons
equally share in the riches, which are like a putrid piece of meat fought over
by a gathering ﬂock of birds. The same applies when coveting riches. A wise
one does not feel joy for that.
30. “A place where riches are accumulated often raises enmity. Night
and day one guards it, as if in fear of a great enemy.

77

21a

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

21b

31. “An execution underneath a banner in the eastern marketplace,37
one detests this. The long banners of covetousness, hatred, and delusion—
a wise one always keeps away from them.
32. “When entering a mountain forest, rivers, or seas, one has little ease
and is often destroyed. If, for instance, one wants to pick the fruit of the
highest branch of a tree, most often one will fall to one’s death. The same
applies in case of the object of desire. One may see it, but it is hard to grasp.
33. “One may earnestly apply oneself to the search for riches, but they
are hard to accumulate and easy to scatter, as if obtained in a dream. Why
would a wise one protect them?
34. “If one deceivingly covers over a ﬁery pit, he who steps on it will
certainly be burned to death. The same applies to the ﬁre of desire. A wise
one does not wander there.
35. “In the cases of the Kauravas, the Vṛṣṇis, the Andhakas, the Mekhalas,
and the Daṇḍakas,38 the appearance of their desire was just like the knives
and [cutting] block of the butcher. A wise one does not behave like that.
36. “If one ties up oneself and throws oneself into water or ﬁre, or if one
throws oneself from a high cliff to seek celestial happiness, one suffers in
vain and does not obtain any beneﬁt.
37. “The asura brothers Sunda and Upasunda lived together and held
each other dear, but they destroyed each other because of their desire. They
perished and their names were both destroyed, all because of desire.
38. “Desire causes one to steal, and one suffers when lashed by the whip
and the stick. Desire brings low expectations, and for a long time body and
spirit are wearied.
39. “Deer die while coveting songs, birds on the wing follow their covetousness for beauty, and ﬁshes in the deep covet bait. They all suffer from
their desire.
40. “When one observes the provisions one depends on, they are not
sovereign ways. With food one cures the ailment of hunger, and one drinks
water to do away with thirst.
41. “Covered in clothes, one withstands the cold wind. One remedies
sleepiness by lying down. Because it is tiresome to walk, one wishes for a
conveyance. Tired of standing up, one wishes for bedding and a seat. One
bathes to do away with impurity. This is all to put a stop to suffering.

78

Chapter XI

42. “Therefore, one should know that the ﬁve desires are not sovereign.
For example, if someone falls ill with fever, he asks for a cooling medicine.
43. “When he wants to stop suffering, a fool thinks he is a sovereign, yet
the provisions he depends on certainly will not stop his suffering. They still
may let the way of suffering increase. Therefore, these are no sovereign ways.
44. “Warm clothes are no constant happiness. As the season passes, they
may yet bring suffering. Moonlight is cool in summer, but in winter it increases
the suffering of the cold.
45. “Up to the eight worldly factors,39 none are characterized by certainty.
The painful and pleasant characteristics are not certain. Slavery and kingship,
why would they be separate?
46. “His instructions are accepted by all, and one considers a king to be
someone superior, but giving instructions means suffering, as when one bears
the heavy burden of responsibility. He must always gauge the weight of the
world. All suffering is concentrated in him.
47. “As a king one has many enemies. Even those dear to him may
become a calamity. Without any dear ones, he stands alone. What joy is there
in this?
48. “Even if he rules the four worlds, what he enjoys is in any case not
more than one part. He may manage to help in ten thousand matters, but how
would great suffering beneﬁt him?
49. “It is better to stop wanting. Appeasement means great contentment.
Dwelling in kingship, the ﬁve desires may mean happiness; but when not
ruling, solitude means joy. As joy and happiness are of the same kind, what
is the use of having a royal position?
50. “Do not make any effort to lead me into the ﬁve desires! What I in
fact wish for is a cool and open road. If you want to bring me any beneﬁt,
help me accomplish my aspiration!
51. “I am not afraid of an enemy, and I do not seek the happiness of
rebirth in heaven. My heart does not cherish common proﬁt, and I have given
up a celestial crown. Therefore I must go against your feelings. I cannot
follow your proposal.
52. “If one has avoided the mouth of a venomous snake, why would one
go back and take hold of it? If one holds a torch and burns oneself, how could
one not quickly drop it?

79

21c

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

22a

53. “When someone who has eyes envies a blind person, when one is
set free but wishes to be bound again, when a rich person wishes to be poor,
and when a wise one indulges in foolishness—when there are people like
this in the world, then I will ﬁnd happiness in my country.
54. “If one wants to cross birth, old age, and death; restrains oneself and
goes begging for alms; has little desire and keeps one’s seclusion; and if one
avoids a woeful destination in the later world, one is content in two worlds.
Do not grieve for me now!
55. “Grieve for him who is king! His thoughts are constantly craving in
vain. He does not obtain contentment in the present world, and in the later
world he will experience a painful retribution.
56. “You have attended to me with your generous feelings, with the propriety and righteousness of the great men of your family, and you would like
me to share in your worldly pleasures. I should recompense your virtue yet.
I urge you to share in my beneﬁts.
57. “If one indulges in the three happinesses,40 he is called a man of the
world. This is not yet meaningful, because one is constantly seeking without
any satisfaction. If one is free from birth, old age, and death, then one may
be called a great man.
58. “You have said that one is unsettled when young, and that one may
go forth when old. But I see that the strength of someone of advanced age
is weak, unﬁt for anything. It is better that one’s decision is made when one’s
determination is ﬁerce, when one is healthy.
59. “The thief of death follows one with a sword in his hand, constantly
looking for his opportunity. Why would he allow one to reach old age to
fulﬁll one’s determination and go forth?
60. “Impermanence is a hunter. Old age is his bow and illnesses are his
sharp arrows. He is constantly on the lookout for deer—living beings in the
wilderness of birth and death. Getting his opportunity, he puts a stop to their
lives. Who would be allowed to live out his lifetime?
61. “In a person’s behavior concerning the matter of birth or extinction,
young, old, or middle-aged, all should diligently apply themselves!
62. “One holds a large gathering when one offers sacriﬁces. This is all
because of foolishness. One should respect the Right Law and oppose any

80

Chapter XI

killing to offer sacriﬁces to heaven! When one seeks good fortune by injuring
the living, he is an unkind person.
63. “Even if the fruition were permanent when one injures the living,
still one should not kill! How much less when one injures the living and
offers sacriﬁces seeking for an impermanent [fruition]?
64. “Even if one practices meditation and quietude without any morality,
learning, or wisdom, one should not comply with the world and arrange for
a large gathering to offer sacriﬁces!
65. “Even if he might obtain happiness in the present by killing the
living, a wise one should not kill! How much less would he seek good fortune
in a later world by killing beings?
66. “I do not ﬁnd happiness in any conditioned fruition of the three
realms.41 The ﬂuidity of the destinations [of sentient existence] is just like
grass tossed about by wind and water.
67. “So I have come far to seek true deliverance. I have heard of one
called Ārāḍa, who explains the path of deliverance well.
68. “I shall now go to him, to the place of the muni, the great seer. May
your suffering be allayed by my sincere words! I apologize to you now.
69. “I wish that your country be safe. Protect it well, just like Lord Śakra!
May the light of your wisdom shine in the world, like abundant sunlight!
70. “Excellent ruler of the great earth, protect your life with an upright
mind! May the right changes protect your son, ruling the world according
to the Law!
71. “Ice and snow take ﬁre to be the enemy. Because of ﬁre, the banner
of smoke arises. The banner of smoke becomes a ﬂoating cloud, and the
ﬂoating cloud brings heavy rain. There are birds in the sky that drink from
the rain,42 but it has not rained for them.
72. “If you make your abode having killed your serious enemies, the
serious enemies in your residence are done away with. But if there is someone
who kills your serious enemy, you should hide him now so that he may go
free, as if it had not rained on him when he took a drink.”
73. The king then held his palms together [respectfully]. He respected
[the Bodhisattva’s] virtue and was joyful in his heart. “I wish that your result
may quickly be accomplished, just as you want. But once you have accomplished a result, you should quickly return and accept me!”

81

22b

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

74. The Bodhisattva made the promise in his heart: “I agree to comply
with your wish!” He took leave and followed his way. He went to Ārāḍa.
75. The king and his retinue held their palms together [respectfully] and
saw him off. They all thought it was amazing, and returned to the city of
Rājagṛha.

82

Chapter XII

Visits to Ārāḍa and Udraka
1. When the moonlight descendant of Ikṣvāku arrived in that quiet grove, he
respectfully went to the muni, the great seer Ārāḍa.
2. When the adept son of the Kālāma family saw the Bodhisattva coming
from afar, he praised him from the distance in a loud voice. He comforted
him and said, “Welcome!”
3. Holding their palms together, they exchanged reverences and asked
after one another’s well-being. After they had made mutual inquiries about
their troubles, they sat down in a digniﬁed way.
4. When the brahman saw the Crown Prince, his appearance and his
careful deportment, washing [his feet] he bowed down to his virtue, as if he
were thirstily drinking the nectar of immortality.
5. He raised his hand and said to the Crown Prince, “I have known that
you have gone forth for a long time. You have broken with the bonds of your
beloved ones, like an elephant who has shaken off his hobbles. Your profound
knowledge, your insight, and your wisdom are bright, capable of avoiding
this poisonous fruition.
6. “The bright excellent kings of the past gave up their thrones and
handed them over to their sons, just as someone wearing a garland discards
it when it is withered. It is still better not to desire the position of a noble
king when you are in your prime.
7. “I see that your determination is very ﬁrm. You are ﬁt to be a receptacle
of the Right Law. You will board the ship of knowledge and cross the sea of
birth and death!
8. “When a common person is enticed to come and study, I only teach
him after I have investigated his ability. I now know your ﬁrm and resolute
determination. Just study as you wish! I will never conceal anything from you!”
9. When the Crown Prince heard these instructions, he was glad and
responded, “You may instruct me well with an impartial mind, without any
love or hate! Just accept me with an open mind, and my wish will be fulﬁlled!
83

22c

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

23a

10. “When one obtains a torchlight while walking at night, when someone
who has lost his direction receives guidance, or when one obtains a light
boat when crossing the sea, the same applies to me now.
11. “I have now received your merciful permission, and I dare ask you
about my inner doubts. The calamities of birth, old age, illness, and death—
how can one avoid them?”
12. When Ārāḍa had heard the Crown Prince’s question, he brieﬂy gave
his explanation, using scriptural texts:
13. “You are an ingenious gentleman, the highest among the intelligent.
Now, listen to my explanation of birth and death, the meaning of origination
and extinction!
14. “Nature, change, birth, old age, and death—these ﬁve are [the constituents of] sentient beings. Nature is a pure [state]; and, as for change, faculties and objects secondary to the ﬁve great elements, to self, to intellection,
and to seeing are called change.43
15. “Matter, sound, smell, taste, and the tactile—these are called objective
elements. Hands, feet, speech, and the two paths [of excretory functions]—
these are called the ﬁve faculties of action.
16. “Eye, ear, nose, tongue, and body—these are called faculties of intellection. For the faculty of mind the two meanings are combined: both action
and that called intellection. Nature and change are a cause, and the knower
of the cause44 is the self.
17. “The seer Kapila and his retinue of disciples studied the important
meaning of this self and obtained deliverance. That Kapila is Prajāpati45 now.
18. “That which knows birth, old age, and death is called the seen.46 The
opposite of the above is called the unseen.
19. “Foolishness, action, and desire are said to turn the wheel [of existence]. If one dwells in these three, one is not free from [existence as a]
sentient being.
20. “Non-conﬁdence, self, doubt, random, non-distinction, absence of
means, profound attachment to objective elements, being bound to what is
mine.47
21. “Non-conﬁdence proceeds when turning things upside down. One both
acts and understands differently. ‘I explain and I know. I come and go, and I
stay.’ Such counting on a self is called the process of the activity of a self.

84

Chapter XII

22. “Being doubtful about the nature of things, and not obtaining the
truth about right or wrong—such uncertainty is called doubt.
23. “If one says that the right way is the self, and that [the self] is nothing
but mind, saying that it is intellection and action, and if one says that fate is
further called the self,
24. “such non-distinction is called random. Not understanding foolish
or clever, nature and change, is called non-distinction.
25. “One may do homage and recite the scriptures, kill living beings
and sacriﬁce them to heaven, consider water and ﬁre as puriﬁcations, and
have the notion that these things mean deliverance—such views are called
absence of means.
26. “When mind, speech, intellection, and action are attached to foolishness, and also to the objective elements, this is called attachment.
27. “‘Everything is mine.’ This is called grasping. Such eight kinds of
delusion engulf one in birth and death.
28. “The fools in every world are in the grasp of ﬁve nodes: darkness,
delusion, great delusion, anger, and fear.48
29. “Laziness is called darkness. Birth and death are called delusion.
Desire is called great delusion, because even a great person may be misled
by it. Resentment is called anger. Mental distress is called fear.
30. “The foolish common person is attached to the ﬁve desires, the basis
of the great suffering of birth and death. As the wheel turns, he is reborn in
ﬁve destinations.
31. “He keeps turning in rebirth, [thinking]: ‘I have seen and heard, and
I know that I am caused.’ Because of this counting on a self, he follows the
ﬂow of birth and death.
32. “This cause is not his nature, and the result is not the possession of
his nature either. He namely considers correctly when four factors direct him
toward deliverance: the clever and the foolish, the seen, and the unseen.
33. “If he knows these four factors, he can be free from birth, old age,
and death. When birth, old age, and death have ended, he has reached a place
without end.
34. “All brahmans in the world practice their pure conduct relying on
the meaningfulness of this, and they have widely explained it to the people.”

85

23b

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

23c

35. When the Crown Prince heard this explanation, he further asked
Ārāḍa, “What are the means of application, and what place does one ﬁnally
reach?
36. “What pure conduct should one practice, and further, for how long?
Why would one practice pure conduct, and what place will one reach in this
way? Do fully explain such important things to me!”
37. “Ārāḍa then gave an explanation according to his scriptural texts.
With his wisdom and means he brieﬂy made further distinctions for [the
Crown Prince].
38. “First, one leaves the common and goes forth, relying on alms. Extensively concentrated on digniﬁed demeanor, he keeps his right morality.
39. “He has little desire and knows satisfaction with whatever he obtains,
ﬁne or coarse. Happy to be alone, he practices residing in solitude and diligently studies the scriptural texts.
40. “He sees desire as fearful and renunciation as puriﬁcation. Controlling
the dwellings of his faculties, he puts his mind at ease in quietude.
41. “He renounces desire, evil, and the unwholesome, the afﬂictions of
the realm of desire. Having renounced, he brings forth joy and happiness,
and he obtains the ﬁrst trance,49 with adjusted and discursive thinking.
42. “After he has obtained the happiness of the ﬁrst trance, and also
adjusted and discursive thinking, he brings forth the notion that this is wonderful, and in his foolishness his mind is attached to happiness. When he
relies on the happiness of renunciation and his life ends, he is reborn in the
Brahma Heaven.
43. “The wise one is fully conscious that he has expediently produced
adjusted and discursive thinking. He strenuously seeks to advance to what
is associated with the second trance. When he is attached to the ﬂavor of that
joy and happiness, he obtains rebirth in the Ābhāsvara Heaven.
44. “Expediently renouncing joy and happiness, he further develops the
third trance. If he is content and does not seek for excellence, he is reborn
in the Śubhakṛtsna Heaven.
45. “If he gives up that happiness of mind, he reaches the fourth trance.
When both suffering and happiness are stopped, he may give rise to the notion
that he is delivered.

86

Chapter XII

46. “With the retribution of the fourth trance he is reborn in the Bṛhatphala
Heaven. Because one has a long life, it is called ‘with extensive fruition.’50
47. “Emerging from that trance, he sees the possession of a body as
wrong. While advancing, he develops wisdom and becomes weary of the
fourth trance. He decides to advance in his search, and expediently does
away with his desire for matter.
48. “He begins with [contemplating] the cavities of his own body and
gradually develops an understanding of emptiness.51 In the end he completely
accomplishes the contemplation of solid parts as space.
49. “He cuts short the objective element of his contemplation of space
and advances to the contemplation of unlimited consciousness. Skilled in
inner quietude, he is free from ‘I’ and ‘mine.’ The observation of nothingness
is the sphere of nothingness.
50. “Just as the stalk and sheath of muñja [grass]52 are separated, and
just as a wild bird leaves its cage, his deliverance is like that, free from an
objective element.
51. “He is a superior brahman, free from his physical appearance, permanently and without end. The wise one must know that this is true deliverance!
52. “The means you have asked about and the deliverance you seek—
these are as I have just explained. If you ﬁrmly believe it, you must apply
yourself!
53. “The seers Jaigīṣavya and Janaka, Vṛddha Parāśara,53 and the others
who have sought the path have all obtained true deliverance following this
path.”
54. When the Crown Prince had heard this explanation, he pondered
over its purport. Motivated by his previous causality, he again asked:
55. “I have listened to your excellent wisdom, to the subtle and very
ﬁne meaning, but if it does not reject the knower of the cause, it is not the
ﬁnal path.
56. “The knower of the cause, of nature and change, may be said to be
delivered, but your contemplation of a self has a way of coming into existence,
and it also has a way of being a seed.
57. “You may think that when the self is puriﬁed, it is truly delivered.
But if it meets with a combination of causes and conditions, it will return to
its bonds.

87

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

24a

58. “For example, when the proper season, soil, water, ﬁre, and wind
for the seed are separated, its reasons for growth are separated. But when it
meets with the [appropriate] conditions, the seed will grow again.
59. “They may be called freed when ignorance, the cause of action, and
desire are rejected, but beings who maintain a self do not have ﬁnal deliverance.
60. “One may reject these three54 everywhere and further obtain three
superiorities, but because the self always exists, it subtly follows.
61. “Because a subtle fault follows, the mind does not apply itself. Life
becomes long-lasting, yet you think that one is truly delivered.
62. “You may say that one is free from any [thought of] ‘mine,’ but if
one were free, then even that would not exist. As you are not free from any
enumeration,55 how would one be free from any attribute?56 So, know that
one is not delivered when one has an attribute!
63. “The meanings of a possessor of an attribute57 and of attribute may
be different, but they are essentially one. If one says that the one is separate
from the other, one will never have the right sphere! If color and heat are
separate from ﬁre, distinct ﬁre cannot be obtained.
64. “For example, before a body there is no possessor of the body. In
the same way, before an attribute there is no possessor of an attribute either.
So, one may have been delivered at ﬁrst but then one is bound to a body.
65. “Furthermore, when the knower of the cause is without body, he is
either knowing or unknowing. If one says he is knowing, he must have something to know; and if there is something to be known, he is not delivered.
66. “If one says he is unknowing, then a self is useless! If one is free
from a self but is still knowing, the self then is the same as a log or a rock.
67. “Being in possession of the knowledge of ﬁne and coarse, one may
turn one’s back on the coarse and respect the subtle. But if one is capable of
giving up everything, what may be caused is ﬁnished.”
68. Ārāḍa’s explanation could not please [the Bodhisattva’s] mind. He
knew that he was no all-knower and that he should practice and further seek
for excellence. He went to the seer Udraka, but he too relied on an existing self.
69. Although he observed a subtle object, he saw that it was beyond perception and non-perception.58 Dwelling in the absence of perception and
non-perception, he still did not have the road to escape.

88

Chapter XII

70. “As beings reach that, they will certainly fall back again!” Because
the Bodhisattva was seeking to escape, he also rejected the seer Udraka.
71. He searched further for an excellent ﬁne path and ascended Gaja
Mountain59 to the forest of asceticism called Nagarī, where ﬁve bhikṣus
dwelled.
72. He saw that the ﬁve bhikṣus were well in control of their sense faculties. They dwelled in that forest of asceticism, keeping the precepts and
practicing austerities.
73. The bank of the Nairañjanā River was quiet and very pleasant. In
that very place the Bodhisattva immediately pondered in tranquility.
74. When the ﬁve bhikṣus knew that [the Bodhisattva] was seeking deliverance with a ﬁne mind, they wholeheartedly came to worship him, as if paying respect to the god Īśvara.
75. They humbly treated him as their teacher and never left his side,
whether going or staying, just as the faculties of a practitioner proceed following the mind.
76. In his diligent application the Bodhisattva had to cross old age,
illness, and death. He wholeheartedly practiced asceticism and, restraining
himself, he forgot to eat.
77. Purifying his mind, he observed a fast that any practitioner would
ﬁnd unbearable. He meditated in silence for a full six years.
78. He ate one sesame seed and one grain of rice a day, and his body
became utterly emaciated. In his search to cross birth and death, his grave
delusion became even more serious.
79. “The path will be accomplished through understanding. Not eating
will not be the cause!” Although his four limbs were weak, his wise mind
became increasingly clear.
80. His spirit was empty and his body was shrunken, but his famous
virtue became widely renowned. It was like the opening up of a kumuda60
ﬂower when the moon has just risen. His excellent fame spread all over the
land. Men and women rivaled to come and see him.
81. His suffering body was like a dead log for almost six years. Fearful
of the suffering of birth and death, he wanted only the cause of right awakening.

89

24b

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

24c

82. He thought to himself, “Not through this will I be free from desire
or will quiet contemplation arise. The wonder I previously obtained beneath
the jambū tree61 is better still. Know that that is the right path!
83. “The path will not be obtained by an exhausted body. It must be
sought after with corporal strength. When food and drink fulﬁll the faculties,
the faculties rejoice, so that the mind is at ease.
84. “When the mind is at ease, it complies with quietude. Tranquility is
the snare for trances. Through meditation one knows the Right Law, and
with the power of the Law one may obtain what is hard to obtain.
85. “In quietude one may leave old age and death, in the highest form
free from any impurity. Such ﬁne ways all come from food and drink.”
86. Having considered the meaningfulness of this, he washed himself on
the bank of the Nairañjanā. After bathing, he wanted to come out of the pond
but he was weak and could not pull himself out. A celestial spirit pressed
down the branch of a tree, and he raised his hand, held on to it, and came out.
87. At the same time, on the other side, beyond the forest, there was a
cowherd chief. The chief’s daughter was called Nandā. A god of the pure
abodes came to tell her, “The Bodhisattva is in the forest. Go and worship
him!”
88. Nandā Balajā happily went to where [the Bodhisattva] was. She
wore bracelets of white shells on her arms, and a garment that was dyed dark
blue. The dark blue and the white reﬂected one another, just like something
immersed in purifying water.
89. Her trusting mind increased her joy. She bowed at the Bodhisattva’s
feet and respectfully offered fragrant milk-rice, considering that he would
deign to accept it, seeing her concern.
90. The Bodhisattva accepted [the meal] and ate it, and [Nandā] obtained
a present fruition. Having eaten, his faculties rejoiced and he was ﬁt to experience bodhi.
91. His body became brighter, and the reputation of his virtue became
ever more lofty, just as the hundred rivers increase the sea and the new moon
daily increases its light.
92. When the ﬁve bhikṣus saw [the Bodhisattva take food], they were
startled and thought it was contemptible. They thought he had withdrawn

90

Chapter XII

from his spiritual path. They abandoned him and moved to a better dwelling
place, just as when one is delivered he is free from all ﬁve great elements.
93. The Bodhisattva wandered alone, and went to the auspicious tree.62
Underneath that tree, he would accomplish the path of perfect awakening.
The ground was wide and level, and smooth, with soft grass growing there.
94. With dignity, he walked like a lion, and at every step the earth shook.
The movement of the earth moved the dragon Kāla. He rejoiced and his eyes
saw clearly.
95. He said, “When I saw the former buddhas, the earth moved just as it
does now. Your virtue, muni, is very worthy, unsurpassed on the great earth!
96. “As your feet tread on the ground, with every step it makes a thundering sound. Your ﬁne light shines in the world, just like the light of the
morning sun.
97. “A ﬂock of ﬁve hundred blue tits hovers in the sky, making circles
to the right. A gentle and cool breeze follows and blows all around.
98. “All these auspicious signs were the same for the buddhas of the
past. That is why I know that the Bodhisattva will accomplish the path of
right awakening.”
99. From another man who was cutting grass, [the Bodhisattva] obtained
pure and soft grass. He spread out the grass underneath the tree and sat down,
his body upright. He sat cross-legged and did not move, like the coiling body
of a dragon.
100. “I will not rise from this seat until I fully achieve what I have to
do!” When he made this true and solemn oath, the gods and dragons all
rejoiced.
101. A cool and gentle breeze came up yet the twigs of the bushes and
trees did not rustle. All the birds and animals were quiet; none gave a sound.
All these were signs that the Bodhisattva would certainly accomplish the
path of awakening.

91

25a

Chapter XIII

Māra’s Destruction
1. When the great seer of a family of seer kings made his ﬁrm solemn oath,
beneath the bodhi tree, that he would certainly accomplish the path of deliverance,
2. demons, dragons, and the multitude of gods all greatly rejoiced. But
the celestial king Māra, enemy of the Law, alone was sorrowful and did not
rejoice.
3. The sovereign king of the ﬁve desires was endowed with every skill
in battle. Because he detested so-called deliverance, he was called Pāpīyas.
4. King Māra had three daughters. They had a beautiful appearance and
ﬁne bearing. Possessing all kinds of wiles to delude people, they were the
best among celestial maidens.
5. The ﬁrst was called Rāgā. The second was called Ratī, and the third
was called Tṛṣṇā. The three daughters came forward at the same time, and
said to Pāpīyas, their father, “We are wondering why you are sad.”
6. Their father [Māra] fully described the situation according to the facts,
and informed his daughters, “In the world there is a great muni. His person
bears the armor of his great solemn oath. He holds the bow of his great resolution and the sharp arrow of wisdom.
7. “He wishes to battle and subdue beings, and to destroy my realm.
Soon, when the beings come to believe in him, I will not be [the same] as
before. When they all turn to his path of deliverance, my land will be empty.
8. “When, for instance, someone offends against morality, his person is
then empty. As long as his eye of wisdom is not open, my land is still all
right. I must go and destroy [the Bodhisattva’s] determination, break down
his bridge!”
9. With bow in hand and ﬁve arrows, along with his retinue, both male
and female, [Māra] went to that aśvattha grove, wishing beings to be ill at
ease.

93

25b

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

25c

10. He saw the quietude of the muni, who was about to cross the sea of
the three existences.63 With his left hand he seized his strong bow, and with
his right hand he made ready to shoot a sharp arrow.
11. And he said to the Bodhisattva, “You, kṣatriya,64 rise quickly! Death
is very dreadful. You should practice your own duties!
12. “Give up the Law of deliverance! Practice warfare and be generous
to meritorious gatherings! Having subdued all the worldly, you will obtain
the happiness of rebirth in heaven in the end!
13. “This path is very famous, practiced by your excellent ancestors. A
descendant of a great family of seer kings should not be a beggar!
14. “If you do not rise now, make your purpose ﬁrm! Beware, do not
give up on your solemn oath! Dare me to let loose my arrow!
15. “At the mere touch of this arrow of mine, the grandson of the moonlight, Aiḷa,65 was as if blown away by a storm. His mind became disordered.
16. “When the seer, practicing asceticism in quietude, heard the sound
of my arrow, he immediately became very afraid at heart. He was confused
and lost his basic nature.
17. “All the more so if you hope to be free from this arrow of mine
during your last days! If you rise quickly now, you may yet be fortunate and
obtain safety.
18. “This arrow’s poison is ﬁerce. It will cause you to shiver and tremble!
If someone relies on his strength to endure my arrow, even his own safety
may be difﬁcult [to obtain]. All the more so if you cannot endure it! How
could you not be frightened?”
19. As Māra explained this fearful matter to intimidate the Bodhisattva,
the Bodhisattva’s mind was complacent. He had no doubts, nor was he afraid.
20. King Māra immediately let loose his arrow, and also brought his
three jade daughters forward. The Bodhisattva did not look at the arrow, and
he did not care for the three daughters either.
21. King Māra stood in awe and became suspicious. He said to himself,
deeply in his heart, “Once I shot at Maheśvara for the maiden of the Snowy
Mountains.66 I could make his heart change but I cannot move the Bodhisattva.
22. “It is not the case that I can move his heart with this arrow or with my
celestial three jade daughters, so that he may bring about love or hatred. I must
further gather my army and put forceful pressure on him with its strength!”

94

Chapter XIII

23. While he was considering thus, Māra’s troops suddenly assembled.
They were of all kinds and each had a different appearance. Some grasped
a trident or held a sword. Others carried a tree or grasped an iron bolt—all
kinds of implements for battle.
24. [They had the] faces of boars, ﬁshes, donkeys, and horses; the appearances of camels, oxen, rhinoceroses, and tigers; and the heads of lions,
dragons, and elephants, and other kinds of birds and beasts.
25. Some had one body and many heads. Some had faces each with one
eye. Others had many eyes, and some had large bellies and long bodies.
26. Some were weak and emaciated, without a belly, and some had long
legs and large knees. Some had large legs and fat calves, and some had long
teeth and sharp claws.
27. Some had no head, chest, or face, and some were bipeds but had
many bodies. Some had large faces and faces [placed] sideways, and some
were of an ash-gray color.
28. Some resembled the light of a bright star, and the bodies of others
emitted smoke. Some had the ears of an elephant and were burdened with
mountains. Some had disheveled hair and were naked.
29. Some wore leather, and their faces were colored half red and white.
Some wore tiger-skin clothes, and others wore snake-skin.
30. Some wore large bells around the waist, and some had twisted locks,
or spiral headdresses. Some had disheveled hair covering their bodies, and
some sucked in the human vital essence.
31. Some took away men’s lives, and some leaped wildly about, crying
out loud. Some hurried in pursuit of others, again and again injuring one
another.
32. Some circled in the sky, and some ﬂew up among the trees. Some
roared and shouted, their evil voices shaking heaven and earth.
33. Such evil beings surrounded the bodhi tree. Some wanted to rip up
[the Bodhisattva’s] body, and others wanted to swallow him.
34. All four sides were ablaze with ﬁre, and the smoking blaze reached
to the heavens above. A gale of wind rose violently on the four sides, and
the mountain forest shook all around.
35. Through the combination of wind, ﬁre, smoke, and dust, it was dark
and one could not see a thing. The gods and humans who loved the Law, and

95

26a

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

26b

dragons and spirits, were all angry at Māra’s crowd. In their anger tears of
blood ﬂowed.
36. When the multitude of gods of the pure abodes saw that Māra was
trying to confuse the Bodhisattva, who was free from desire and without
anger, they felt grief and sorrow for him.
37. They all came and saw the Bodhisattva sitting upright, unmoving.
Countless Māras surrounded him, and their evil voices moved heaven and
earth.
38. The Bodhisattva was established in quietude. His bright complexion
was without any peculiar sign. He was like a lion king, dwelling among the
herd of animals.
39. They all sighed, crying out, “Ha! Ha! Amazing! Wonderful!” But
Māra lashed his crowds on, and each presented their awful powers.
40. Again and again they pressed each other on to immediately cause
his destruction. Their eyes wide open, they gnashed their teeth. They ﬂew
in disarray and leaped wildly about.
41. The Bodhisattva watched in silence, as if he were watching children
playing. The Māras became more and more angry, and doubled their ﬁghting
strength.
42. When they tried to carry a rock, they could not lift it, and those who
could [lift the rock] could not put it down. Flying spears, tridents, and sharp
lances froze in the sky and did not come down.
43. As thunder shook, there was a shower of large hail but it changed
to ﬂowers of ﬁve colors. Evil dragon-snakes spat out poison, which changed
to a fragrant breeze.
44. Beings of all shapes tried to injure the Bodhisattva, but they were
unable to make him move and consequently they hurt themselves.
45. King Māra had an elder sister, called Meghakālī. Holding a skull
vessel in her hands, she stood in front of the Bodhisattva. Exhibiting all kinds
of strange deportment, she tried to debauch and confuse the Bodhisattva.
46. Such hosts of Māra wanted to frighten the Bodhisattva with their
various hideous bodies and by raising all kinds of evil voices. But they could
not move one hair. The Māras were all distressed.
47. A spirit67 in the sky had rendered himself invisible, and he raised his
voice, “I see that the great muni’s mind is without thought of resentment.

96

Chapter XIII

48. “Your evil poisonous minds, Māras, try to bring resentment where
there is no resentment. Foolish evil Māras, you toil in vain. There is nothing
you can do.
49. “Give up your noxious thoughts! Be quiet and stay silent! You cannot
blow away Mount Sumeru with your breath.
50. “Fire may become cold and water may become a blaze, the earth’s
nature may become evenly soft, but you cannot destroy the Bodhisattva. For
eons he has practiced asceticism.
51. “The Bodhisattva practices right consideration, and diligently strives
with zeal. His pure wisdom is bright and he is compassionate for all.
52. “No one can affect or break down these four ﬁne qualities, or make
difﬁculties for him to accomplish his path of right awakening, just as the sun
shining with its thousandfold light is certain to remove the world’s darkness.
53. “As one obtains ﬁre by rubbing sticks together, and as one obtains
water by digging in the earth, he strenuously applies right application. There
is nothing he will not obtain in his search.
54. “No one comes to rescue the world; all are affected by the poisons
of greed, anger, and delusion. Because he is merciful toward beings, he seeks
for the ﬁne medicine of wisdom. He will do away with the suffering of the
world. Why do you trouble him?
55. “The deluded in the world are all attached to wrong paths. The Bodhisattva is studying the right road. He wishes to guide beings.
56. “Harassing one’s guide in the world—this is absolutely not done!
As if one would deceive the merchant’s guide through the wilderness!
57. “As beings have fallen into great darkness and no one knows the
place to go, he lights the lamp of wisdom for them. Why would you want to
extinguish it?
58. “As beings are all tossed about in the great sea of birth and death, he
repairs the ferryboat of wisdom for them. Why would you want to let it sink?
59. “Forbearance is a shoot of the Law, and ﬁrm determination is the
root of the Law. The precepts of discipline are the ﬂowers, and the thoughts
of awakening are the branches and the trunk.
60. As for the great tree of wisdom, the unsurpassed Law is its fruit. It
gives shelter to beings. Why would you want to fell it?
61. The cangue and chains of greed, anger, and delusion are a yoke for

97

26c

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

beings. For long eons he has practiced asceticism to deliver beings from their
bonds. He will certainly accomplish this in the present, sitting in this exact
place.
62. “Just as the buddhas of the past did, he has ﬁrmly established his
adamantine moment. While in all directions everything is moving, only this
earth is tranquil. He is ably experiencing ﬁne concentration. You cannot
destroy that.
63. “Just yield in your heart! Do away with haughty intentions! Develop
the idea to be a good friend! Practice forbearance and wait upon him!”
64. When Māra heard the voice in the sky and saw that the Bodhisattva
remained tranquil, he felt shame and lost his pride. He turned back and
returned to his heaven.
65. Māra’s hosts were all in distress. They were defeated and had lost
their might. They abandoned their weapons of war, scattered in the wild
forest, just as when one has killed the enemy ruler the gangs of enemies are
all destroyed.
66. After the Māras had withdrawn, the Bodhisattva’s mind was still.
The sunshine doubled its light, and the dusty mist dissipated.
67. The moon was bright and the stars were clear. There was no more
darkness. Celestial ﬂowers fell down like rain from the sky to worship the
Bodhisattva.

98

Chapter XIV

Abhisaṃbodhi68
1. After the Bodhisattva had subdued Māra, his determination was ﬁrmer
and his mind tranquil. The eternal end being most meaningful, he entered
the profound and ﬁne trances. Sovereign in the samādhis, he would realize
them in due order.
2. During the ﬁrst watch he entered concentration and remembered his
past lives. “From Such-and-such a place, called So-and-so, I came to be
reborn here.” That way he completely understood his hundreds, thousands,
and tens of thousands of births and deaths.
3. The births and deaths he had experienced were countless. All kinds
of living beings had all been his family once, and he had great compassion
in his heart.
4. Having recollected with great compassion, he further observed that
living beings revolved in six69 destinations, and that their births and deaths
never ended. [The six destinations] were false and not ﬁrm at all, like a
plantain tree or an illusion.
5. In the second watch he then obtained the pure divine eye. Seeing all
beings, it was as if he observed their images in a mirror.
6. As the beings generated births and deaths, they were noble or low,
poor or rich. According to their pure or impure actions they experienced
painful or happy retributions.
7. He observed that evildoers would be reborn in woeful destinations,
and that those who practiced wholesome actions would be reborn among
humans or gods. If they were reborn in hell, they experienced countless kinds
of suffering.
8. They [had to] swallow liquid copper, or iron skewers pierced their
limbs. [They were] thrown into boiling hot cauldrons, or forced into great
masses of ﬁre.
9. Packs of dogs devoured them with their long teeth, or crows with sharp
beaks pecked at their brains. Afraid of ﬁre, they went to dense forests, with
99

27a

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

27b

leaves that were [as sharp as] swords, cutting their limbs. Sharp knives cut
open their bodies, or sharp axes chopped them up.
10. Experiencing these utterly painful poisons, their actions did not let
them die. They had happily performed unclean actions, but their retribution
was the experience of utter suffering.
11. They had savored their attachments for only an instant, but the painful
retribution lasted for a very long time. Laughing, they had planted the cause
of suffering, but they experienced the punishment in tears.
12. If the beings that do evil were to see their retribution, they would
sever their vital arteries, collapse in fear, and bleed to death.
13. When they performed the actions of animals, their actions were of
several kinds, each one different. After death they fell into the animal destination, with several kinds of bodies, each one different.
14. Some died for their skin and ﬂesh, for their fur, horns, bones, tails, or
feathers. They massacred one another, and their relatives still devoured them.
15. They carried a heavy burden or pulled a yoke. They were lashed and
stabbed with goads and awls. Bloody pus dripped from their wounded limbs.
No one could stop hunger or thirst.
16. As they proceeded they massacred others, and they did not have the
power of autonomy [over their own fates]. In the sky, in water, or on dry
land, they had nowhere to escape from death.
17. Those whose stinginess was great were reborn in the destination of
hungry ghosts. Their huge bodies were like big mountains, but the openings
of their throats were like the eye of a needle. As the ﬁery poisons of hunger
and thirst were ablaze, they burned themselves.
18. If they had been stingy and had not given to those who asked, or if
they had kept others from being generous, they were reborn among the hungry
ghosts. When they asked for food, they could not obtain any. They might try
to eat impurities rejected by others but it was transformed and lost.
19. If one would hear that the painful retribution of stinginess is such,
he would slice his ﬂesh to give it to another, just like King Śibi.
20. Some were reborn in the destination among humans, physically
dwelling in walking latrines. [The body’s] movement was utterly painful,
and as it left the womb, it gave rise to fear. When a soft body touched an
external object, it was as if cut by a sword.

100

Chapter XIV

21. As they dwelled in the lot of their previous actions, they did not have
a single moment free of death. Suffering hardship, they sought rebirth; and
being reborn, they experienced suffering for a long time.
22. If they were reborn in heaven because of their merit, their thirst constantly burned them. When their merit was exhausted and their life was at
its end, the ﬁve signs of decay and death70 arrived. Just as the ﬂowers of a
tree become pale and withered, they became drawn and lost their brightness.
23. The lot of their retinue was life or death. Suffering in sadness, no
one could make them stay. Their palaces became desolate and empty, and
the jade ladies all departed. Sitting or lying in the dirt, they wept sadly and
longed for them.
24. The living felt grief about their miserable fall, and the dead were
sad, longing for life. Through strenuous practice of asceticism one wishes
for the happiness of rebirth in heaven, but because one has such suffering,
how base is this? What is there to covet?
25. What is obtained through great application will not avoid the suffering
of separation. Alas! Gods and humans, tall or short, there is no difference!
26. Practicing asceticism for eons and forever free from desire, one may
think one will surely abide a long time, but in the present all miserably fall.
27. In hell one experiences various suffering, and animals kill each other.
Hungry ghosts are forced to suffer hunger and thirst, and humans are
exhausted from craving.
28. One might mention the happiness of rebirth in heaven, but separation
is a very great suffering. Being misled, one is reborn in the world and does
not have any place to rest.
29. Alas! In the sea of birth and death the wheel turns without end. Beings
drown in an unceasing current. They are tossed about, without anything to
rely upon.
30. Thus [the Bodhisattva] observed the ﬁve destinations with his pure
divine eye. They were false and not ﬁrm, like a plantain tree or like bubbles.
31. Then, during the third watch, he entered profound concentration and
observed that the suffering of the turning of the wheel in the world was its
speciﬁc nature.
32. “One is frequently reborn, grows old, and dies. The number [of
rebirths] is countless. Desire and the darkness of delusion—no one knows
how to escape them.”
101

27c

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

28a

33. In his right mindfulness, he inwardly considered the origination of
birth and death. He knew with certainty that old age and death had to be
brought about by birth. If a person has a body, for that reason physical pain
must follow.
34. He further observed how birth was caused, and he saw that it was
through the action of existence. His divine eye observed that the action of
existence was not produced by the god Īśvara. It had no speciﬁc nature and
no self, and neither was it without a cause.
35. If one cuts through the ﬁrst knot of the bamboo, the other knots then
pose no difﬁculty. After he had seen the cause of birth and death, he gradually
saw the truth.
36. The action of existence was produced by grasping, as when ﬁre consumes ﬁrewood. Grasping had craving as its cause, just as a small ﬁre may
set a mountain ablaze.
37. Knowing that craving is produced by experiencing, one understands
unpleasant and pleasant, seeking contentment. Hunger and thirst seek drink
and food. Experiencing produces craving in the same way.
38. Any experiencing has contact as its cause. Its three classes71 mean
the production of suffering or of happiness. If one works at rubbing sticks,72
one may obtain ﬁre and use it.
39. Contact is produced by the six sense faculties, because a blind person
does not have clear perception. The six sense faculties originate from nameand-form, just as a shoot grows into a stalk and [produces] leaves.
40. Name-and-form are produced by consciousness, just as a seed means
the production of the shoot and leaves. But consciousness comes from nameand-form. Nothing is omitted from such transformation.73
41. Because of consciousness, one produces name-and-form; and because
of name-and-form, one produces consciousness. Just as a man and his boat
advance together, there is mutual transportation on water and on dry land.
42. Just as consciousness produces name-and-form, name-and-form produces the faculties. The faculties produce contact, and contact further produces
experiencing.
43. Experiencing produces craving, and craving produces grasping.
Grasping produces the existence of actions, and existence then produces
birth.

102

Chapter XIV

44. Birth produces old age and death. The turning of the wheel is endless
for all. The conditioned origination of the beings is completely known in
right awakening.
45. [The Bodhisattva’s] right awakening was certain to be completed.
The end of birth meant the extinction of old age and death. When existence
is extinguished, birth is extinguished. When grasping is extinguished, existence
is extinguished.
46. When craving is extinguished, grasping is extinguished. When experiencing is extinguished, craving is extinguished. When contact is extinguished,
experiencing is extinguished. When the six sense faculties are extinguished,
contact is extinguished.
47. The extinction of all sense faculties comes from the extinction of
name-and-form. When consciousness is extinguished, name-and-form is
extinguished. When formation is extinguished, consciousness is extinguished.
48. When delusion is extinguished, formation is extinguished.74 The
great seer’s right awakening was accomplished. When right awakening was
thus accomplished, the Buddha appeared in the world.
49. The eightfold path—right view, and so on—is a smooth, level, and
right road. In the end there is no [“I” or] “mine,” just as ﬁre is extinguished
when the ﬁrewood is consumed.
50. “What I had to do, is done. I have obtained the path of right awakening
of our ancestors.” [The Buddha] had completely achieved the highest meaning
and entered the house of the greatest seer.
51. As darkness passed and the light rose, movement and tranquility
were both silent. He had reached the Law without end, and his omniscience
was clear.
52. The virtue of the great seer was pure, and the earth quaked all around.
The whole universe was clear and bright, and gods, dragons, and spirits gathered in great numbers. In the sky they played celestial music to worship the
Law.
53. A gentle breeze brought coolness, and celestial clouds brought fragrant
rain. Fine ﬂowers blossomed out of season and sweet fruits became ripe in
spite of the season.
54. Mahāmāndārava and all kinds of celestial precious ﬂowers came
down in profusion, in worship of the worthy muni.

103

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

28b

55. Beings of different species all turned to one another with friendly
thoughts. Fear was completely eliminated. There was no longer any thought
of anger or arrogance. All in the entire world accompanied the one whose
impurities had ended.
56. The gods were happy with [the Buddha’s] deliverance, and the woeful
destinations were calm for a while. Afﬂiction gradually ceased and the moon
of knowledge gradually increased its light.
57. When the seers of the Ikṣvāku family who were reborn in heaven
saw that the Buddha had appeared in the world, they were ﬁlled with joy.
58. In their celestial palace it then rained ﬂowers in worship. The gods,
dragons, and spirits praised the Buddha’s virtue with one voice.
59. When people in the world saw the worship and heard the sounds of
praise, they all rejoiced and they were overcome with joy. Only the celestial
king Māra felt great grief in his heart.
60. The Buddha meditated seven days, and his mind was pure. He
observed the bodhi tree, gazing without blinking.
61. “Relying on this place, I have fulﬁlled my previous wish. I am established in the Law without self.” With his buddha eye he observed beings, and
this gave rise to merciful thoughts. He wished to let [beings] obtain purity.
62. “Greed, anger, delusion, and wrong views are ﬂoating and sinking
into their minds. Deliverance is very profound and ﬁne. How can I propagate
it?” He gave up his diligent application and stayed silent.
63. He thought back to his previous solemn oath. He again thought about
expounding the Law, and observed the strength of the afﬂictions of living
beings.
64. Brahmadeva knew what was on [the Buddha’s] mind, [and understood]
that he should be invited to turn the [wheel of the] Law. Releasing his pure
light all around for the rescue of suffering beings, he came to see the worthy
muni and the signs of a great person who would expound the Law.
65. As the ﬁne meanings were all seen, [the Buddha] was established in
true knowledge. He had abandoned any wrong that would cause difﬁculties,
and was free from any false thought.
66. [Brahmadeva] was reverential and rejoiced in his heart. He held his
palms together and urged him, “How fortunate the world is in meeting you,
worthy one with great compassion!

104

Chapter XIV

67. “All kinds of beings are unclean and have impure thoughts. Some
have serious afﬂictions and the afﬂictions of others are insigniﬁcant.
68. “World-honored One, you have escaped the great sea of the suffering
of birth and death. Please, save those beings who are sunk in it!
69. “Just as a righteous person in the world shares the beneﬁt he has
obtained with others, the beneﬁt of the Law that you, World-honored One,
have obtained, should indeed save beings!
70. “Common people mostly beneﬁt themselves. Combining the beneﬁt
of oneself and others is difﬁcult. Please, deign to be compassionate and do
the most difﬁcult thing in the world!” Having urged him in this way, [Brahmadeva] took his leave and returned to the Brahma Heaven.
71. The Buddha was pleased in his heart at Brahmadeva’s invitation,
and increased his sincerity. He nourished his feeling of great compassion
and strengthened his intention to expound the Law.
72. Remembering that [the Buddha] would go begging for alms, the four
kings75 all offered their almsbowls. The Tathāgata76 accepted the four [bowls]
for the sake of the Law, and combined them into one.
73. At that time some merchants were traveling. A celestial spirit, a good
friend, told them, “The great seer, the worthy muni, is in that mountain forest.
As he is a ﬁne ﬁeld of merit in the world, you should go and worship him!”
74. When [the merchants] heard this command they greatly rejoiced,
and offered [the Buddha] his ﬁrst meal. After the meal he looked back and
thought, “Who should hear the Law ﬁrst?
75. “Yes, there are Ārāḍa and Udraka Rāmaputra. They are ﬁt to receive
the Right Law, but their lives have now come to an end. Next, there are the
ﬁve bhikṣus who should hear the ﬁrst exposition of the Law.”
76. He wanted to expound the Law of tranquility, just as the sunlight
does away with darkness. He went to Vārāṇasī, the place where the seers of
the past had dwelled.
77. With the steady gaze of the eyes of an ox king, and with the digniﬁed
gait of a lion, he went to the city of Kāśi to save beings. At every step, the
animal kings looked at him, but he looked back at the bodhi grove.

105

28c

Chapter XV

Turning the Wheel of the Law
1. The Tathāgata was in complete quietude, and his light was manifestly shining. With digniﬁed deportment, he walked alone but as if followed by a large
crowd.
2. On his way he met a brahman, whose name was Upaga. Maintaining
the deportment of a bhikṣu, he respectfully stood by the side of the road.
3. Pleased to meet someone wonderful, [Upaga] held his palms together
and remarked, “Beings are all attached, but you have the appearance of someone without attachment.
4. “Thoughts in the world are unsteady, but you alone have quieted your
faculties. Your bright countenance is like the full moon; it is as if you are
savoring the ford to immortality.
5. “Your appearance has the characteristics of a great person, a sovereign
king with the power of wisdom. What you had to do is certainly done. Which
teacher did you apply to for teaching?”
6. [The Tathāgata] answered, “I have no teacher nor any teaching. I am
unsurpassed. I have my own insight into the very profound Law. I have
obtained what others could not obtain.
7. “I now have complete understanding of what others should understand
but that no one in the whole world has understood. So I am called one with
right awakening.
8. “Afﬂictions are like enemies. I have subdued them with the sword of
my knowledge. And so, extolled in the world, I am called superior.
9. “I shall go to Vārāṇasī and beat the drum of the law of immortality.
I am without arrogance, nor do I dwell upon fame, nor do I seek for the happiness of any beneﬁt.
10. “Indeed, I will propagate the Right Law and rescue suffering beings.
Because I have made a great solemn oath in the past, I shall save those who
are not yet saved. The result of my oath will be accomplished now. I will
fulﬁll that previous vow.
107

29a

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

29b

11. “When one has provided riches for oneself, one is not extolled as a
famous righteous person, but if one beneﬁts the whole world, then one is
called a great person.
12. “If one does not bring rescue from drowning in the face of danger,
why would one be called a valiant person? If he does not cure the sick, how
would he be called a good doctor? If he sees someone who is lost but does
not show him the way, who would call him a good guide?
13. “When, for instance, a lamp shines in the darkness, it is a natural
light for the unwitting. When the Tathāgata lights the lamp of wisdom, there
is no feeling of desire.
14. “When rubbing sticks, one is sure to obtain ﬁre. In the sky wind is
natural. When digging in the ground, one is sure to obtain water. All this is
reasonable and natural.
15. “The accomplishment of the path by all munis is sure to occur in
Gayā, and they have also been turning the wheel of the Right Law in the
land of Kāśi.”
16. The brahman Upaga said “Ha!” in praise and amazement. In accordance with his previous plans, he continued on his way, and they separated.
But with every step he looked back and paused, remembering the wonder.
17. The Tathāgata gradually traveled ahead and reached the city of Kāśi.
The land was excellently adorned, like the palace of Śakra, ruler of the gods.
18. In the place where the two rivers, the Ganges and the Vārāṇasī, both
ﬂow, trees, ﬂowers, and fruits were luxuriant. Birds and animals roamed
together.
19. It was silent, without any noisy commoners. The ancient seers had
dwelled there. The Tathāgata’s light was shining and doubled its brightness.
20. The [ﬁrst] son of the Kauṇḍinya family; and the second one, Daśabala
Kāśyapa; the third one, called Vāṣpa; the fourth, Aśvajit; and the ﬁfth one, called
Bhadrika, had been practicing austerities, rejoicing in the mountain forest.
21. They saw the Tathāgata coming from afar. They gathered, sat down,
and all talked it over. “Gautama is tainted by worldly happiness and he has
abandoned any asceticism.
22. “Now he returns here. Do not rise to welcome him, and do not do
obeisance or make polite inquiries either, providing him with what he needs!

108

Chapter XV

Because he has abandoned his former oath, he should not receive any worship!”
23. When a common person has a visitor, he should perform a sequence
of proprieties. He should arrange for bedding and seating and make him feel
at ease.
24. But after they had made this agreement, each [of the ﬁve bhikṣus]
kept sitting in his place. As the Tathāgata approached them, however, they
unconsciously disregarded their agreement.
25. One offered to give up his seat, and another took his garment and
bowl for him. One begged to wash his feet, and another asked after his needs.
26. In such different ways they honored him and were of service, as if
to a teacher. But they did not give up his family [name] and still called him
Gautama.
27. The World-honored One said to them, “Do not call me by my former
surname and utter a contemptuous word for an arhat!
28. “My mind is completely equal concerning respect or disrespect. If
you are not respectful in your heart, it is you who will incur the blame.
29. “Because a buddha can save the world, one calls him a buddha. He
has an equal mind toward all beings, thinking of them as his children, as it
were. But to call him with his former name is like an offense of arrogance
against one’s father.”
30. The Buddha had told them in his mercy, with great compassion, but
they followed their foolish minds and did not believe his right awakening.
31. “You say that in your previous practice of austerities you had not
yet obtained anything. Now that you have indulged in the pleasures of the
body and mouth, how could you have become a buddha?”
32. With such doubts they did not believe that he had obtained the path
of a buddha, that he had completely achieved the meaning of the truth and
was endowed with omniscience.
33. The Tathāgata then brieﬂy expounded his essential path to them. “A
fool [either] practices asceticism or happily continues pleasing his [sense]
faculties.
34. “Look at these two different things! They are a great mistake. Because
they go against deliverance, it is not so that they are the right path.

109

29c

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

30a

35. One may practice asceticism with an exhausted body but the mind
will still rush on in confusion. If one does not even give rise to worldly knowledge, much less will one be able to surpass the faculties!
36. “If one lights a lamp with water, one will never remove the darkness.
One may try to develop the lamp of wisdom with an exhausted body but one
will not be able to destroy foolishness.
37. “If one wants [to make a] ﬁre with decayed wood, one toils in vain
and will not obtain it. But if one rubs a stick and makes effort, one may immediately obtain ﬁre and use it.
38. “In one’s search for the path, one does not obtain the law of immortality
through asceticism. Attachment to desire is meaningless, and foolishness is an
impediment to the light of wisdom. If one does not even understand the scriptural
texts, much less will one obtain the path of freedom from desire!
39. “If one has a grave illness but does not eat the food that helps cure
that illness, how could the grave illness of ignorance be done away with
while one is attached to desire?
40. “If one sets ﬁre to dry grass in the wilderness and it is increased by
a ﬁerce storm, who could extinguish the blaze? The same applies to the ﬁre
of greed.
41. “I have left the two extremes. My mind stays in the middle path. All
my suffering is ﬁnally appeased. I am tranquil, free from any error.
42. “My right view surpasses the sunshine, and my equal conceptualization is my conveyance. Right speech is my abode and I am on an excursion
in the forest of right action.
43. “Right livelihood is a rich disposition, and application is the right
road. Right mindfulness is the city wall, and concentration is bedding and
seating.
44. “The eightfold path is level and right, the escape from the suffering
of birth and death. For those who embark on this road, what they have to do
will be completely achieved. They will not fall into a painful fate in the two
worlds, yonder and here.
45. “The three worlds are but a mass of suffering and only this path can
extinguish it. My pure eye of the Right Law, formerly unheard of, has fully
seen the path of deliverance. Yes, I have for the ﬁrst time given rise to it now!
46. “Birth, old age, illness, and death are suffering; separation from what

110

Chapter XV

one loves or meeting with enmity, not attaining something one wants, and
so on are kinds of suffering.
47. “If one renounces desire or does not yet renounce it, has a body or
is without a body, if one is without any pure quality, one may brieﬂy say that
all this is painful.
48. “When, for instance, a great ﬁre is appeased, it does not give up its
heat, even though it may have become smaller. Even in a self that is quiet
and subtle by nature, great suffering still exists.
49. “The afﬂictions of greed and the others, and all kinds of wrong
actions—these are the causes of suffering. If one gives them up, suffering is
extinguished.
50. “When, for instance, seeds are without earth, water, and so forth,
when all conditions are not combined, shoots and leaves do not grow.
51. “Existences continue by nature, from heaven to the woeful destinations. The wheel keeps turning and does not stop. This is produced by desire.
Demotion differs according to weak, intermediate, or strong, but all kinds
of actions are the cause.
52. “If one has extinguished greed and so forth, there is no continuation
of existence. When all kinds of actions have ended, different kinds of suffering
know long-lasting appeasement. If this exists, then that exists. If this is extinguished, then that is extinguished.
53. “Absence of birth, old age, illness, and death; absence of earth, water,
ﬁre, and wind; and both absence of beginning, middle, and end and condemnation
of a deceptive law—these mean tranquility without end, abodes of the noble.
54. “The expounded eightfold right path and no other is the right means.
When the world does not see it, [beings] are misled for a long time.
55. “I know suffering and the annihilation of its accumulation. I have
realized its extinction and I have developed the right path. I have contemplated
these four truths and I have gained perfect awakening.
56. “I tell you that I know suffering, that I have annihilated its impure
cause, that I have caused the realization of its extinction, and that I have
developed the eightfold right path. Knowing the four truths, my pure eye of
the Law was achieved.
57. “When I had not yet brought about my universal eye concerning
these four truths, I was not called delivered. I was not said to have done what

111

30b

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

30c

I had to do, and it was not said that my complete understanding of the truth
was accomplished.
58. “Because I knew the truths, I perceived that I was delivered. I perceived that what had to be done was done, and I perceived that I was perfectly
awakened.”
59. When he expounded this truth, the son of the Kauṇḍinya family and
the multitude of eighty thousand gods completely achieved true meaningfulness. Free from any impurity, they achieved the pure eye of the Law.
60. When the teacher of gods and humans knew that he had done what
had to be done, he rejoiced and asked with a lion’s roar, “Kauṇḍinya, do you
know yet?” Kauṇḍinya immediately said to the Buddha, “I know your Law,
great teacher!”
61. Because he knew the Law, he was called Ājñāta Kauṇḍinya. Among
Buddha’s disciples he was the ﬁrst to gain the highest insight.
62. As he knew the sound of the Right Law, he heard the spirits of the
earth all raise their voices and call out, “Splendid is the profound Law you
have seen!
63. “You, Tathāgata, have turned today what has never yet been turned.
For gods and humans everywhere you have widely opened the gate of immortality.
64. “Pure morality is the spokes. Self-discipline and quiet concentration
are the axle cones. Firm knowledge is the felloe, and shame cleanses the axle
hubs.
65. “Right mindfulness is considered the hub, completing the wheel of
the True Law. You are right, having left the three worlds! You will not fall
back and follow a heterodox teacher!”
66. When the spirits of the earth called out in this way, the spirits in the
sky transmitted the call. The gods proceeded with praise, which penetrated
up to the Brahma Heaven.
67. The celestial spirits in the three worlds heard the exposition of the great
seer for the ﬁrst time. As it spread, they were surprised and said to each other,
“We have heard all around that the Buddha has appeared in the world. For the
kinds of living beings he widely turns the wheel of the Law of quietude.”
68. A breeze cleared the sky, dissipating the mist, and celestial ﬂowers
rained from the sky. The gods played celestial music in praise of the wonder.

112

Fascicle Four
Chapter XVI

King Bimbisāra and Disciples
1. When the ﬁve bhikṣus, Aśvajit and the others, had heard the voice that
knows the Law, they felt sadness and pain. They held their palms together
and increased their respect, and looked up at his worthy countenance.
2. The Tathāgata then very skillfully caused them to enter the Right Law.
The ﬁrst and last of the ﬁve bhikṣus obtained the path, having subdued their
faculties. They were like the ﬁve stars77 in the sky, attending the bright moon.
3. Then Yaśas, the son of an elder from Kuśinagara, woke up suddenly
from his sleep at night and looked at his retinue, men and women lying around
naked, and immediately felt disgusted at heart.
4. He thought this was the basis of afﬂiction, deceiving fools. Wearing
his ornaments, girdle, and necklaces, he left his house and went to the mountain forest.
5. While seeking his way, he called out, “Troubled! I am troubled! Confused!”
The Tathāgata was walking up and down in the night, and heard the
voice calling out, “Troubled!”
6. He immediately said, “Welcome! Here is a tranquil place. Nirvana is
utterly cool. In its tranquility one is free from any trouble.”
7. When Yaśas heard the Buddha’s words, he was very joyful in his heart.
Because of his previous revulsion, noble wisdom opened up in a cool way.
8. As if having entered a cool pond, [Yaśas] reverently arrived where
the Buddha was. His person still had its common appearance but his mind
had obtained the end of impurities. Through the power of his previously
planted wholesome roots, he swiftly accomplished the fruition of arhatship.

113

31a

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

31b

9. His pure knowledge was going over both the hidden and the clear,
and after he had heard the Law, he immediately obtained insight, just as easy
as it is to apply color to a fresh white fabric. He had come to the realization
that he had done what he had to do.
10. When he looked at his body, which was still adorned, he felt shame in
his heart. The Tathāgata knew what was on his mind, and expounded the verses:
11. “You are adorned with necklaces but your mind has subdued your
faculties. You impartially observe beings, and in your practice of the Law
you do not consider their appearance.
12. “When on his body one wears the garment of someone who has gone
forth but his mental bonds are not yet forgotten, when he dwells in the forest
yet covets worldly splendor, [that person] is then a common person.
13. “Even though he may apparently have a commoner’s deportment, if
his mind is ﬁxed on the most eminent object and he lives at home in the same
way as in a mountain forest, he is free from any [“I” or] “mine.” The undoing
of the bonds exists in his mind. How could his appearance give any certainty?
14. “Wearing armor, clothed in a heavy gown, one is thought to be able
to control a strong enemy. A change in appearance, wearing a dyed garment,
is to subdue the enemy of afﬂiction.”
15. [The Buddha] then said, “Come, bhikṣu,” and at these words his
common appearance changed. He was endowed with the deportment of someone who had gone forth, and entirely became a śramaṇa.
16. Previously he had common companions, ﬁfty-four in number. Looking
for their good friend, they left home and subsequently entered the Right Law.
17. Because of their previous wholesome actions, the ﬁne fruition was
now accomplished. When something has been imbued with potash for a long
while, it quickly becomes bright on contact with water.
18. Hearers of superior behavior, sixty arhats, were all following the
Law of the Arhat. He courteously instructed them:
19. “You have now crossed over to the other shore of the river of birth
and death. What you had to do is ﬁnished. You are ﬁt to receive any worship!
20. Each of you should travel to different countries and save those who
are not yet saved. The suffering of beings burns, and for a long time they
have not had anyone come to their rescue. You should each travel alone, be
merciful and receive them!

114

Chapter XVI

21. “I shall go alone now too, and return to Gaja Mountain. There are
great seers there, royal seers and brahman seers. They are all staying there,
honored by the whole world.
22. “The Kāśyapa seers who practice asceticism, the people of the land
all serve them. Those who receive their training are very numerous. I shall
go now and save them.”
23. The sixty bhikṣus then accepted his instruction and widely propagated
the Law. In agreement with their previous causality, they each went at will
in different directions.
24. The World-honored One walked all alone to Gaja Mountain. He
entered the quiet forest of the Law and went to the seer Kāśyapa.
25. There was a cave where he made offerings to ﬁre, and an evil dragon
dwelled there. The mountain forest was utterly clear and nowhere would he
be ill at ease, but in order to convert [Kāśyapa] the World-honored One spoke
to him and asked for lodging.
26. Kāśyapa informed Buddha, “There is no place to stay. There just is
a cave to make offerings to ﬁre. The very pure may dwell there but an evil
dragon lives there. He can certainly hurt people!”
27. The Buddha said, “Allow me, and I will stay one night.” Kāśyapa
made all kinds of excuses, but the World-honored One kept asking.
28. Kāśyapa further said to Buddha, “In my heart I do not want to permit
you [to stay there], but you may think I am being ungenerous. Therefore, do
as you wish!”
29. The Buddha immediately entered the [cave] dwelling for ﬁre [worship]. Sitting upright, he practiced right consideration. Then, when the evil
dragon saw the Buddha, it became angry and let loose a poisonous ﬁre.
30. The whole cave dwelling was ablaze, but it did not touch the Buddha’s
body. When it had been completely released the ﬁre was extinguished by
itself, and the World-honored One still sat at ease.
31. When the ﬁre of the eon78 arises and when the cave palace of Brahmadeva is ablaze, King Brahma in the same way sits on this exact place, unafraid
and fearless.
32. When the evil dragon saw that the World-honored One’s bright
countenance did not change, [the dragon’s] poison stopped and wholesome
thoughts arose. He bowed and took refuge.

115

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts
31c

33. When Kāśyapa saw the light in the night, he sighed, “Alas! Astonishing! Such a moral person but he is burned by the dragon’s ﬁre.”
34. Kāśyapa and his retinue all came to have a look in the morning. The
Buddha had subdued the evil dragon and had placed him in his bowl.
35. [Kāśyapa] understood the Buddha’s qualities and thought it was
amazing. Because he had been indulging in pride for a long time, he said,
“My path is most worthy.”
36. The Buddha showed all kinds of supernatural transformations as
were suited to the occasion. As [Kāśyapa] observed what was on his mind,
he transformed in response, so that his mind became gentle and he was ﬁt
to be a vessel of the Right Law.
37. He became fully conscious that his path was shallow, inferior to the
World-honored One’s. He decided to be humble of mind and courteously
accepted the Right Law.
38. The ﬁve hundred disciples of Uruvilva Kāśyapa [also] accepted the
Right Law in due order, as their teacher had been completely subdued.
39. After Kāśyapa and his multitude of followers had all accepted the
right changes, the seer threw into the water all the [ritual] objects he had
relied on and all implements to make ﬁre offerings. They were tossed about
and carried away with the current.
40. His two younger brothers, Nadī and Gaja,79 dwelled downstream.
When they saw the clothes and other items tumbling in disorder in the river’s
current, they thought [Kāśyapa] had met with an awful fate. They were fearful
and ill at ease.
41. Their two groups of ﬁve hundred people searched the river and
looked for the elder brother. When they saw that the elder brother had gone
forth along with his disciples, they knew he had obtained a wonderful Law
and were amazed.
42. “Our elder brother has now submitted to the path. We too must follow
him!” The World-honored One expounded the Law to the three brothers and
to their retinue of disciples, and then presented a comparison to making a
ﬁre offering.
43. “As the black smoke of foolishness rises and confused thoughts are
brought about rubbing a stick, the ﬁres of desire and anger burn beings. The
ﬁre of such afﬂictions burns ceaselessly.

116

Chapter XVI

44. “One is engulfed in birth and death but the ﬁre of suffering is constantly ablaze. One can see the two kinds of ﬁre but while one is burning,
one is without any support. Why would a person with high aspirations not
bring forth disgust?
45. “Disgust removes desire. When greed has ended one obtains deliverance. If one has obtained deliverance, understanding from deliverance arises.
46. “Observing the ﬂow of birth and death, I have begun my pure conduct.
When all that one must do is done, one will no longer experience a later existence!”
47. When those thousand bhikṣus heard the World-honored One’s exposition of the Law, no impurity arose and their minds were all delivered.
48. When Buddha had expounded the Law to the Kāśyapas and their
thousand bhikṣus, what they had to do was done and they were well adorned
with pure wisdom. The entire meritorious retinue puriﬁed their actions with
generosity and morality.
49. As the reverend seers followed their way, the forest of asceticism
lost its splendor, just as someone who has lost the virtue of morality is merely
living in futility.
50. The World-honored One and his great retinue went to the city of
Rājagṛha. He remembered the king of Magadha and the solemn oath he had
previously made.
51. After the World-honored One arrived, he stayed in the Yaṣṭivana.
When King Bimbisāra heard this, he went together with his great retinue to
where the World-honored One was, followed by men and women from the
whole country.
52. From afar he saw the Tathāgata sitting with a subdued mind and subdued faculties. He had done away with any common expression. [King Bimbisāra] descended from his chariot and advanced on foot, just as Śakra, ruler
of the gods, approached King Brahmadeva.
53. He advanced and bowed deep at the Buddha’s feet. He respectfully
asked after the Buddha’s well-being. When the Buddha had in turn reassured
him, he ordered him to sit down at one side.
54. The king then silently thought in his heart, “The Śākya has an awesome power. The Kāśyapas with their excellent qualities are all his disciples
now.”

117

32a

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

32b

55. The Buddha knew other’s thoughts, and asked Kāśyapa, “What meritorious gain did you see when you abandoned the practice of making offerings
to ﬁre?”
56. When Kāśyapa heard the Buddha’s request, he was startled and rose
in front of the great multitude. He knelt on his right knee, held his palms
together, and informed the Buddha in a clear voice:
57. “When one develops merit making offerings to the spirit of ﬁre, the
fruition in any case means that the wheel keeps turning. In births and deaths
afﬂictions increase. That is why I have abandoned it.
58. “When one strenuously makes offerings to ﬁre to seek for the objects
of the ﬁve desires, the desires one experiences increase without end. That is
why I have abandoned it.
59. “Making offerings to ﬁre and practicing the method of incantations,
one experiences rebirth but no deliverance. Experiencing rebirth is the basis
of suffering. That is why I have given it up, further seeking contentment.
60. “I once thought that asceticism, offering sacriﬁces, and arranging
for a great gathering were foremost and of the highest excellence, but these
still go against the right path. That is why I have abandoned [these practices]
now, further seeking excellent tranquility.
61.”Freedom from birth, old age, illness, and death is a cool place without
end. Because I know this is meaningful I have abandoned the practice of
making offerings to ﬁre.”
62. The World-honored One heard Kāśyapa’s explanation about the facts
he understood, and, wanting to make the whole world all around give rise
to thoughts of pure faith, he said to Kāśyapa, “Welcome, great person!
63. “Having distinguished all kinds of paths, you follow the most excellent path. In front of the great multitude, show your excellent qualities now,
64. just like an elder with huge riches shows his precious treasures! Let
the poor suffering beings increase their thoughts of disgust!”
65. “Very well! I will follow your instruction!” In front of the great multitude [Kāśyapa] immediately controlled himself and entered right mindfulness. He swiftly rose into the sky.
66. He walked up and down, stayed, sat or lay down, or his whole body
was like a cave. Left and right he emitted ﬁre and water but was not burned,

118

Chapter XVI

nor did he become wet. From his body came clouds and rain, and thunder
and lightning moved heaven and earth.
67. The whole world all looked up at him, and indulging their eyes they
watched tirelessly. With different mouths but with the same sound they
extolled the wonder.
68. Only then did he control his divine power, and respectfully did obeisance at the World-honored One’s feet. “You, Buddha, are my great teacher,
and I am your disciple. Following your instructions I have made this behavior
known. What I had to do is ﬁnished.”
69. As the whole world all around had seen this, and knowing that
Kāśyapa was [the Buddha’s] disciple, they were certain and knew that the
World-honored One was truly omniscient.
70. The Buddha knew that the whole gathering was a ﬁt vessel to receive
the Law. He said to King Bimbisāra, “Listen very carefully now!
71. “The mind and the faculties, all these have the law of birth and extinction. The understanding that birth and extinction are wrong is a universal
observation.
72. “Such a universal observation means that one understands the body.
Understanding that the body has the law of birth and extinction, one is without
grasping and without experiencing.
73. “Know the body and its faculties as a mental conception, without
any ‘I’ or ‘mine,’ simply a mass of suffering, born as suffering and extinguished as suffering!
74. “Having understood that corporal characteristics are without any ‘I’
or ‘mine,’ one goes to the highest, pure place without end.
75. “The afﬂictions, view of a self, and so on, bind every world. After
one has seen the absence of any ‘I’ or ‘mine,’ all bonds are undone.
76. “One is bound by the view of untruth, but viewing the truth one is
delivered. If the world is in the grasp of precepts, it is in the grasp of what
is wrong.
77. “If one had a self, it would be either permanent or impermanent. The
view of the two extremes in birth and death, that error is the greatest and
even worse.
78. “If it were impermanent, one’s practice would be fruitless; and as

119

32c

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

33a

one would not experience a later existence, one would be delivered without
any effort.
79. “If it were permanent, without death, rebirth or an in-between [state],
it would be the same as space, without birth and without extinction.
80. “If there were a self, it would be the same for all; and as all would
have a self, without any action its fruition might be naturally accomplished.
81. “If there were the activity of a self, one should not earnestly practice.
If one had a sovereign ruler, what would be the need to perform actions?
82. “If a self were permanent, in principle it would not allow any change.
Seeing that one is characterized by suffering and happiness, how could one
say it is permanent?
83. “By understanding that one comes into existence, one is delivered
and becomes free from any impurity. If all were permanent, what would be
the use of being delivered from it?
84. “Absence of a self is not just a word. The principle is true that it has
no true nature. Not seeing that the self causes anything, how could one explain
that a self is active?
85. “Because the self does not cause anything and one is without a
causing self—because one is without these two things—in reality there is
no self.
86. “Without one who causes or one who experiences and without a
ruler, one constantly returns. Birth and death keep ﬂowing like night and
day. Listen to my explanation now!
87. “Through the causality of the six [sense] faculties and their six
objects, six consciousnesses arise. The three things in combination produce
contact. Awareness, volition, and action subsequently proceed.
88. “When dried herbs are placed under a convex gem, ﬁre is then produced by the sun. As for the faculties, their objects, and the consciousnesses,
a personality is produced in the same way.
89. “A shoot grows because of a seed, but the seed is not the shoot. Not
exactly like that, yet not different, beings come into existence in the same
way.”
90. When the World-honored One had explained the truth, the universal
and highest meaning, King Bimbisāra was joyful. Free from impurity, his
eye of the Law arose.

120

Chapter XVI

91. When the king’s retinue, the population, and the numerous spirits
had heard the explanation of the law of immortality, they too were subsequently free from any impurity.

121

Chapter XVII

Conversion of the
Great Disciples
1. Then, when King Bimbisāra bowed and invited the World-honored One
to come live in the Veṇuvana, he felt merciful and kept silent. After the king
had seen the truth, he paid his respects to [the Buddha] and returned to his
palace.
2. The World-honored One and his great multitude changed their residence
and stayed in the Veṇuvana. He established the light of the lamp of wisdom
in order to save living beings. He dwelled there with those of the brahma
abodes, with those of the celestial abodes, and with those of the abodes of
the noble.80
3. Then, as Aśvajit had subdued his thoughts and controlled his faculties,
and as it was time to go on almsrounds, he entered the city of Rājagṛha.
4. His complexion was outstanding in the world, and his demeanor was
at ease and digniﬁed. All the men and women in the city were joyful when
they saw him. Passersby stopped, coming forward to welcome him or following behind him.
5. The seer Kapila had saved many disciples, but the most excellent and
learned among them was called Śāriputra.
6. When he saw the dignity of the bhikṣu [Aśvajit], who having quieted
his faculties had a quiet and reﬁned bearing, [Śāriputra] paused and waited
for him to approach. He raised his hand and asked:
7. “Your youthfulness and quiet bearing—I have never seen such. What
exquisite law did you obtain, and which teacher do you serve as his principles?
Who has expounded your teacher’s teaching? Please, tell me and settle my
doubts!”
8. The bhikṣu was pleased with [Śāriputra’s] questions, and humbly
answered with a serene countenance, “He is endowed with omniscience,
born in the excellent family of Ikṣvāku. He is most excellent among gods
and humans. He is my great teacher.
123

33b

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

33c

9. “Because my age is young, my time of study is still limited. How
could I propagate the very profound and subtle meanings of my great teacher?
10. “With my shallow knowledge I will now brieﬂy explain the Law
taught by my teacher: The arising of any existing factor comes from causality.
The factors in birth and extinction may all be extinguished; the exposition
of the path is the means.”
11. As Upatiṣya, the twice-born, heard this, his mind knew inner harmony.
He was free from any impurity and his pure eye of the Law arose.
12. What he had previously practiced assuredly was the [philosophy of]
the knower of the cause and the uncaused. All was inactive, all coming from
the god Īśvara. When [Aśvajit] had made the Law of causality known, the
knowledge that there is no self was clear.
13. All afﬂictions, strong or weak—no one had been able to ﬁnally do
away with them. Only through the teaching of the Tathāgata were they forever
ended, leaving nothing behind.
14. It is not the case that by being in the grasp of any “mine” one can
be free from a self. Light appears because of the sun or a lamp. But what can
cause the absence of light?
15. If one cuts down the stalk of the lotus, its ﬁne ﬁbers are still connected.
But the Buddha’s teaching does away with afﬂiction as if it were completely
annihilated by a rock.
16. [Upatiṣya] respectfully did obeisance at the bhikṣu’s feet, then withdrew and returned home. After the bhikṣu had begged for alms he returned
to the Veṇuvana too.
17. When Śāriputra returned home, his appearance was very serene. The
worthy Maudgalyāyana, his good friend, had the same nature and his talent
for learning was equal.
18. In the distance he saw Śāriputra, his countenance and deportment very
joyful. He said, “When I see you now, your expression is different than usual.
19. “Your ordinary disposition is quite serious but now your joyful
appearance is obvious. You have certainly obtained the law of immortality.
This appearance is not without cause.”
20. [Śāriputra] answered with what the Tathāgata had said. He really
had obtained the wonderful Law. Invited to explain it, he immediately did
so to [Maudgalyāyana]. When [Maudgalyāyana] had heard it, his mind

124

Chapter XVII

opened up. All impurity was removed too, and he subsequently produced
the eye of the Right Law.
21. As the ﬁne fruition of a cause they had long ago planted, they
observed, as it were, a lamp in their hands. They attained unshakable faith
in the Buddha. Both went to where the Buddha was, together with a crowd
of followers, two hundred and ﬁfty disciples.
22. The Buddha saw the two worthies from afar and said to his multitude,
“The two who are coming will be my chief disciples. The wisdom of the one
will be peerless, and the supernatural power of the other will be the highest.”
23. He immediately announced in his profoundly pleasant and pure
voice, “Welcome! Here is the law of purity. Having gone forth, you may
completely achieve its path.”
24. In their hands they held tridents; they had twisted locks and carried
pitchers for cleansing. When they heard Buddha’s welcoming voice, they
immediately changed into śramaṇas.
25. The two teachers and their disciples all adopted the deportment of
bhikṣus. They bowed at the World-honored One’s feet, withdrew, and sat to
one side. He courteously expounded the Law to them, and they all obtained
the path of arhatship.
26. At that time there was a twice-born one, the bright lamp of the
Kāśyapa family. He was learned and endowed with the physical marks. His
riches were abundant and his wife was utterly worthy,81 but he had given
them up and had gone forth, earnestly searching for the path of deliverance.
27. On his way he approached the Bahuputraka Shrine and unexpectedly
met Śākyamuni, whose bright deportment manifested his brilliance, like a
banner when bringing sacriﬁces to the gods. Reverently his whole person
was respectful. [The twice-born one] made obeisance and bowed at his feet.
28. “You, worthy one, are my great teacher. I am your disciple. For a
very long time I have been accumulating the darkness of delusion. Please
bring me the light of your lamp!”
29. The Buddha knew that the twice-born one was joyful in his heart,
holding deliverance in high esteem. In his pure and soft voice he welcomed
[the twice-born one].
30. Upon hearing the command, [the twice-born one] was relieved at
heart and the fatigue of his body and spirit was alleviated. His mind was

125

34a

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

ﬁxed on excellent deliverance and he was quiet, free from any impurity. As
beﬁtting [one of] great compassion, [the Buddha] gave a brief explanation.
31. He understood all profound factors, and accomplished the four unhindered analytical knowledges.82 Because his great virtue was renowned everywhere, he was called Mahākāśyapa.
32. He had formerly seen the body and a self as different, or believed
that the self is the body. The view of an existing self and “mine” was forever
done away with. He saw only a mass of suffering. When free from suffering,
there is nothing left.
33. Keeping the precepts and practicing asceticism were no cause, but
they had been viewed as a cause. He universally saw the nature of suffering
and was forever free from clinging to anything.
34. Whether seeing existence or nonexistence, the two views give rise
to doubtfulness, but universally seeing the truth he was certain, free from
any doubt.
35. Profoundly attached to riches and beauty, one is infatuated and desire
arises, but with their impermanence and the notion of their impurity one is
forever without covetousness.
36. With a mind of friendliness he thought in an impartial way. He did
not think of friend and foe differently. As he felt compassion for all, he had
dispelled the poison of anger.
37. Relying on matter, all was remedied, and all kinds of various notions
arose. As his reﬂection destroyed all notions of matter, he could put a stop
to desire for matter.
38. Even if he was born among the gods of no form, their lives still
would certainly come to an end. In their foolishness about the four attainments
they had the notion that [the four attainments] meant deliverance. Tranquil
and free from any notion, his covetousness for the immaterial was forever
removed.
39. Restless thoughts are disturbing, just like a strong wind whipping up
the waves. He deeply entered ﬁrm concentration and quieted his excited mind.
40. He contemplated that factors have no [“I” or] “mine,” and that in
birth and extinction they are not solid. Not seeing any weak, intermediate,
or strong, his arrogant thoughts were naturally forgotten.

126

Chapter XVII

41. Having lit the lamp of wisdom, he was free from any darkness of
delusion. He saw the law of destruction and absence of destruction, and
absolutely nothing remained of his ignorance.
42. Considering the ten qualities, the ten kinds of afﬂiction were extinguished.83 He was at rest, having done what he had to do. Deeply moved,
[Mahākāśyapa] gazed at the Honored One’s countenance.
43. Free from the three and having obtained three,84 the three disciples85
had removed the three.86 Like the three stars87 lined up in the Trāyastrimśa
Heaven, waiting upon the thirty-ﬁve,88 the three [disciples] attended the
Buddha in the same way.

127

34b

Chapter XVIII

The Conversion
of Anāthapiṇḍada
1. Then there was an important elder, called Anāthapiṇḍada. He was enormously wealthy and his riches were countless, but he freely gave donations,
saving the poor.
2. He came from far to the north, from the country of Kośala, and was
staying in the home of a good friend. His host was called Śūla.
3. When he heard that the Buddha had appeared in the world and was
staying nearby in the Veṇuvana, he went to the grove that very night, having
received his name and full esteem for his virtues.
4. The Tathāgata knew that his faculties were mature and that his pure
faith had arisen. As ﬁtting, he called him by his real name and expounded
the Law to him.
5. “You ﬁnd happiness in the Right Law, but your pure faith has been
thirsting in vain. You have given up your sleep to come and salute me.
6. “Today I will fully perform my initial duty of hospitality to you. The
basis of the virtue you have planted in the past makes my pure expectations
ﬁrm. Your joy upon hearing the Buddha’s name makes you ﬁt to be a vessel
for the Right Law.
7. “When one widely practices kindness in an impartial manner and provides for the poor all around, one’s famous virtue becomes widely renowned.
The completion of fruition comes from a previous cause. I shall now practice
the gift of the Law, giving earnestly and sincerely.
8. “Then I will give the gift of quietude. Fully keep pure morality! Morality is an ornament. It can change the woeful destinations and it allows one
to ascend to heaven, bringing the reward of the celestial ﬁve happinesses.89
9. “Any aspiration means great suffering, and desire accumulates all
wrongs. Develop the virtue of renunciation and the happiness of quietude,
free from desire!

129

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

34c

10. “Know that the suffering of old age, illness, and death is the greatest
calamity in the world! Through right contemplation of the world one leaves
birth, old age, illness, and death.
11. “You have seen that humans have the suffering of old age, illness,
and death. The same applies to rebirth in heaven. There is no one who permanently stays.
12. “The impermanent means suffering, and the painful is without a self.
What is painful in impermanence is not a self. How could there be an ‘I’ or
‘mine’?
13. “Know that the painful is nothing but suffering! When it is accumulated, it is a cause. The extinction of suffering means quietude, and the path
is the place of tranquility.
14. “Beings keep cycling [in birth and death] by nature. Know that this
is the basis of suffering! Disgusted with the end and trying to block its origin,
one may not wish for any existence or nonexistence!
15. “The great ﬁres of birth, old age, and death are burning all around
in the world. Seeing that birth and death is unsteady, one should develop
freedom from its notion. Samādhi completely achieves the quiet place of
immortality.
16. “Empty and without ‘I’ or ‘mine,’ the whole world is like an illusion.
Observe this body as a multitude of great elements and a mass of formations!”
17. When the elder [Anāthapiṇḍada] heard the exposition of the Law,
he immediately obtained the ﬁrst fruition.90 The sea of birth and death was
eliminated. There was just one drop left.
18. “One may practice renunciation in seclusion or be free from the body
in the highest existence.91 It is better to be truly delivered by seeing the truths
now as a common person.
19. “If one is not free from the suffering of the formations and from the
net of all kinds of strange views, one does not see the meaning of the truth,
even though one may reach the highest existence. Wrong notions are attached
to celestial merit, since the bond of desire for existence becomes increasingly
stronger.”
20. When the elder [Anāthapiṇḍada] heard the exposition of the Law,
the darkness of obscuration opened up in a bright way. He consequently

130

Chapter XVIII

obtained the right view and all wrong views were forever removed, just as
a strong autumn wind scatters heavy clouds.
21. “He did not consider Īśvara as the cause for the production of the
world, nor was it the case that it was produced by a wrong cause, neither
was it uncaused.92
22. “If [the world] were produced by Īśvara, there would be no old or
young, ﬁrst or last. There would be no wheel of the ﬁve destinations. The
born would not be extinguished.
23. “And there would be no calamities. Doing evil would not be wrong.
Pure or impure actions would come from the god Īśvara.
24. “If the world were produced by the god Īśvara, he would not be
doubted, just as the son is produced by the father. Who would not be conscious
of his honored one?
25. “When one met with suffering, one would not on the other hand
resent the god. All would honor Īśvara, and would serve no other spirit.
26. “If Īśvara were the maker, he would not be called “Sovereign.” But
as a maker he would constantly have to produce. If he were constantly producing, he would himself toil. Why then call him “Sovereign”?
27. “He would either produce unwittingly, as the action of an infant, or
produce intentionally. If he had the intention [to produce] he would not be
sovereign.
28. “If suffering or happiness came from beings, then these are not made
by Īśvara. If Īśvara produces suffering or happiness, he would have love or
hate. Because he would have love or hate, he should not be called “Sovereign.”
29. “If, furthermore, a sovereign were active, beings would be silent. Conﬁding in his sovereign power, what would be the use of practicing good? One
just might practice good or evil but would not have the retribution of the action.
30. “If sovereignty were produced by actions, all would be actions in
common [with human beings]. If they were actions in common, all would
be called sovereigns.
31. “If Īśvara were uncaused, all would be nonexistent too. If he would
rely on another sovereign, then the number of sovereigns would be without end.
32. “That is why beings all have no maker. Know that the meaningfulness
of a sovereign is destroyed in this discussion! All meanings are mutually
contradicted. If there is no explanation, there is an error.

131

35a

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

35b

33. “If furthermore a speciﬁc nature93 were to produce, the error would
be the same. Those who understand the theories of causality have never given
such explanation.
34. “One could have things that are made without any basis or cause,
but they all come from a cause, as if relying on a seed. Therefore, know that
nothing is produced by a speciﬁc nature!
35. “All that is made is not just produced by one cause. But because one
speciﬁc nature is mentioned, it is not the cause.
36. “Or [suppose] one says that the speciﬁc nature completely ﬁlls all
places. If it were to completely ﬁll all, there would be no maker or that which
is made. And if there is no maker or that which is made, it is not a cause.
37. “If it were in all places and all would have a maker, it would be the
case then that at all times, constantly, there is something being made.
38. “If one mentions a constant maker, there would be no waiting for
the right time to produce an object. Therefore, know that it is not the case
that a speciﬁc nature is the cause!
39. “When they further explain that this speciﬁc nature is free from any
attributes,94 all things that are made should be free from attributes too.
40. “But all the worldly is seen to possess attributes. Therefore, know
that the speciﬁc nature again is no cause!
41. “If one explains that the speciﬁc nature is different from an attribute,
its nature should not be different, since one would consider something permanent as cause.
42. “Because beings are different from their attributes, the speciﬁc nature
is no cause. If the speciﬁc nature were permanent, things would not be destroyed.
43. “Considering the speciﬁc nature to be a cause, cause and effect would
in principle be the same. Because the worldly is destroyed, know that it has
another cause!
44. “If it were caused by a speciﬁc nature, one would not seek deliverance.
As it would have a speciﬁc nature, it would allow its birth and extinction. Even
if one had obtained deliverance, the speciﬁc nature would yet produce bonds.
45. “If the speciﬁc nature was invisible but was the cause for visible factors,
it would not yet be a cause, because cause and effect would in principle be different. For all visible things in the world both cause and effect are visible.

132

Chapter XVIII

46. “If a speciﬁc nature were unwitting, it would not be the cause of
something with an intention. Just as upon seeing smoke one knows of the
ﬁre, cause and effect are mutually dependent.
47. “It is not the case that the cause is invisible but that it would produce
something visible. When, for instance, gold is made into vessels and robes,
throughout they are not separate from gold. If the speciﬁc nature were a cause
for something, why would it be different throughout?
48. “If time were a maker, one should not seek for deliverance. Because
time is permanent, one should let time be.
49. “The world would be endless, and the same would apply to time.
And so, a practitioner should not apply himself to it and strive.
50. “Entities95 and attributes—the world discusses them as being the
same or different. Even though there are several kinds of theories, know that
they are not one cause.
51. “If one says that a self is active, it should produce according to one’s
wishes, yet it now does not follow one’s wishes. Why would one say a self
is active?
52. “What one does not want is still obtained; and what one wants, on
the other hand, is still disregarded. As suffering and happiness are not sovereign, why say that a self is active?
53. “If a self were active, one would be without any action for a woeful
destination. Because several kinds of results of an action are produced, one
knows that it is not the case that a self is active.
54. “One might say that a self is active complying with the occasion,
but in response to an occasion it would do only what is good. Because good
and evil are caused by conditions, one knows that it is not the case that a self
is active!
55. “If absence of a cause were active, one should not develop application.
As all would be spontaneously ﬁxed, why would one develop any cause?
56. “With several kinds of actions in the world, one obtains several kinds
of results. Therefore, know that all is not made as uncaused!
57. “With or without any intention, all arises from causes and conditions.
No factor in the world is produced uncaused.”
58. [Hearing this,] the elder Anāthapiṇḍada’s mind opened up and he
had thorough insight into the exquisite meaning. Knowledge of the unique

133

35c

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

36a

reality arose, and he decidedly understood the truth. He bowed at the Worldhonored One’s feet, held his palms together, and stated his request:
59. “I live in Śrāvastī. The land is rich and happy. Its great king Prasenajit is a descendant of the family of Haryaśva. His meritorious virtue and
fame are renowned. He is honored near and far.
60. “I do wish to establish a pure abode. I do wish you would mercifully
accept it! I know that in your mind, O Buddha, [all] is equal. You do not seek
comfort where you dwell, but may you not disregard my invitation, out of
sympathy for beings?”
61. The Buddha knew the elder’s intention. A great donation would now
be made. Untainted and unattached, he skillfully guarded the intention of
beings.
62. “You have seen the truth. In your actual intention you wish to practice
generosity. Money is no permanent treasure. One should quickly donate it.
63. “When, for instance, one’s treasury burns down, what has been taken
out is precious. A bright person knows about impermanence, and by donating
his riches he extensively practices kindness.
64. “The stingy are parsimonious. They do not enjoy [their wealth] for
fear of its extinction, and they are not afraid of impermanence. Simple loss
increases their mournfulness.
65. “When donating at the right time and to a proper recipient, one is
like a vigorous man facing an enemy. Able in generosity and able in battle,
he is a valiant and wise person.
66. “One who donates is loved by all. He is well praised and widely
renowned. The virtuous are happy to be his friend, and when his life ends
his thoughts are always joyful.
67. “Free from regret and fear, he is not reborn in the destination of hungry ghosts. Here he is recompensed with ﬂowers, but his fruition is hard to
conceive.
68. “While revolving in the six destinations, no ﬁner companion surpasses
generosity. If one is reborn among gods or humans, one is served by all.
Reborn in the animal destination, generosity is recompensed and one will
accordingly experience happiness.
69. “Even though one may obtain the path of immortality when one’s
wisdom has developed quiet concentration, and when one is without support

134

Chapter XVIII

and without counting on anything,96 it is completed through the donation of
resources.
70. “Because of one’s generosity, one develops the eight mindfulnesses97
of a great person. Following the mindfulnesses, one has joyful thoughts and
certainly gains samādhi.
71. “As samādhi increases wisdom, one can correctly contemplate birth
and extinction. Having correctly contemplated birth and extinction, one in
due order obtains deliverance.
72. “If one is generous, giving up one’s riches, one does away with
attachment. If one is compassionate and gives reverentially, one completely
removes jealousy and pride. One clearly sees the result of generosity, but
without generosity one is deluded and insight is done away with.
73. “The extinction of all fetters and afﬂictions—this comes from generosity. Know that generosity is a cause for deliverance!
74. “Just as someone grows plants or ﬂowers and fruits for their shade,
the same applies to generosity. The happiness of its reward is great nirvana.
When riches, which are not solid, are donated, the reward one obtains is a
solid fruition.
75. “When donating food, yes, one gains strength; and when donating
clothing, one obtains beauty. When one establishes a pure abode, all fruitions
are fully accomplished.
76. “Some donate seeking the ﬁve desires, and some wish for greater
riches. Some donate for fame. There are those who seek the happiness of
rebirth in heaven. Some want to avoid poverty. Only you donate without any
[such] intention.
77. “The highest among generosities is not obtained without beneﬁt. If
you want to be magnanimous, let it be quickly accomplished! You came
deluded and with desire in your heart, but you will return after the eye of
purity has opened up.”
78. The elder [Anāthapiṇḍada] accepted the Buddha’s instruction, and
his generous mind became increasingly clear. He invited Upatiṣya, his worthy
friend, to return with him.
79. When he had gone back to Kośala, he went all around to choose a
ﬁne site. He saw the garden of Crown Prince Jeta, the grove and the streams
utterly clear and quiet.

135

36b

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

36c

80. He went to the crown prince and asked for permission to buy the
grounds. The crown prince greatly valued the place and at ﬁrst did not have
any intention to sell.
81. “If you were to cover it entirely with gold, still the land would not
be given!” The elder, with joy in his heart, immediately spread out gold all
around.
82. Jeta said, “I will not allow it. Why do you spread out all this gold?”
The elder [Anāthapiṇḍada] said, “If you will not permit it, why did you say
to cover [the land] with gold?”
83. As both men contended thus, they went to the magistrate to decide
the matter. All sighed, thinking that it was amazing, and Jeta too knew that
[Anāthapiṇḍada] was sincere.
84. Having made extensive inquiries about his reasons, it was said that
“He will establish a pure abode, and offer it to the Tathāgata and the order
of bhikṣus.”
85. When the crown prince heard the Buddha’s name, his mind immediately understood. He accepted only half the gold, and peacefully negotiating,
they established [the place] together.
86. “Let us together bring offerings to the Buddha—you the land and I
the grove!” The elder [Anāthapiṇḍada] handed over the land to Śāriputra,
and Jeta [donated] the grove.
87. [Śāriputra] planned and began construction of a pure abode. Night
and day they worked and it was quickly completed. [The place] was prominent
and excellently adorned, like the palace of the four celestial kings.
88. They followed the rules and complied with the propriety of the path
in accord with what was ﬁtting for a Tathāgata. A wonder in the world, [the
place] increased the brilliance of the city of Śrāvastī.
89. As the Tathāgata showed his divine shelter, all noble ones gathered for
the summer retreat. The one without attendants98 mercifully descended, and,
having attendants, the [noble ones] contributed to the propriety of the path.
90. Because of this merit, the elder [Anāthapiṇḍada] ascended to heaven
when his life ended. His sons and grandsons continued his inheritance,
planting the ﬁeld of merit for generations.

136

Chapter XIX

The Meeting of
Father and Son
1. The Buddha converted all kinds of people of different paths in the land of
Magadha. They all followed the unique Law, just as the sun is reﬂected by
the stars.
2. He left the city of the ﬁve mountains99 together with a thousand disciples. Surrounded by his retinue, he went to the gilded mountains.100
3. Approaching Kapilavastu, he wished to show his gratitude. “I will
offer the Law to serve the king, my father.”
4. The royal preceptor and the chief minister had sent ahead some scouts
to investigate the attendents’ presence and observe [the Buddha’s] advance.
When they knew that the Buddha wanted to return to his country, they hurried
to inform [the king] in advance.
5. “The Crown Prince has traveled far to study. His wish has been fulﬁlled.
He is returning now.” The king was overjoyed on hearing this. He adorned
his carriage and immediately left to welcome [the Buddha]. The whole country,
nobles and commoners, all followed the king.
6. Gradually approaching, he saw the Buddha from a distance. His appearance was twice as bright as in the past. Among his great multitude, [the
Buddha] was like King Brahmadeva.
7. [The king] descended from his chariot and slowly advanced, careful
not to make any difﬁculty concerning the right of way. Gazing at [the
Buddha’s] countenance, he felt delighted but did not know what to say.
8. Being covetous, [the king] dwelled among the bonds of the common,
but his son had surpassed that and had ascended to become a seer. Although
his son was among worthies of the path, [the king] did not know by what
name to call him.
9. [The king] considered that he had been longing for this for a long
time, yet now [that the time had come] he did not know how to make a

137

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

37a

pronouncement. His son sat in silence. [The Buddha] was tranquil and his
expression did not change.
10. “Absence of affection after a long separation makes my heart lonely
and sad. Suppose, for instance, someone who has been thirsting in vain comes
across a cool spring on his way. He hurries to drink from it, but when he
approaches the spring, it is unexpectedly dry.
11. “Now I see that you, my son, still have your former bright appearance,
but your mind is distant and your manner remote, without any hidden
impulses. While you restrain your feelings, my vain hopes are dashed, just
as encountering a dry spring when thirsty.
12. “When I did not see you, multiple thoughts rushed on, but when I
look you in the eye, there is no joy, just as when someone who has been
remembering a distant dear one suddenly sees his painted image.
13. “You should rule the four worlds, just like King Māndhātṛ, but you
now go begging for alms. What splendor would this path have?
14. “You are as tranquil as Sumeru, and your bright appearance is as
bright as the sun. You walk with the digniﬁed step of an ox king, with the
roar of a fearless lion, but you do not accept the ﬁefdom of the four gods.
You support yourself begging for alms.”
15. The Buddha knew that in the mind of the king, his father, there still
existed the notion that he was his son. In order to open up his mind and also
out of mercy for the entire crowd, he rose in the sky through his supernatural
power and with both hands held up the sun and moon.
16. He wandered through the sky and made all kinds of transformations.
He divided himself into countless bodies and united again in one,
17. or walked on water as on the ground, or entered into the ground as
into water. Walls of stone did not hinder him, and left and right he emitted
water and ﬁre.
18. The king, his father, was overjoyed, and his feelings of father and
son were all done away with. Seated on a lotus in the sky, [the Buddha]
expounded the Law to the king.
19. “I know that your heart, O king, is kind. Because of me, your son,
your grief has increased. You are bound by love for your son but you should
quickly remove that! Stop your love, quiet your thoughts, and accept that I,
your son, cares for the Law!

138

Chapter XIX

20. “That which other sons have never offered, I offer this now to the
king, my father. That which a father has never received from a son you will
now obtain from your son.
21. “Amazing for a human king and wonderful for a celestial king, the
exquisite path of immortality, I now offer this to you, great king.
22. “Any speciﬁc action is an action for rebirth. The basis of an action
causes its fruition. Know about the cause and effect of an action! Diligently
develop actions to cross over the worldly!
23. “When one carefully contemplates the world, only action is one’s
good friend. Relatives and oneself, with deep affection they long for one
another. But when life stops, the spirit goes on alone. Only the good friend,
action, follows.
24. “As the wheel revolves in the ﬁve destinations, one’s three actions101
are produced by the three.102 But craving is their cause, while all kinds of
species are different.
25. “You must exert yourself now, and purify your corporal and verbal
actions! Diligently practice night and day! Appease your confused mind and
become quiet! Only this will beneﬁt oneself. Without this there is nothing
for me!
26. “Know that the existences of the three worlds are like the waves of
the sea! They are difﬁcult to enjoy and hard to attend to. You should practice
the fourth action!103
27. “In birth and death the wheel of the ﬁve destinations turns like the stars.
As even the gods change, how could one obtain permanence among humans?
28. “Nirvana is the greatest happiness, and the quiet of meditation is the
most excellent among pleasures. The happiness of the ﬁve desires of a human
king is dangerous, fraught with fear. As if dwelling with poisonous snakes,
how could one have an instant of joy?
29. “A bright person sees the world as if he were surrounded by a great
ﬁre. His fear is extraordinary and he does not have any contentment, even
for a little while. He seeks to leave birth, old age, and death. The place of
quietude without end is where a wise one dwells.
30. “One does not need sharp weapons, elephants, horses, and troops
with chariots. Having subdued greed, anger, and delusion, there are no more
enemies in the world.

139

37b

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

37c

31. “Know suffering and annihilate the cause of suffering! Realize its
extinction and develop the means! Through right awakening to the four truths,
one’s fear of a woeful destination is removed.”
32. The previous display of [the Buddha’s] ﬁne divine power had made
the king’s heart joyful. His feelings of resolute faith were already profound,
and he was ﬁt to be a vessel for the Right Law.
33. He held his palms together and said in praise, “Wondrous is the
accomplishment of the result of your solemn oath! Wondrous is the freedom
from great suffering! Wondrous is the beneﬁt for me!
34. “Even though [the sight of you at ﬁrst] increased my grief, I have
obtained beneﬁt because of the sadness. Today is a wondrous day for me!
The fruition for having given birth to a son is accomplished.
35. “It was proper to reject exquisite happiness. It was proper to strenuously practice austerities. It was proper to forsake the splendor of your
family. It was proper to give up feelings of love.
36. “The seer kings of old suffered greatly but without any merit. In a
pure and tranquil place, you have now obtained all. At ease yourself and putting others at ease, your great compassion saves beings.
37. “Those who in the past once dwelled in the world as wheel-turning
kings did not have any sovereign divine power that could open up my mind,
and neither did they have this ﬁne Law which makes me joyful today.
38. “If you were a wheel-turning king, the cycle of births and deaths
would not end. Now you are spared from birth and death, and the great suffering of the turning of the wheel is extinguished. You widely and ably
expound the law of immortality for the kinds of beings.
39. “Such is your divine power, and your wisdom is extremely profound
and extensive. You have forever extinguished the suffering of birth and death,
and are the highest among gods and humans. Even if you had occupied the
position of a noble king, I would never have obtained this beneﬁt.”
40. Having spoken such praise, [the king’s] love of the Law increased
his reverence. Though he occupied the worthy position of king and father,
he humbly bowed and made obeisance [to the Buddha].
41. When the whole population in the land observed the Buddha’s divine
power, when they heard his exposition of the profound ﬁne Law and saw
their king’s reverence,

140

Chapter XIX

42. they held their palms together and made deep obeisance, and all
thought that it was wonderful. Weary of staying in their common bonds, they
all produced the thought of going forth.
43. The princes of the Śākya lineage gained insight into the path, coming
to fruition. They all became weary of the happiness of worldly prosperity,
gave up their relatives, and went forth.
44. Ānanda, Nanda, Kṛmila, Aniruddha, Nanda, and Upananda, and also
Kuṇṭhadhāna.
45. Such chiefs and also other sons of the Śākya lineage all followed
the Buddha’s teaching. They accepted the Law and became his disciples.
46. The son of the chief minister, who puts the country straight, Udāyin,
and others subsequently went forth together with the princes.
47. Furthermore, when the son of Atri, called Upāli, saw that the princes
and the son of the chief minister had gone forth, he was moved in his heart,
his affections opened up, and he accepted the law of going forth.
48. When the king, the father, had seen the divine power and qualities
of his son, he too entered the clear stream himself, the gate of the Right Law
of immortality.
49. He gave up his royal throne and his land, and was succeeded by
Amṛtodana.104 Residing in solitude, [the former king] practiced quietude.
Dwelling in the palace, he practiced like a royal seer.
50. After the Tathāgata had subsequently received all, his own family
and good friends, his countenance was kindly as he went on his way and his
relatives joyfully followed him.
51. When the time had come to go begging for alms, [the Buddha] entered
Kapilavastu. The men and women in the city were pleasantly surprised and
called out in raised voices,
52. “Siddhārtha’s application to the path is completed, and he has
returned!” Inside and outside they passed it on and told one another. Big and
small rushed out to have a look.
53. In the doors and windows they stood shoulder to shoulder. In sidelong
glances they saw the primary and secondary marks of the Buddha’s body
and the light [from his marks] was very bright.
54. Outwardly [the Buddha] wore a kāṣāya garment, but the brightness
of his body inwardly had a penetrating shine, just as the round disk of the
sun casts its light both inside and outside.
141

38a

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

38b

55. Those who observed this felt sadness and joy in their hearts. They
held their palms together and their tears ﬂowed. They saw that the Buddha
was walking in a digniﬁed way, his appearance restrained, and with controlled
faculties his ﬁne ﬁgure manifested the meaningfulness of the Law. They were
startled and their sad sighing increased.
56. “By taking tonsure he has ruined the loveliness of his appearance,
and his body is covered with a colored garment. His deportment and reﬁned
appearance are stately. With self-control he proceeds, gazing at the ground.
57. “His head should bear a feathered crown and he should hold the
reins of a ﬂying dragon! Why must he brave the ﬂoating dust and go begging
with a bowl in his hand?
58. “His skills are sufﬁcient to subdue his enemies, and his appearance
will please his ladies. He should wear ornamental dress and a celestial crown,
and the people should all turn their heads toward his heavenly light!
59. “Why does he turn his splendid countenance downward, restraining
his mind and controlling his appearance, and, having given up desire and
ﬁne clothes, wear a dyed garment on his unadorned body?
60. “What sign did he see, and what does he seek? He has become an
enemy of the ﬁve worldly desires. He has given up his worthy wife and his
dear son, and wanders alone, happy all by himself.
61. “Difﬁcult, indeed, it is for that worthy consort!105 For a long time
she has been feeling sorrow, and now she hears that [her husband] has gone
forth. Can her life yet be complete?
62. “We are wondering whether King Śuddhodana will ever see his son.
He has seen his ﬁne-looking ﬁgure but [the son] has gone forth, ruining his
appearance. An enemy may yet be more bitterly regretted, but when his father
sees [his son], how could he be all right?
63. “His dear son Rāhula is in tears and feels a constant longing. Does
[the Buddha] not think of soothing him when he sees him, because he has
applied himself to this path?
64. “All those who understand the way of signs have said that when the
Crown Prince was born, he was endowed with the signs of a great person,
that he would enjoy the four seas. But contemplating what he has done now,
that was all empty talk.”

142

Chapter XIX

65. Such [statements] among many others were their confused and disorderly pronouncements. But the Tathāgata’s mind was unattached, without
any delight or grief. In his compassion he felt sympathy for the beings, and
wished to free them from their poverty.
66. He increased their wholesome roots and for the sake of the future
world, he showed them the path of little desire and removed the mist of common impurity.
67. He entered a poor neighborhood and begged for alms, ﬁne or coarse,
whatever he could obtain. He did not single out any family, big or small,
and, his bowl full, he returned to the mountain forest.

143

Chapter XX

Acceptance of the
Jetavana Pure Abode
1. After the World-honored One had converted the people of Kapilavastu,
and when their salvation had been completed according to circumstances,
he went on his way together with his great multitude. He went to the land of
Kośala, to King Prasenajit.
2. The Jetavana had been decorated and its halls and dwellings were all
fully prepared. Its streams and springs poured forth, and all the ﬂowers and
fruits were blossoming.
3. Many wondrous birds, in the water and on land, ﬂocked together
according to their kind and sang harmoniously. [The Jetavana’s] many charms
were matchless in the world, just like the palace of Mount Kailāsa.106
4. The elder Anāthapiṇḍada and his retinue welcomed [the Buddha and
his multitude] as they were seeking their way. They scattered ﬂowers, burned
famous incense, and invited them to enter the Jetavana.
5. With his golden dragon-pitcher in his hand, [Anāthapiṇḍada] knelt
and poured superior water, and offered the Jetavana pure abode to the order
of the ten directions.107
6. The World-honored One accepted [the offerings] with the solemn
wish, “May your country be in peace, making it safe for a long time! May
your good fortune, O Elder Anāthapiṇḍada, increase without end!”
7. When King Prasenajit heard that the World-honored One had arrived,
he then adorned his carriage and left for the Jetavana. He bowed at the Worldhonored One’s feet. He withdrew and sat to one side, held his palms together,
and said to Buddha:
8. “I had not imagined that great good fortune would unexpectedly come
to my small country. I am evil and very pernicious. How could I move a great
man?
9. “Now that I have seen your noble countenance, may I bathe in and

145

38c

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

39a

drink from your bright grace! Even though I dwell among the common, I
have met with the noble one, entering his excellent stream.
10. “When, for instance, the wind passes through a fragrant forest, it
becomes a perfumed eddy in combination with the air. When the birds come
together on Sumeru, their different colors all adjust to its golden light.
11. “When one has met with a bright person, one becomes equally splendid upon receiving his shelter. When the countryman brought worship to the
seer, he was reborn as the constellation Triśaṅku.108
12. “All worldly gain comes to an end, but your noble beneﬁt is forever
without end. A human king has many faults, but when he meets a noble one
his beneﬁt is permanent contentment.”
13. The Buddha knew that the king’s mind was earnest and that he would
ﬁnd happiness in the Law, like Lord Śakra. But he still had two kinds of
attachments: he could not forget about riches and female beauty. Knowing
it was the right time and knowing his mental behavior, [the Buddha]
expounded the Law to the king.
14. “When an evildoer, a lowly person, sees good, he still feels respect.
How much more, then, would a sovereign king who has accumulated merit,
availing of his past causality!
15. “To have greater reverence upon meeting the Buddha—this is not
difﬁcult! When the land is quiet and its people content, meeting the Buddha
does not increase these.
16. “I shall now brieﬂy expound the Law. Listen carefully, great king!
Accept my exposition and see the result of my merits!
17. “When life has ended, the body and the spirit are separated, and
one’s relatives are all separated. There are only the wholesome and evil
actions that throughout follow one like a shadow.
18. “When you hold the actions of a righteous king in high esteem and
when you care for all people, in the present world your fame will spread and
at your life’s end you will ascend to heaven.
19. “If you indulge your feelings and do not comply with the Law, you
suffer now and later you will be without joy. In ancient times King Kṛśāśva
complied with the Law and experienced celestial good fortune. King
Nikumbha performed evil and when his life ended he was reborn in a woeful
destination.

146

Chapter XX

20. “I have now brieﬂy expounded the Law about good and evil to you,
great king! As a great requirement you must be kind at heart! Observe your
people as you would an only child!
21. “Do not harass or injure, and control your faculties well! Reject the
wrong path and take the right road! Do not elevate yourself and put down others!
Be a friend of ascetics and do not frequent friends who hold wrong views!
22. “Do not rely on your royal power and do not listen to artful talk! Do
not trouble any ascetic and do not transgress the code of royal rule! Be mindful
of the Buddha and consider his Right Law! Subdue those who are wrong!
23. “Be seen as the highest among humans, and your virtue may be
thought of as most eminent! Profoundly consider the notion of impermanence,
the constant change of one’s physical life! Fix your mind on the most eminent
object and earnestly seek pure faith!
24. “Preserve your kindness and sovereign happiness, and in a future
world you will increase your joy! May they transmit your fame in the vast
eon, and you will certainly be shown gratitude by the Tathāgata! When, for
instance, someone likes sweet fruit, he should plant ﬁne saplings.
25. “There are those who from brightness enter darkness, and there are
those who from darkness enter brightness. There are those whose one darkness
is continued by another darkness, and there are those whose one brightness
is cause for another brightness. A wise one must reject three categories109
and throughout apply himself to brightness.
26. “When one speaks evil, all echo it; but when good is being called
out, those who go along have difﬁculties. There is nothing that does not cause
fruition, and what one has caused is not lost. If one undertakes something
but is not diligent, one will in the end be unable to do anything.
27. “If one did not once develop wholesome causality, one will later
bring about a period without happiness. Having gone, there will be no period
of rest. Therefore, one should develop what is wholesome! Watch yourself
in order not to do any evil, because you will experience the results of your
own actions!
28. “Just as beings have no place to escape when the four rocky mountains
come together, beings have no way to do away with the mountains of birth,
old age, illness, and death. Only those who practice the Right Law escape
these heavy mountains of suffering.

147

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

39b

29. “All the worldly is impermanent. The objects of the ﬁve desires are
like lightning, [passing swiftly]. Old age and death are the sharp ends of an
awl. Why would one practice what is wrong?
30. “The excellent kings of old were like the god Īśvara. They were
valiant and determined to conquer the sky, but having been illustrious for a
while they were ruined.
31. “The ﬁre of the eon will melt Sumeru and the waters of the sea will
all dry up. All the less may one’s body, which is like a bubble, hope to stay
long in the world!
32. “A ﬁerce wind may be stopped by a violent whirlwind,110 sunshine
may be screened off by Sumeru, and a great ﬁre may be extinguished by
water. All existing things turn to extinction.
33. “This body is an impermanent object, painstakingly guarded for a
long time. One extensively enjoys riches and female beauty with it, and in
one’s negligence one becomes proud.
34. “When the moment of death suddenly arrives, [the body] is as rigid
as a dead log. An intelligent person, seeing this change, should diligently
practice! How could he sleep?
35. “Birth and death alone move the mechanism [of samsara].111 One
ceaselessly continues to fall. If one does not indulge in a happiness that will
be discontinued, its painful retribution will not be brought about.
36. “One must not be close to any friend who is not excellent! If one
does not apply oneself and ceaselessly practices, in one’s application one
will not experience knowledge about existence. But experiencing this will
certainly make you free from the body.
37. “Having a body, one must not be tainted by an object! Being tainted
by an object is a great fault. Even if one were born among the immaterial
gods, one would not be spared from change in time.
38. “You should train in a body that will not change! If it does not
change, you are without any fault. As there is this body, it is the basis of all
suffering.
39. “That is why the wise ones put a stop to the fundamental [problem]
through the absence of a body. All kinds of beings bring forth suffering
through their desire.
40. “Therefore, one should produce thoughts of revulsion concerning

148

Chapter XX

the existence of desire! If one is disgusted with the existence of desire, one
will not experience any suffering.
41. “Even if one is born in [the realms of] form or no-form, changing
is a great calamity, as one is not in quietude. All the more so if one is not
free from desire!
42. “Thus one should contemplate the three realms as impermanent and
without any ruler! While all suffering is constantly ablaze, how could the
wise wish for happiness? When, for example, a tree is ablaze with many
ﬂames, why would the birds swarm to it?
43. “He who understands this is an intelligent person. Without this there
is no understanding. Having this [realization], one is an insightful person,
and being without this means no understanding.
44. “This, then, is what one should do, and being without this is not
ﬁtting. With this, one is close to the teaching, and without this one is separated
from the right principle.
45. “If one says that this excellent Law is not ﬁt for householders, this is
a wrong pronouncement. Yes, the Law is spread equally among the people.
46. “When one suffers from heat and enters cold water, all becomes
cool. When a dark room is lit by the ﬂame of a lamp, all see the ﬁve colors.
47. “The same applies to the practice of the path. There is no different way
for mendicants and for common people. Those who dwell in the mountains
may fall, committing an offense, while a householder may rise to be a seer.
48. “Delusion is a vast ocean and wrong views are its waves. Beings
follow the currents of desire. They are tossed about and no one can cross over.
49. “Wisdom is a light boat. Firmly hold on to the correctness of samādhi!
The drum of application and the oars of mindfulness can save one from the
ocean of ignorance.”
50. When the king had attentively listened to the explanation of the
Omniscient One, he despised common splendor and knew that kingship was
without any joy. He had been like a maddened elephant running loose, which
had sobered up and returned, well proven.
51. There were the heretics, who had seen that the king had put his serene
faith in the Buddha. They all requested the great king to decide about the
Buddha on the basis of his divine power. The king then said to the Worldhonored One, “Please, comply with their request!”

149

39c

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

40a

52. The Buddha immediately agreed, in silence. All kinds of people with
different views, and the divine seers with the ﬁve supernatural powers112 all
came to where the Buddha was.
53. The Buddha immediately manifested his divine power, sitting in the
sky in his proper place. He emitted a great light all around, as bright as the
morning sun. The heretics were all subdued, and the people of the land widely
turned to his teaching.
54. In order to expound the Law to his mother, he immediately ascended
to the Trāyastriṃśa Heaven. Three months he dwelled in his celestial palace
and converted gods and humans all around. After he had saved his mother
and shown his gratitude, he returned after the summer retreat had passed.
55. As all the attendants of the gods mounted a staircase of seven precious
things, [the Buddha] descended to Jambudvīpa, to the place to which buddhas
have always descended.113
56. Countless gods and humans saw him off in their palaces. The rulers
and their people in Jambudvīpa held their palms together and gazed up at
[the Buddha].

150

Chapter XXI

Subduing the Maddened Elephant
Dhanapālaka
1. After [the Buddha] had converted his mother in heaven, and also the other
multitude of gods, he returned among humans and went on converting [beings]
according to circumstances.
2. Jyotiṣka, Jīvaka, Śūra, Śroṇa, the elder’s son Aṅgada, and also Prince
Abhaya,
3. Nyagrodha and others, Śrīguptaka, the nirgrantha (Jain) Upāli, he
caused them all114 to be delivered.
4. When the king of Gandhāra, called Puṣkara,115 heard the exposition
of the profound ﬁne Law, he gave up his country and went forth.
5. The demon Haimavata and also Sātāgra116 were subdued on Mount
Vipula,117 and they were converted.
6. The brahman Pārāyaṇika was subdued on Mount Pāṣāṇaka118 by the
subtle meaning of half a gāthā, and was brought to resolute faith.
7. In the village of Sthāṇumatī119 there was Kūṭadatta. He was a head of
the twice-born [ones] and killed many living beings to offer as sacriﬁces, but
the Tathāgata made an effort to convert him and caused him to enter the right
path.
8. A celestial spirit of great majesty on Mount Vaidehaka, called Pañcaśikha,120 accepted the Law and entered certainty.
9. In the village of Veṇukaṇṭakī121 [the Buddha] converted the mother
of Nanda,122 and in the city of Aṅgapura he subdued very powerful spirits.
10. Pūrṇabhadra123 and the wicked, very powerful dragons Śroṇa and
Daṇḍa, the king and his concubines, all accepted the Right Law, thereby
opening the gate of immortality.
11. In a village of dwarfs124 Kenya and Śela earnestly sought the happiness
of rebirth in heaven, but they were converted so that they entered the right
path.

151

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

40b

40c

12. In a village of the Suhmas [the Buddha] showed his divine power
to Aṅgulimāla.125 He converted him so that he was immediately subdued.
13. There was the son of a great elder, Prajīvana (?).126 He was very
wealthy and had many riches and possessions, just like Pūrṇabhadra. Before
the Tathāgata, he was instantly converted and widely practiced generosity.
14. In the village of Bhadrika [the Buddha] converted the brothers
Bhadravālin and Bhadra, two spirits.127
15. In Videhapura there were two brahmans. One was called Mahāyus
(?), and the other was called Brahmāyus. [The Buddha] subdued them in a
debate and caused them to enter the Right Law.
16. Upon his arrival in the city of Vaiśālī [the Buddha] converted rākṣasa
demons, and also the Licchavi Siṃha and a multitude of Licchavis, and
Satyaka Nirgranthaputra.128 He caused them all to enter the Right Law.
17. In Alakāvatī129 there were the demons Bhadra, Bhadraka, and
Bhadrakarma (?).
18. He later arrived at Mount Aṭavī and saved the demon Āṭavika, a second one called Kumāra, and a third one, Hastaka.
19. [The Buddha] returned to Gaja Mountain and saved the demon
Ṭakana (?) and the yakṣa Śūcīloma and his sister’s son.130
20. He later went to Vārāṇasī and converted Kātyāyana. After that he
went to Śūrpāraka using his divine power.
21. [The Buddha] converted the merchants there, and Stavakarṇin. He
accepted the Sandalwood Hall,whose ﬁne fragrance spreads even now.
22. Upon reaching Mahīvatī, he saved the seer Kapila. While the muni
was staying there he stepped upon a stone, and the two wheel(-marks) with
a thousand spokes [on the soles of his feet] became visible [on the stone].
They were preserved.
23. Upon reaching the place of Vāraṇa, he converted the demon Vāraṇa,
and upon reaching the country of Mathurā he saved the demon Gardabha.
24. In Sthūlakoṣṭhaka [the Buddha] saved Rāṣṭrapāla. When he arrived
in the village of Vairañjā, he saved the brahmans.
25. In the village of Kalmāṣadamya he saved Bṛhadvājin, and further
converted Agniveśya there.
26. [The Buddha] again returned to the land of Śrāvastī and saved the
gautamaka Jātiśroṇi and the māgaṇḍika Ātreya.131

152

Chapter XXI

27. Having returned to the land of Kośala, [the Buddha] saved heretical
teachers, Puṣkarasārin, and the crowd of brahmans.
28. When he arrived in the quiet and secluded place of Śetavika, he
saved the heretical seers so that they entered the path of the seer Buddha.
29. Upon his arrival in the land of Ayodhyā, [the Buddha] saved a crowd
of demons and dragons. When he arrived in the land of Kumbhīra, he saved
two evil dragon kings. One was called Kumbhīra and the other was called
Kālaka.
30. Further, upon his arrival in the land of the Bhārgas, [the Buddha]
converted the yakṣa demon called Bheṣaka, the parents of Nakula, and also
the great elder, so that they had resolute faith in the Right Law.
31. Upon his arrival in the land of Kauśāṃbī, [the Buddha] converted
Ghoṣila and the two upāsikās132 Prajā and Uttarā.133
32. Their companions, a multitude of upāsikās, were also saved in due
order. Upon his arrival in the land of Gandhāra he saved the dragon Apalāla.
33. All such [beings], those who walk in the sky and those who have
the nature of water or of dry land, he went to convert them all in due order,
just as the sun illuminates the darkness.
34. At that time, when Devadatta134 saw the excellence of the Buddha’s
qualities, deep in his heart he felt jealous and withdrew from the trances. He
used evil means to destroy the order of the Right Law.
35. [Devadatta] ascended Mount Gṛdhrakūṭa, let a rock fall, and tried
to hit the Buddha with it, but the rock split in two and fell to the Buddha’s
left and right.
36. On the level and straight royal road [Devadatta] let loose a maddened
evil elephant. His rolling roar was like thunder. His ferocity burst forth, forming a cloud. He rushed on like a storm, mighty as a ﬁerce wind.
37. His trunk, tusks, tail, and four feet—coming into contact with them
would absolutely bring destruction. In the alleys and streets of the city of
Rājagṛha, those he had killed and injured lay scattered about. After their
violent deaths, the corpses lay spread out in the streets. Brains and blood
were spattered all around.
38. All the men and women were afraid to go out. The whole city trembled [in fear]. One heard only voices calling out in panic. Some left the city
in a hurry, and others hid in caves.

153

41a

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

39. The Tathāgata and a group of ﬁve hundred then arrived and entered
the city. The people in the windows high on the pavilions advised the Buddha
not to proceed.
40. The Tathāgata was composed at heart and complacent, and his countenance was free from distress. He was mindful only of the suffering of envy.
His compassionate mind wished to put [the elephant] at ease.
41. As a multitude of gods and dragons followed all around, [the Buddha]
gradually approached the place where the maddened elephant was. All the
bhikṣus had ﬂed, so he was accompanied only by Ānanda. Just like the one
speciﬁc nature of all kinds of characteristics of the Law, he did not move.
42. The maddened elephant burst forth in a rage, but when he saw the
Buddha, his mind immediately became calm. He threw himself down and
made obeisance at the Buddha’s feet, as if Mount Tai had crumbled.
43. With his lotus-like palm, [the Buddha] patted [the elephant] on the
head, just like the sun shining on a dark cloud. As [the elephant] knelt at the
Buddha’s feet, he expounded the Law to him, saying:
44. “No elephant may injure the greatest dragon! It is hard for an elephant
to ﬁght a dragon, but if an elephant wants to injure the greatest dragon, he
will never be reborn in a wholesome destination!
45. “The infatuations of greed, anger, and delusion are difﬁcult to subdue,
but the Buddha has subdued them. That is why you should now reject greed,
anger, and delusion. If you do not reject them, [you will be] sunk in the mud
of suffering and they will further increase.”
46. When the elephant had heard the Buddha’s exposition, his madness
was destroyed and his mind immediately gained insight. He was content in
body and in mind, as when one is thirsty and drinks the nectar of immortality.
47. When the elephant had been converted by the Buddha, the people
in the land all rejoiced. They all exclaimed in admiration that it was wonderful,
and arranged for all kinds of worship.
48. Those of a lesser goodness changed to an intermediate [level], and
those of intermediate goodness advanced to a superior [level]. Nonbelievers
gained faith and believers’ faith was very ﬁrm.
49. When the great king Ajātaśatru135 saw that the Buddha had subdued
the maddened elephant, he thought that it was amazing. He rejoiced and doubled his respect.

154

Chapter XXI

50. The Tathāgata, being skillful in means, showed all kinds of divine
power and subdued the beings. He caused them to enter the Right Law according to their capacities. The whole country developed wholesome actions,
just like people at the beginning of an eon.
51. Devadatta was entangled in his own evil. Previously he had the divine
power to ﬂy, but now he was certain to fall into the Avīci136 Hell.

155

41b

Chapter XXII

Lady Āmra[pālī]’s137 Meeting
with the Buddha
1. After the World-honored One had made extensive conversions, the thought
of his [ﬁnal] nirvana138 arose. He set forth from the city of Rājagṛha to the
district of Pāṭaliputra.
2. After [the Buddha’s] arrival he stayed there in the Pāṭalī Caitya.139
There was a dependent state, a border district of Magadha.
3. The brahman who ruled that land140 was learned and understood the
scriptural texts. Looking at the signs concerning the welfare of the land, he
served as the national oracle.
4. The king of Magadha sent a messenger to notify the oracle that he
had to erect a secure wall to protect against violent neighbors.
5. The World-honored One predicted that the land would be protected
by celestial spirits. If one were to erect a wall there, it would forever be ﬁrm
and free from danger.
6. The augur rejoiced in his heart, and brought worship to the Buddha,
to the Law (Dharma), and to the order (Sangha). The Buddha left through a
gate141 in the wall and went to the shore of the Ganges River.
7. Out of profound respect for Buddha, the augur called [the gate] the
Gautama Gate. The whole population on the shore of the Ganges River came
out to welcome the World-honored One. They brought all kinds of offerings
and all adorned their boats so that he might cross.
8. Because there were numerous boats, the World-honored One could
not be impartial in accepting one, and disregarded the others’ intention. He
immediately rendered himself and his great multitude invisible through his
divine power. He suddenly disappeared from one bank and emerged on the
other bank.
9. Riding the boat of knowledge, [the Buddha] extensively saved beings.
Because of the power of his qualities, he crossed the river without relying

157

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

41c

on a boat. The population on the shore of the Ganges River called out with
one voice that it was amazing.
10. They all called this ford by the name Gautama Ford. The Gautama
Gate, the gate in the wall, and the ford called Gautama Ford, these names
spread in the world and the fame of both was transmitted for generations.
11. The Tathāgata proceeded on and arrived in the village of Kuṭi. Many
were converted by his exposition of the Law [there]. He later arrived in the
village of Nādikā.
12. Many people had died in an epidemic, and their relatives all came
out to ask, “Where will our relatives, who died in the epidemic, be reborn
at life’s end?”
13. The Buddha knew the retribution of their actions well, and gave his
explanation in compliance to all their questions. He went on to Vaiśālī and
stayed in the Āmra Grove.
14. Lady Āmrapālī was pleased to hear that the Buddha had come to her
garden. Followed by her retinue of servants, she went out to welcome him
with dignity.
15. She was well in control of her faculties. On her body she wore a
light garment. She gave up decorated clothes, and desisted from [perfuming
herself with] fragrant ﬂowers when bathing.
16. She was as pure and simple as any chaste maiden in the world when
bringing sacriﬁces to the gods. Her beautiful and ﬁne complexion was like
the celestial appearance of a jade lady.
17. When the Buddha saw the lady coming from afar, he said to his multitude of bhikṣus, “This woman is utterly beautiful, capable of keeping the
attention of any practitioner. You should apply right mindfulness and pacify
your mind with wisdom!
18. “It would be better to be in the jaws of a ﬁerce tiger or under the
sharp sword of a madman than to have feelings of desire for a woman.
19. “A woman shows her licentious attitude whether walking, standing,
sitting, or lying down. Even painted images [of women] reveal their seductive
appearance. They steal one’s wholesome thoughts. Why not guard oneself?
20. “One may see them weeping or laughing, glad or angry; they may
be relaxed, with lowered shoulders, or their disheveled hair may tumble—

158

Chapter XXII

still they confuse one’s mind. All the more so when they have adorned themselves to manifest a ﬁne appearance!
21. “Their adornments conceal their lowly bodies, enticing a fool. In his
bewilderment he has evil ideas and does not perceive her offensive appearance.
Observe that she is impermanent, painful, impure, and ‘without anything
that is hers’!
22. “Look carefully at the truth and dispel any notion of desire! Correctly
contemplate her as a speciﬁc object! Even a celestial maiden is not pleasant.
All the less could desire for any human keep one’s attention!
23. “Grasp the bow of zeal and the sharp arrow of wisdom! Wear the
heavy armor of right mindfulness and choose to battle the ﬁve desires!
24. “It would be better to pierce both eyes with a hot iron skewer than
to observe female beauty with desire in mind.
25. “Desire confuses the mind and one is deluded by female beauty.
When one’s life ends with confused thoughts, one will certainly fall into the
three woeful destinations.142 Be afraid of the suffering of the woeful destinations and do not be deceived by a woman!
26. “One’s [sense] faculties should not be bound to her as their object,
and as an object she should not be bound to one’s faculties! Thoughts of desire
for her come from one’s faculties which are bound to her as their object.
27. “When, for instance, two plowing oxen share a single yoke and martindale, the oxen cannot be bound any further. The same applies to one’s faculties and their objects. That is why one should control one’s thoughts. Do
not let them be negligent!”
28. As the Buddha expounded the Law in all kinds of ways to the bhikṣus,
Lady Āmrapālī eventually arrived before the World-honored One.
29. She saw the Buddha sitting underneath a tree, meditating and reﬂecting in tranquility, and cherished the thought that the Buddha in his great compassion had mercifully accepted her grove.
30. With an upright mind she controlled her bearing and corrected her
former seductive feelings. Purely endowed with a reverential body and mind,
she bowed and made obeisance at his feet. The World-honored One bade her
to sit down and expounded the Law to her as she wished:
31. “Your thoughts are pure and tranquil, and you reveal an outwardly
virtuous appearance. When one is in the prime of life and has abundant

159

42a

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

42b

wealth, when one is endowed with virtue combined with a beautiful appearance, and when one is able to have resolute faith in the Right Law, that is
difﬁcult [to achieve] in the world.
32. “When a man dwells in wisdom, his happiness with the Law is not
something wondrous. That a woman, whose determination is weak, whose
wisdom is shallow but whose desire is profound, is capable of being happy
with the Right Law, this is even more difﬁcult [to achieve].
33. “When one is born in the world, one should just ﬁnd one’s pleasure
in the Law! Riches and beauty will not be permanently preserved. Only the
Right Law is precious.
34. “Strength is ruined by illness, and youth is transformed by old age.
Life is distressed by death, but the practice of the Law cannot be encroached
upon.
35. “One is separated from the things one likes, and one is compelled
to be near what one does not like. One’s aspirations are not as one wishes.
Only the Law is in compliance with one’s intentions!
36. “Others’ strength means one’s great suffering, but one’s sovereign
strength means joy. Women all depend on another, and they bear the suffering
of another’s child. Therefore, reﬂect and feel revulsion toward a female
body!”
37. When Lady Āmrapālī heard the Law, she rejoiced in her heart. Her
ﬁrm wisdom increased its brightness and she was able to break with desire.
She immediately felt revulsion toward her female body and was not tainted
by any object.
38. Even though she felt ashamed of her lowly body, the power of the
Law urged her mind on. She bowed and said to Buddha, “You have received
me, worthy one. Mercifully accept my offerings tomorrow and let me fulﬁll
my earnest wish!”
39. The Buddha knew that she was sincere at heart, and considering also
the beneﬁt of all beings, he accepted her request in silence. [Lady Āmrapālī]
consequently rejoiced. As she listened with affection, her understanding
steadily increased. She made obeisance and returned home.

160

Fascicle Five
Chapter XXIII

Staying Alive through [the Buddha’s]
Divine Power
1. The Licchavi elders of Vaiśālī then heard that the World-honored One had
entered their country and was staying in the Āmra Garden.
2. Some rode white chariots, with white parasols, and were dressed in
white. Blue, red, yellow, or green—each had a different appearance in their
multitude. Their attendants led in front and [followed] behind. Competing
for the road, they advanced while jostling [with one another] for the way.
3. Their celestial crowns, ornamental garments, adorned with precious
ornamentation, the great brilliance of their majestic appearance—all increased
the brightness in that grove.
4. They removed their ﬁvefold majestic apparel,143 dismounted, and
advanced on foot. Having put a stop to pride, their demeanor was reverential
and they bowed at the Buddha’s feet.
5. The great multitude surrounded the Buddha, just as the sun casts a circle
of light all around. The Licchavi called Siṃha was chief of the Licchavis.
6. His virtuous appearance was like a lion’s, and he held the position of
a lion minister. Having dispelled his lionlike pride, he was instructed by the
lion of the Śākyas:
7. “You have great majesty, a famous family, and a beautiful appearance,
yet you have done away with worldly pride. Through acceptance of the Law,
you have increased your brightness.
8. “The adornment of morality is better than the ornamentations of riches
and beauty, and of fragrant ﬂowers. Your land’s abundance and happiness
are due only to your splendor.

161

42c

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

43a

9. “Bringing splendor to one’s person and happiness to one’s people
resides in a controlled mind. When increased with a feeling of happiness
with the Law, it makes one’s virtue steadily loftier.
10. “While one does not despise any creature in the land and can assemble
all the worthy, one must daily renew one’s virtues and foster all people!
11. “Lead the multitude wisely and correctly, just like an ox king crossing
a ford. If one can be mindful in the present world and in a later world, one should
indeed develop right morality, and one’s welfare will be ﬁrm in both worlds.
12. “One will be revered by all, and one’s fame will spread widely. Kind
[people] will be happy to be your friends and the spread of your virtue will
be eternal and limitless.
13. “Precious jade and stones in a mountain forest all come into existence
relying on the earth. The virtue of morality is just like the earth from which
all that is good comes.
14. “Without wings one may wish to rise into the sky, and one may try
to cross a river without a good boat. If one does not have the virtue of morality
as a human, escape from suffering is really difﬁcult.
15. “Just as a tree is hard to climb when its beautiful ﬂowers and fruits
sting, the same applies to the one who, though learned and having the power
of beauty, destroys morality.
16. “Sitting upright in an excellent pavilion, one may be adorned with
a king’s mind, but when in possession of the quality of pure morality one
may follow the great seer and be converted.
17. “Even if one has dyed one’s garment, wears fur or feathers, or a
spiral headdress, or has shaven one’s head, if one does not develop the virtue
of morality then it is difﬁcult to cross over all suffering.
18. “One may bathe three times night and day, make offerings to ﬁre,
and practice asceticism; one may leave one’s body for the ﬁlthy animals in
the wilds, one may rush toward water or ﬁre, or throw oneself from a cliff;
19. “one may live on fruits, eat herbs and roots, inhale the wind, and
drink from the water of the Ganges; one may swallow air and thereby cease
ailments—if one practices these paths of birds and animals far removed from
right morality, one is not a vessel of the Right Law.
20. “By ruining morality, one incurs slander, and one is not held dear
by kind [people]. One constantly feels fear in one’s heart and is followed by

162

Chapter XXIII

an evil reputation, just like a shadow. In the present world there is no beneﬁt.
How could one obtain happiness in a later world?
21. “That is why a wise person should develop pure morality. In the
wilderness of birth and death, morality is the best guide.
22. “Keeping the precepts comes from one’s own effort. This is not difﬁcult. Pure morality is a stairway that lets one ascend to heaven.
23. “The establishment of pure morality comes from the weakness of
afﬂiction. One’s faults ruin the mind and one loses one’s ﬁne qualities.
24. “First forsake any [‘I’ or] ‘mine.’ Any [‘I’ or] ‘mine’ covers all that
is wholesome, just as ashes conceal a ﬁre. Only when one steps on it does
one notice the burning.
25. “Pride covers over the mind, just as the sun is concealed by a heavy
cloud. Insolence extinguishes shame, and grief weakens strong determination.
26. “Old age and illness ruin youthful appearance. Arrogance extinguishes
all that is wholesome. The envy of the gods and of asuras raises contention.
The loss of any merit comes from a feeling of arrogance.
27. “‘I am the most excellent among the excellent. My virtue is the same
as that of the most excellent, but I may be somewhat weaker than the most
excellent one.’ [One who thinks] thus is a fool!
28. “Beauty and family are all impermanent. They are unsteady and
unﬁrm over time. In the end they go to ruin. What is the use of pride?
29. “Desire is a huge calamity. It pretends to be your friend but is a secret
foe. The ﬁercest ﬁres come from within. This also applies to the ﬁre of desire.
30. “The blaze of desire is worse than any ﬁre in the world. A ﬁre may
be great but water can extinguish it. Desire is hard to extinguish.
31. “When a ﬁerce ﬁre is set in the wilderness, the grass is destroyed
but it will grow back. When the ﬁre of desire burns the mind, it is hard for
the Right Law to come into existence.
32. “Desire seeks worldly happiness, and [worldly] happiness increases
impure actions. Through evil actions one falls into a woeful destination.
Among one’s enemies, none surpasses desire.
33. “Desire produces love, and through love one indulges in what one
may want. By indulging in what one may want, one incurs all suffering.
Among faults, none surpasses desire.

163

43b

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

43c

34. “Desire is a great illness. The medicine of knowledge is ended by a
fool. Wrong insight and considerations can make desire increase.
35. “‘It is impermanent, painful, impure, without self, and without any
[“I” or] “mine.”‘ A truthful observation with wisdom can extinguish that
wrong desire.
36. “That is why one should develop truthful observation of the object.
When a truthful observation has arisen, desire is undone.
37. “Seeing qualities, one produces desire; and seeing faults, one gives
rise to anger. When both qualities and faults become nonexistent, desire and
hatred are removed.
38. “Anger changes one’s ordinary appearance. It can ruin ﬁne beauty.
Anger is a screen for the brightest eyes. It harms the meaning of the Law
when one wishes for learning.
39. “It ceases the meaningfulness of affection, as one is held in contempt
by the world. That is why one should reject hatred. Do not comply with angry
thoughts!
40. “He who can control his rage is called a skillful charioteer. The world
may praise one who controls his chariot well, but he is [only] a passenger
holding the reins.
41. “When one gives in to hatred and does not stop it from burning, the
ﬁre of mournfulness subsequently ﬂares up. If someone gives rise to anger,
he ﬁrst burns his own mind. Afterward, when [the ﬁre] is increased by a
breeze, it may also burn [others].
42. “The suffering of birth, old age, illness, and death oppresses beings,
but one may further add the harm of hatred. Having many enemies, one
further increases enmity.
43. “Seeing that the world is oppressed by all suffering, one should give
rise to compassionate thoughts! When beings produce afﬂictions, they are
strong or weak, with countless differences.”
44. The Tathāgata, being skillful in means, gave a brief explanation
according to [the Licchavis’] illness, just as a good doctor in the world prescribes medicine according to the illness.
45. When the Licchavis had heard Buddha’s exposition of the Law, they
immediately rose and made obeisance at the Buddha’s feet, and joyfully
accepted [the dust] on their heads.

164

Chapter XXIII

46. They invited the Buddha and his great multitude to an offering [meal]
to be arranged for the next day, but the Buddha told the Licchavis that
Āmrapālī had already invited him.
47. The Licchavis felt embarrassed. “Why does she take away our beneﬁt?” But knowing that the Buddha’s mind was impartial, they again rejoiced.
48. The Tathāgata was skillful in comforting [them], as was ﬁtting, and
caused them to be joyful at heart. Humbly converted, [the Licchavis] returned,
well proven, just like a snake after a stern incantation.
49. When the night had passed and the signs of dawn had arisen, the
Buddha and his great multitude went to the house of Āmrapālī and accepted
her offering.
50. [The Buddha] went to Veṇugrāmaka and stayed there for the summer
retreat. When the three-month retreat was over, he returned to Vaiśālī.
51. He was staying on the shore of Markaṭa Pond, sitting in a grove.144
He emitted a great light all around. Moved [by this light], Māra Pāpīyas
came to where the Buddha was, held his palms together, and entreated him,
saying:
52. “In the past, on the shore of the Nairañjanā [River], you made a
truthful pledge: ‘When the thing I have to do is completed, I will enter nirvana.’ What you had to do is now done. You must comply with your former
intention!”
53. The Buddha then said to Pāpīyas, “The moment of my extinction is
not far off. Later, after three full months, I will enter nirvana.”
54. Māra knew then that the time for the Tathāgata ’s extinction had
been set. His earnest wish was fulﬁlled, and he joyfully returned to his celestial
palace.
55. While he was sitting underneath a tree, the Tathāgata rightly experienced samādhi. He abandoned his life of karmic retribution and remained
alive through his divine power.
56. As the Tathāgata abandoned his life, the great earth quaked all around.
In the ten directions and in the sky, all around a great ﬁre blazed.
57. The top of Sumeru crumbled and stones rained from the sky. A violent
gale arose in the four directions. The trees were all broken apart. Celestial
music brought a mournful sound. Gods and humans forgot to be joyful in
their hearts.

165

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts
44a

58. The Buddha rose from his samādhi and said to the beings all around,
“I have abandoned my life now. Yet through the power of my samādhi I
maintain myself.
59. “My body is like a dilapidated chariot, without any further cause to
come or go. I am freed from the three existences, like a bird born after it has
shattered its egg.”

166

Chapter XXIV

Farewell to the Licchavis
1. When the venerable Ānanda saw that the earth and the heavens all around
were shaking, he was startled in his heart and the hair on his body stood on
end. He asked the Buddha why [these things were occurring].
2. The Buddha said to Ānanda, “I will remain alive for three [more]
months. All remaining life formations have been abandoned. That is why the
earth quakes.”
3. When Ānanda heard the Buddha’s explanation, he felt sad and his tears
ﬂowed. Just as, for instance, when a very powerful elephant disturbs a sandalwood tree and its wood is damaged—its fragrant gum ﬂows down like tears.
4. As a relative [of the Buddha], as someone who held his worthy great
teacher in esteem, possessing profound goodness, but not yet having renounced
desire—because of these four things [Ānanda] could not overcome his pain.
5. “Now that I have heard the instructions of the World-honored One,
that his nirvana is certain, my whole body has completely withered away. I
have lost my direction and my usual bearing. I have completely forgotten
the Law I have heard. In my disarray I have lost heaven and earth.
6. “Astonishing how [soon comes] the extinction of my master, savior
of the world! In freezing cold, about to die, the ﬁre I have encountered is
suddenly extinguished again.
7. “Confused by the wilderness of afﬂictions, I have lost my direction.
I unexpectedly met an expert guide but before I am saved I suddenly lose
him again!
8. “I am like someone who has traveled a long road and who, exhausted
by the heat, has thirsted for water for a long time. Suddenly coming across
a cool pond he hurries to it, but ﬁnds it all dried up.
9. “His eyes gazing, with blue eyelashes, [the Buddha] clearly examines
the three worlds. His wisdom shines in the darkness, but soon it will become
dark!

167

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

44b

10. “Suppose, for instance, during a drought a cloud appears and one
anticipates the rain for the plants. But the cloud is quickly dispersed by a
ﬁerce wind. Hope ceases and one is left with an empty ﬁeld.
11. “In the great darkness of ignorance, beings have all lost their direction.
The Tathāgata has lit the lamp of wisdom but it will be suddenly extinguished.
How will they escape?”
12. When the Buddha had heard Ānanda’s exposition, his bitter complaint
and his sorrowful feelings, he softly spoke comforting words and explained
the True Law to him:
13. “When someone understands his speciﬁc nature, he will not dwell
in grief! All that is conditioned will all go to ruin.
14. “I have already explained to you that what is united will by nature
be separated. Love is impermanent in principle. Give up thoughts of longing!
15. “The conditioned keeps ﬂowing. One is born and one is extinguished.
One will not maintain oneself. One may wish for a long-lasting existence,
but will never achieve that state!
16. “If the conditioned were to permanently remain, nothing would
change. This would be deliverance. What more would one want?
17. “What could you and other beings now want from me? I have already
expounded to you what you should obtain.
18. “What use is this body of mine? The body of the ﬁne Law will exist
for a long time. I may remain or exist in quietude [but] what you require will
indeed be here!
19. “As a teacher, I have never held anything from beings. Develop a
notion of revulsion [for samsara], well established in your own territory!
20. “When you know your own territory, you must be attentive and diligently apply yourself! Practice alone and in tranquility, and reside in solitude!
Do not follow beliefs in anything else!
21. “When you know the territory of the Law, you are certain to clearly
see the lamp of wisdom. It can dispel delusion, and one may observe the four
ranges.145 Having obtained the excellent Law, one is free from any self and
free from [‘I’ and] ‘mine.’
22. “The bones of the skeleton are plastered with skin and ﬂesh, dipped
in blood, and tied by sinews. After careful contemplation, [one sees that] this
is all impure. Why be content with this body?

168

Chapter XXIV

23. “Any experiencing comes from its conditions, just as bubbles [form]
on water. Birth and extinction are impermanent and painful, far removed
from any pleasant notion.
24. “Thoughts come into existence, exist, and are extinguished. Renewed
again and again, they do not cease even for a while. When considering tranquility, the notion of permanence is forever abandoned.
25. “All formations are produced by causes and conditions. They gather
and scatter, and are not constantly together. A fool produces the notion of a
self, but a wise one is without any [‘I’ or] ‘mine.’
26. “Reﬂect on these four ranges, and correctly contemplate them! This
is the path of the unique vehicle, by which all suffering is extinguished.
27. “If one can dwell in it and truthfully contemplate it correctly, this
Law is permanent and without end, even while the Buddha’s body may be
dead or alive.”
28. When the Buddha had expounded this ﬁne Law and comforted
Ānanda, the Licchavis heard about it. They were fearful and gathered together.
29. They all abandoned their mundane deportment and rushed to where
the Buddha was. After they had made obeisance, they sat to one side. They
wanted to question him but could not utter a word. The Buddha knew what
was on their minds. He anticipated [their questions] and gave them a skillful
explanation.
30. “As I observe you now, you have exceptional notions in your mind.
You have abandoned the affairs that are the common lot [of human beings].
Yes, mindfulness of the Law is what you feel.
31. “If you now wish to receive learning and knowledge from me, do
not grieve for me, whether I am alive or dead!
32. “Impermanence is the nature of the conditioned. It is ﬁckle and
changeable. Neither ﬁrm nor beneﬁcial, it is not characterized by long-lasting
duration.
33. “The seer kings of old, the seer Vasiṣṭha and others, the wheel-turning
king Māndhātṛ, among many others,
34. “such former excellent ones were as powerful as the god Īśvara.
They have all long since gone to ruin. Not one presently exists.
35. “Suns and moons, Śakras, rulers of the gods—their numbers were
very great too, but all these have also turned to ruin. No one has existed for
a long time.
169

44c

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

45a

36. “The number of buddhas in the past worlds has been [as many as]
the sands on the banks of the Ganges. Their wisdom shone in the world but
they have all been extinguished like a lamp.
37. “The same will apply to the future extinction of the buddhas of future
worlds. Why would I now be any different? I [too] shall enter nirvana.
38. “Yonder there are others I have to save. Now I must go and proceed.
Vaiśālī has been pleasant. Do feel at ease!
39. “There is not any support in the world and one should not enjoy the
three worlds! Stop the suffering of grief and give rise to the thought of renunciation!
40. “Having decided on a long separation, I will travel north. I will
slowly travel the long road, just like the sun nears the mountains in the west.”
41. The Licchavis, moaning sadly, complied as [the Buddha] went on his
way. Looking up at heaven, they sighed with grief. “Alas! How astonishing!
42. “His appearance is like a mountain of real gold, fully adorned with
all the marks, but before long he will crumble. How unkind is impermanence!
43. “We have thirsted in vain for a long time in birth and death. The
Tathāgata is our mother of wisdom but suddenly abandons us now. Not having
any rescue, what of our suffering?
44. “Beings have been in darkness for a long time, but through his light
they may proceed in wisdom. Why does the sun of wisdom suddenly hide
its light?
45. “Ignorance is a swift current, tossing beings about. Why will the
bridge of the Law soon and so suddenly be destroyed?
46. “The ﬁne medicine of the unsurpassed knowledge of the compassionate great physician-king can cure the suffering of beings. Why does he
abruptly depart?
47. “The ﬁne celestial banner of compassion, adorned with wisdom and
covered with adamantine thoughts—the world would tirelessly observe it.
48. “But why will the banner of excellence, our sacriﬁcial ornament,
soon collapse? How little merit do beings have! They will continue to turn
in the stream of birth and destruction.
49. “The gate to deliverance has suddenly closed. We will suffer for a
long time, without any hope of escape. The Tathāgata is skillful at giving

170

Chapter XXIV

comfort but he has abandoned us to our feelings and has bade us farewell
for a long time.”
50. Controlling their thoughts, [the Licchavis] endured their longing.
They were like pale karṇikāra ﬂowers. Hesitantly and slowly, they went on
their way, dispirited. They were like those who had lost a relative and returned
when the burial was over, after a long farewell.

171

Chapter XXV

Parinirvāṇa

1. While Buddha was approaching his place of nirvana, Vaiśālī was empty,
as if the stars and the moon had lost their light in the darkness of the clouds
at night.
2. The land had been happy before, but now it suddenly languished, like
an orphaned daughter who has lost her kind father and is always lonely and
sad.
3. Like someone who is beautiful but has no learning, who is intelligent
but has little virtue, who is eloquent at heart but stammers in speech, who
has bright wisdom but lacks talent,
4. who has divine power but lacks digniﬁed demeanor, who is compassionate but false at heart, eminent but without any power, with digniﬁed
demeanor but without any Law,
5. the same applied to Vaiśālī. Once ﬂourishing, it was now in decline,
just like plants in an autumn ﬁeld. Lacking water, they wither away.
6. [The people] either stopped making cooking ﬁres, all smoke extinguished, or, needing nourishment, forgot to eat. They all abandoned their
public and private activities, and did not engage in the common lot [of human
beings].
7. Mindful of the Buddha, they were deeply moved by their love. Each
was silent, not saying a word. The Licchavi Siṃha was then forced to bear
his grief. He let his tears fall and made sounds of grief to show his affection.
8. “He has destroyed any wrong path and has shown the Right Law. He
has subdued the heretics. He will ﬁnally go away, never to return.
9. “The world will cease when he has left the ways of the world. Impermanence is a grave illness. When the World-honored One has entered great
tranquility, [the people] will be without any support and without salvation.
10. “The Worthy One, superior in expediency, will hide his light in the
ﬁnal place, and we will lose our strong determination, just like ﬁre without
ﬁrewood.
173

45b

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

45c

11. “When the World-honored One gives up his protection of the world,
beings are very pitiable. When he has lost his divine power as a human, the
whole world will all grieve for him.
12. “To escape the heat, one jumps into a cool pond; if one meets with
cold, one relies on ﬁre [for warmth]. When all will soon be desolate, what
then can beings resort to?
13. “With his thorough insight into the excellent Law, he is a master
craftsman in the world, but the world is losing its ruler. When a person loses
his path, he is destroyed.
14. “[The Buddha] has been sovereign over old age, illness, and death,
but when his path is lost, a wrong path will be taken. How could the world
have two [people] who are able to destroy the mechanism of great suffering!
15. “Extreme ﬁres may burn with ﬁerce heat, but the rain of a great cloud
will extinguish them. When the ﬁre of desire burns, who will be able to extinguish it?
16. “When the one who can be compared with what is most ﬁrm146 has
given up the heavy burden of the world, who with the power of wisdom could
then be its uninvited friend?
17. “Just as a prisoner facing punishment may become drunk with wine
but [will nonetheless be] executed, beings with misled consciousness are
born only to die. With a sharp saw, one cuts wood, and impermanence cleaves
the worldly.
18. “Delusion is deep water, and desire is a huge wave. Afﬂictions are
ﬂoating froth, and wrong views are a makara ﬁsh.147 Only with the boat of
wisdom one can cross over this great ocean.
19. “Illnesses are the blossoms of a tree, and old age is a delicate twig.
Death is the deep root of the tree, and the actions of existence are its shoots.
The sharp sword of wisdom can cut down the trees of the three existences.
20. “Ignorance is a rubbing-stick and desire is the ﬂame. The objects of
the ﬁve desires are fuel. One may extinguish [the ﬁre] with the water of
knowledge.
21. “Endowed with the excellent Law, [the Buddha] has destroyed delusion. Having seen the right road of tranquility, he has ended afﬂictions.
22. His compassion has converted beings. Friend or foe are no different
[to him]. His omniscience has thorough insight, but now all will be abandoned.

174

Chapter XXV

23. “A soft and pure voice, a right body, and delicate long arms. When
the greatest seer has an end, who could be immortal?
24. “One must understand that time changes quickly! One should diligently seek the Right Law, just as when, on a dangerous journey, one comes
across water, one should drink quickly and advance along the road!
25. “Impermanence is very adverse, bringing destruction all around,
whether to the noble or the low. When right contemplation exists in the mind,
one is constantly awake even while asleep.”
26. The Licchavi Siṃha was then constantly mindful of the Buddha’s
wisdom. Feeling revulsion for birth and death, he admired the lion among
humans.
27. He abandoned his worldly love and had profound respect for the
quality of renunciation. He subdued his ﬁckle mind and ﬁxed his thoughts
on the state of quietude.
28. He diligently practiced generosity and was free from pride. He found
happiness in solitary practice, resided in solitude, and reﬂected on the True Law.
29. The Omniscient One turned around and looked back, like a lion. He
saw Vaiśālī and pronounced a gāthā for his long-lasting farewell.
30. “This has been my last excursion to this Vaiśālī. Staying in the land
where the Mallas live, I will enter nirvana!”
31. Gradually and in due course, [the Buddha] traveled on and reached
Bhoganagara. He stayed in the śāla grove148 and instructed his bhikṣus:
32. “I will now enter nirvana in the middle of the night. You must rely
on the Law! That is your most excellent abode.
33. “If [a teaching] is not recorded in the sutras and does not comply
with the discipline, if it goes against the true meaning, then it should not be
accepted!
34. “What is not the Law and what is not the discipline, and furthermore
when [a teaching] is not what I have proclaimed,149 then it is the teaching of
darkness. You should quickly reject it!
35. “Hold fast to my clear expositions!150 They are not wrong. They are
my expositions, agreeing with the Law and with the teaching of the discipline.
36. “What is accepted as agreeing with my Law and discipline—that
may be believed! If someone says that my Law and discipline are wrong,
that must not be believed!

175

46a

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

46b

37. “When someone does not understand the subtle meaning and is mistaken about the wording, that person is a fool. He falsely proclaims what is
wrong.
38. “He does not distinguish true from false. He sees nothing and experiences darkness. Suppose, for instance, brass and gold are displayed
together—[in the same way] one deceives the world.
39. “A fool indulges in shallow knowledge. He does not understand the
true meaning. He accepts a similar law and assumes that the True Law has
been accepted.
40. “Therefore, carefully observe the True Law and discipline, just as a
goldsmith ascertains the genuine [metal] by heating and pounding it!
41. “Ignorance about the scriptural texts is not wisdom. What is not
ﬁtting is explained as ﬁtting, and what one should do is seen as not ﬁtting.
42. “Perform an equal acceptance when the meaning of a verse is practiced as it is expounded! If one does not skillfully grasp a sword, one will
instead hurt one’s hand.
43. “When the words are not ingenious the meaning is hard to understand,
just as when one searches for a house while walking at night. If the house is
remote, one does not know where it is.
44. “If one loses the meaning, one forgets the Law. If one forgets the
Law, thoughts rush on in disarray. That is why a wise person does not contradict the true meaning.”
45. Having expounded these instructions, [the Buddha] arrived in the
city of Pāpā, and the multitude of Mallas arranged for all kinds of offerings.
46. There was then an elder’s son, called Cunda. He invited the Buddha
to come to his house and served him his last meal.
47. When the meal was over, [the Buddha] expounded the Law. He then
went to Kuśinagara. [On the way] he crossed two rivers, the Kukustā River
and the Hiraṇyavatī River.
48. There was a śāla grove, a tranquil and secluded place. [The Buddha]
entered and bathed in the Hiraṇyavatī River, and his body resembled a mountain of real gold.
49. He instructed Ānanda, “Sweep clean the space between two trees
there and put up a charpoy. I will now enter nirvana in the middle of the
night.”

176

Chapter XXV

50. As Ānanda heard the Buddha’s instructions, his breathing became
difﬁcult and he felt sad at heart. He let his tears ﬂow and followed the instructions. After he had made the arrangements, he came back to inform [the
Buddha].
51. The Tathāgata went to the charpoy and lay down on his right side,
his head turned north. He used his hand as a pillow and rested one foot upon
the other, just like a lion king.
52. Once he lay down his last body, whose suffering had ended, he would
never rise. The group of his disciples surrounded him and cried out in grief,
“The eye of the world is extinguished!”
53. The wind stopped and the streams in the grove went quiet. Birds and
animals were silent and did not make a sound. The sap of the trees ﬂowed
like tears. Flowers and leaves fell down out of season.
54. Humans and gods who had not yet renounced desire were all very
fearful, just like those who are traveling through a vast marsh. The road is
dangerous and they have not yet reached a village. Afraid they will not make
it, their minds are distressed as they plod along.
55. When the Tathāgata had ﬁnally laid himself down, he said to Ānanda,
“Go and tell the Mallas! The moment of my nirvana has arrived. If they have
not seen me, they will always be regretful and feel great suffering.”
56. Ānanda accepted the Buddha’s instructions. Sadly weeping, he went
on his way, and told the Mallas about the World-honored One’s ﬁnal end.
57. When the Mallas heard this, they became utterly fearful. Men and
women left in a hurry, and in tears arrived where the Buddha was.
58. With torn clothes and disheveled hair, their sweating bodies coated
in dust, they went to that grove wailing, just like gods whose merit had ended.
They let their tears fall and made obeisance at the Buddha’s feet, pale with
grief.
59. The Tathāgata spoke in a comforting way, “Do not be mournful!
Now is a moment to rejoice. You should not feel distress!
60. “What has been planned for eons, not until now do I obtain it, a pure
state without end, saved from the objects of the [sense] faculties.
61. “Free from earth, water, ﬁre, and wind, I am in quietude and will
not be reborn or extinguished. I have forever done away with sorrow. Why
feel sorrow for me?

177

46c

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

47a

62. “In the past, on Gaja Mountain, I wanted to give up this body, but
because of my former causality I remained in the world until now.
63. “Holding on to this brittle body is like dwelling with a poisonous
snake. I will now enter great tranquility. All my painful causality has ended.
64. “I shall not experience a body again, and future suffering will be
appeased for a long time. Do not be afraid for me anymore!”
65. When the Mallas heard the Buddha explain that he would enter great
quietude, their thoughts were confused and their eyes became bleary, as if
gazing into a great darkness.
66. They held their palms together and said to the Buddha, “You, O
Buddha, are free from the suffering of birth and death. You will forever go
to the happiness of tranquility. We are really pleased.
67. “When, for instance, a house is on ﬁre and one’s loved ones escape
from it, even the gods rejoice. How much more would the people in the
world!
68. “But after your extinction, O Tathāgata, beings will have no one to
observe. Because we will forever be far from any salvation, we feel grief.
69. “Suppose, for instance, a group of traveling merchants is crossing a
remote wilderness with just one guide, and [the guide] suddenly dies halfway.
Since the group now has no one to rely on, how could they not feel grief!
70. “One may have realized some understanding in the present world,
but when one has observed the Omniscient One but has not yet gained his
excellent beneﬁt, one would be ridiculed by the whole world, just as when
a fool passes by a mountain full of precious things yet remains in poverty.”
71. Thus the Mallas lamented to the Buddha, just as an only child laments
to his kind father.
72. The Buddha showed them the highest meaning with skillfully enticing
words. He said to the multitude of Mallas, “It really is as you say.
73. “One needs rigor in one’s search for the path. Yet one does not obtain
it just by meeting me. If you practice according to what I have expounded,
you will be free from the net of all suffering.
74. “The practice of the path exists in the mind. It does not necessarily
come from meeting me. When, for instance, a sick person relies on a remedy
and takes a good medicine, all illness is naturally removed. He does not wait
to see a doctor.

178

Chapter XXV

75. “If one does not practice according to what I have expounded, one
meets me in vain, without any gain. Even if one is far away from me, practicing the Law, one is near me. If one dwells with me but does not follow
the Law, know that he is far away from me!
76. “Do not be negligent in controlling your mind! Strenuously develop
right action! When one is born in the world, one is for a long time oppressed
by all suffering. One is disturbed and not at ease, like a lamp in the wind.”
77. When the crowd of Mallas heard the Buddha’s compassionate instructions, they were inwardly moved and wiped away their tears. They forcefully
restrained themselves and returned [home].

179

Chapter XXVI

The Great Parinirvāṇa
1. There was then a brahman called Subhadra. He was completely endowed
with worthy qualities, and with pure morality he protected living beings.
2. In his youth he had received wrong views, and had gone forth to follow
a heretical path. He wanted to come and meet the World-honored One, and
said to Ānanda:
3. “I have heard about the Tathāgata’s path, that its meaning is very difﬁcult to fathom. With his unsurpassed insight in the world he is the highest
teacher to give training.
4. “He is about to enter parinirvāṇa now, and it will be even more difﬁcult
to meet him again. While it is difﬁcult to meet him, encountering those who
have met him is most difﬁcult, just like [grasping] the moon in a mirror.
5. “I now want to meet the unsurpassed skillful guide. In my search to cease
all suffering, he will let me cross over to the other shore of birth and death. The
Buddha’s sun is about to hide its light. Please, let me meet him for a while!”
6. Ānanda felt sad and thought that [Subhadra] was going to disparage
[the Buddha], or that he was pleased with the extinction of the World-honored
One. “I must not let him meet the Buddha!”
7. But the Buddha knew about [Subhadra’s] wish, and that he was ﬁt to
be a vessel for the Right Law, and said to Ānanda, “Allow the heretic to
approach! I will save him from human life. Do not make any difﬁculties!”
8. When Subhadra heard this, he felt great joy in his heart. His feeling
of happiness with the Law became more and more profound. Increasing his
reverence, he came before the Buddha.
9. At this occasion, courteously speaking with soft words, he made polite
inquiries. He held his palms together with a serene countenance and made
his request, “I would now like to ask you a question.
10. “In the world there are those who know a law, like myself and many
others. Yes, we have heard about what you, O Buddha, have obtained, a different and essential path to deliverance.
181

47b

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

47c

11. “Please, brieﬂy explain it to me. I am imbued only with the feeling
of longing and do not [wish to] debate, and I am without any thought of winning or losing!”
12. The Buddha brieﬂy explained the eightfold right path to the brahman.
Upon hearing it, [Subhadra] immediately accepted it with an open mind, as
if he had been lost and had found the right road.
13. He knew that what he had previously applied himself to was not the
ﬁnal path. He immediately obtained what he had never obtained. He gave
up the wrong path and turned his back on the darkness of delusion. He
reﬂected on what he had previously practiced.
14. Both anger and delusion nourish unwholesome actions. When desire
is equally practiced with anger and delusion, it can give rise to wholesome
actions. Learning, wisdom, and zeal are yet produced by desire for existence.151
15. When anger and delusion are stopped, then one is free from their
actions. When their actions have been done away with, one is said to be delivered from their actions. But by being delivered from their actions one is not
associated with the meaningful.
16. All the worldly is explained as having a speciﬁc nature. If desire for
existence, anger, and delusion have a speciﬁc nature, they should permanently
exist. How could one be delivered?
17. Yes, if anger and delusion are extinguished, desire for existence
returns one to birth. By comparison: As its speciﬁc nature, water is cold, but
it becomes hot [when heated over a] ﬁre. When the heat has diminished, [the
water again] turns cold, because its speciﬁc nature is permanent.
18. One always experiences the nature of desire for existence. Learning,
wisdom, and zeal do not increase it. They do not increase it and they do not
diminish it. How could one be delivered?
19. [The brahman] had previously thought that birth and death were
actually produced by nature, but now, contemplating that meaning, no one
could be delivered!
20. If a nature namely permanently remains, how could one have a ﬁnal
end? When, for instance, one lights a bright lamp, how could one make it
lose its light?
21. The Buddha’s path is really meaningful. Because of craving, one
produces the world. When craving is extinguished, one knows tranquility.
Because of its extinction, its result is nonexistent.
182

Chapter XXVI

22. He had once thought that the self was different from the body, unseen
and uncaused. Now he had heard the Buddha’s right teaching, that the world
is without any self.
23. All factors are produced by causes and conditions, because nothing
is sovereign. Because [they are] produced by causes and conditions, [factors]
are painful. The same applies to the extinction of causes and conditions.
24. Observing that the world is produced by causes and conditions, [the
brahman Subhadra] extinguished his view of annihilation. When, free from any
causality, the world is extinguished, one is free from the view of permanence.
25 [Subhadra] completely gave up his former views and had profound
insight in the Buddha’s Right Law. Having planted wholesome causes in his
previous lives, he immediately gained insight upon hearing the Law.
26. He had obtained ﬁne tranquility, the pure state without end. His mind
opened up and his faith was very extensive as he respectfully gazed at the
Tathāgata lying there.
27. “It is unbearable to watch the Tathāgata give up the world and enter
parinirvāṇa. Before the Buddha’s ﬁnal end I should be extinguished ﬁrst!”
28. [Subhadra] held his palms together and made obeisance to [the
Buddha’s] noble countenance, sitting in his proper place to one side. He
abandoned life and entered nirvana, just as rain extinguishes a small ﬁre.
29. The Buddha said to the bhikṣus, “My last disciple has entered nirvana
now. Worship him!”
30. As the ﬁrst watch passed, the moon was bright and the stars were
all clear [in the sky]. The lonely grove was quiet, without a sound. The Buddha
gave rise to thoughts of great compassion.
31. He bequeathed his instructions to his disciples, “After my parinirvāṇa
you must respect the prātimokṣa.152 It is your great preceptor, the bright lamp
in the vast darkness.
32. “As the greatest treasure of poor people, you should regard my
instructions! Follow them just as you would serve me, no different!
33. “Purify your actions of body and speech and abandon all efforts at
livelihood! Raising living beings in a ﬁeld or dwelling, accumulating riches
and collecting the ﬁve grains—keep away from all that, just as one avoids
a great ﬁery pit!

183

48a

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

48b

34. “Cutting plants and trees to open up new soil, treating and curing
any illness, consulting the calendar [to discern] one’s fate, casting horoscopes
for portents of one’s destiny, observing signs for any proﬁt or loss—all this
should not be done!
35. “Restrain oneself and eat at the proper time. Do not accept or cause
[heterodox] arts to be practiced. Do not concoct herbal potions. Keep away
from any crookedness.
36. “The provisions one depends on in compliance with the Law, one
should accept these in moderation! One may accept [provisions] but must
not amass them. This is a brief explanation of the precepts.
37. “[The prātimokṣa] is the basis of all precepts and the basis for deliverance. Relying on this Law, one can produce all right experiencing. All true
knowledge obtains ﬁnal certitude because of this.
38. “That is why you must keep [the prātimokṣa]! Do not let it be broken!
When pure morality is not broken, one has all good qualities. Without it, one
does not have any [good qualities], as they are established only by morality.
39. “If, dwelling in pure morality, one controls one’s faculties well, he
is like someone who tends his herd well and does not let [the animals] run
loose.
40. “If one does not control the horses of the [sense] faculties and if one
allows the six [sense] objects, one brings about calamities in the present
world and will fall into a woeful destination.
41. “If, for instance, one does not train a horse, it will cause one to fall
into a pit. Therefore, a wise one should not set his [sense] faculties loose!
42. “The [sense] faculties are very evil. They are one’s worst enemy.
Though beings may like their [sense] faculties, they are hurt by them yet.
43. “A sworn enemy, an extremely poisonous snake, a dangerous tiger,
or a ﬁerce ﬁre—a wise one does not fear the world’s great evils.
44. He fears only that a ﬁckle mind will lead him to a woeful destination,
as it is made happy by something small and sweet and does not observe the
deep precipice.
45. “A ﬁckle mind is like a maddened elephant that has lost his sharp
goad, like a monkey who has taken over the grove. A wise one should control
[his mind]!

184

Chapter XXVI

46. “If one sets the mind loose so that it is sovereign, one will never
obtain tranquility. Therefore one should control the mind and quickly go to
a state of tranquility!
47. “Know moderation in food. Regard it as a way of taking medicine.
Do not have any covetous or angry thoughts over food. Food stops hunger
and thirst, just as grease is [used] for a dilapidated cart.
48. “Just as a bee chooses ﬂowers and does not ruin their color or fragrance, a bhikṣu should go begging for alms. Do no harm to others’ faith!
49. “If [a donor] is generous with an open mind, one should assess what
he can bear [to give]. If one does not calculate the strength of the ox, [too]
heavy a load will hurt it.
50. “Develop right actions in due course at the three times: morning,
midday, and afternoon. During the two parts of the night, the ﬁrst and the
last watch, do not be attached to sleep either!
51. “Lie down [to rest] in the middle of the night with upright thoughts.
Remain in concentrated mindfulness until the ﬁrst sign of light. Do not sleep
too much, letting your physical life pass by in vain!
52. “As the ﬁre of time constantly consumes one’s body, why sleep long?
The enemies of the afﬂictions will harm you due to your idleness. If the mind
is numb from sleep, who will notice when death arrives?
53. “If a poisonous snake hides in your dwelling, a skillful incantation
can make it leave. But if a black venomous snake is in your mind, it is done
away with by the skillful incantation of clear perception.
54. “One who just sleeps a lot is a shameless person. Shame is an ornament. Shame is the goad that controls the elephant.
55. “Shame lets the mind be concentrated. Shamelessness ruins any
wholesome root. Those with shame are praised as worthy in the world. The
shameless are equal to birds and animals.
56. “Even if someone were to cleave your body joint by joint with a
sharp knife, you should not harbor resentment, nor should you speak evil
words. Evil thoughts and evil words hurt oneself. They do not harm another.
57. “When one restrains the body and practices austerities, nothing surpasses the excellence of forbearance. There must only be the practice of forbearance, the most ﬁrm strength, difﬁcult to vanquish! Therefore, do not
harbor resentment or say evil words to others!

185

48c

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

49a

58. “Anger destroys the Right Law, and it destroys beauty. It ruins one’s
good reputation. The ﬁre of anger burns one’s own mind. Anger is the enemy
of virtue. If you love virtue, do not harbor resentment!
59. “As a householder, to come to anger is not surprising, because of
the many troubles [of household life]. But if having gone forth one harbors
anger, that deviates from the right principle, as if a large ﬁre were lit in cold
water.
60. “If pride arises in your heart, pat yourself on the head with your hand!
You have taken the tonsure and wear a robe. You hold an almsbowl in your
hand, and you have decided on this life as your last birth. Why be proud?
61. “When an ordinary person is proud on the basis of his ﬁne family,
he may yet consider it an error. How much more so should someone who
has gone forth! Having proud thoughts in one’s earnest search for the path
of deliverance—this is absolutely not done!
62. “Crooked and straight are mutually opposed by nature. They are not
found together, just as frost and a blaze [do not occur together]. One who
has gone forth develops the straight path. Crookedness is not what he may
apply himself to! Falsehood is an unreal pretense. Yes, the Law does not
deceive.
63. “Seeking much means suffering, but little desire means happiness.
If one has little desire because of one’s happiness, all the more so when
searching for true deliverance!
64. “The stingy are afraid to seek for more, for fear of losing their wealth.
He who likes to be generous is afraid too, ashamed of his riches, of which
he may not provide enough [to others].
65. “Therefore, one should have little desire and be generous to others,
without any fear! From having little desire, one obtains the path of deliverance.
66. “If one seeks deliverance, one should develop satisfaction too! The
heart is always joyful when satisﬁed. Joy is nothing but the Law.
67. “Even if the provisions one depends upon are lowly, one is always
content and satisﬁed. Even if someone who is unable to feel satisﬁed obtains
the happiness of rebirth in heaven, the ﬁre of suffering permanently burns
his mind, because he is not satisﬁed.
68. “If [you are] wealthy but not satisﬁed, this too is poverty. When [you
are] satisﬁed even though poor, this is the highest wealth.

186

Chapter XXVI

69. “If one is not satisﬁed, the objects of the ﬁve desires become even
larger. One seeks even more and tirelessly hurries toward suffering for a long
time. In his effort he feels anxiety and, on the other hand, he is pitied by
those who are satisﬁed.
70. “If one does not often accept one’s retinue, one’s mind is always
tranquil. Because of tranquility and quietude, all humans and gods serve him.
That is why one should give up both of the two retinues of close and distant
loved ones.
71. “For instance, suppose many birds and monkeys live on a lone tree
in a vast marsh. The same applies to a large retinue one may care for. For a
long time one experiences much suffering. A large crowd means many entanglements, like an old elephant that is sunk in the mud.
72. “If one applies oneself with zeal, there is no beneﬁt one will not
obtain. One should therefore be strenuous night and day, not lazy!
73. “As the small streams in the valley continuously ﬂow, they hollow
out a rock. If one is not strenuous when trying to make a ﬁre with a stick,
one toils in vain and does not obtain it. Therefore, always be vigorous, like
someone in his prime making a ﬁre!
74. “A good friend may be ﬁne but he is inferior to right mindfulness.
If right mindfulness exists in one’s thoughts, no evil will enter them.
75. “That is why a practitioner should always be mindful of his body! If
he loses mindfulness of his body, all wholesome [things] may be forgotten.
76. “When, for instance, a brave leader wears armor, he can withstand
a strong enemy. With right mindfulness as one’s heavy armor, one can restrain
the thieves of the six [sense] objects.
77. “Right concentration regulates an insightful mind, and it contemplates
birth and extinction in the world. That is why a practitioner should practice
samādhi. In samādhi one is quiet, able to extinguish all suffering.
78 “When wisdom can shine brightly, one is far from any grasping. It
equally contemplates one’s inner considerations. By following [wisdom],
one advances toward the Right Law. The householder and the one who has
gone forth, both should follow this path!
79. “On the great ocean of birth, old age, and death, wisdom is a light
boat. In the great darkness of ignorance, wisdom is a bright lamp.

187

49b

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

80. “For the impure illnesses of the fetters, wisdom is the ﬁnest medicine.
In the thorny forest of afﬂictions, wisdom is a sharp axe.
81. “Being deluded, one loves the swift current. Wisdom is a bridge.
That is why one should diligently practice wisdom produced from learning,
from reﬂection, and from cultivation!
82. “If one accomplishes the three kinds of wisdom, his eye of wisdom
is open, even though he may be blind. When without wisdom one’s thoughts
are false, one is not someone who has gone forth.
83. “Therefore, know and leave any false factor, and reach subtle happiness, the quiet and tranquil state!
84. “Honor heedfulness! Negligence is a skillful enemy. If one is not
negligent, one will obtain rebirth in the place of Lord Śakra. If one is remiss
and negligent, one will fall among the asuras.
85. “I have completed the comforting and compassionate actions I had
to do. Be vigorous and skillfully develop your own actions!
86. “Increase your quiet thinking in a secluded place in a mountain
forest! Diligently exert yourselves, so that you will not feel remorse later!
87. “For instance, a ﬁne doctor in the world offers a prescription that is
ﬁtting for the illness. If one is ill but does not take [the medicine], this is not
the fault of the ﬁne doctor.
88. “I have expounded the truth and I have shown the level road. If one
hears [this teaching] but does not accept it, the one who has expounded it is
not to blame.
89. “If there is anything you do not understand about the meaning of
the four truths, you should all ask me now! Do not conceal your feelings
anymore!”
90. As the World-honored One taught in his merciful way, the whole
gathering remained silent. Then Aniruddha saw that the great multitude was
silent, free from any doubt. He held his palms together and said to the Buddha:
91. “That the moon is warm and the sunshine cold, the wind quiet and
the earth unstable by nature—such four kinds of delusion have not existed
at all in the world.
92. “The truths of suffering, of its cause, of its extinction, and of the
path are true, never contradicted. They are as you have expounded, Worldhonored One! The whole assembly is completely free from any doubt.

188

Chapter XXVI

93. “We are all saddened indeed by your nirvana, World-honored One.
We do not have the idea that your explanation, O World-honored One, does
not mean ﬁnal certitude.
94. “Yes, if someone has recently gone forth and has no profound understanding of the situation yet, as he has heard your courteous instructions now,
his doubts have all been done away with.
95. “Having crossed over the sea of birth and death, one is free from
desire and without any aspiration. Yet all feel sad longing now. ‘How soon
is the Buddha’s extinction!’ we sigh.”
96. The Buddha appeased Aniruddha’s several kinds of mournful words
further with his compassionate mind, and said:
97. “Yes, even if one would stay for an eon, one would ﬁnally turn to
separation. One may be united with a different person, but in principle one
will not permanently be together.
98. “Having beneﬁted myself and others, my remaining would be in
vain. What would I have to do? Those of the gods and humans who were to
be saved have all obtained deliverance.
99. “You, my disciples, spread and maintain the Right Law! Know that
existence will certainly be ruined! Do not feel grief anymore!
100. “Diligently apply yourself to arrive at the place without separation!
I have lit the lamp of knowledge. It is shining and removes the darkness in
the world.
101. “When you know that the world is not secure, you should rejoice,
just as when a friend who has met with a serious illness is cured and freed
from his suffering!
102. “I have given up my vessel of suffering, going against the current
of the sea of birth and death. I have forever left all suffering. You should
rejoice about this!
103. “Guard yourselves well! Do not be negligent! All that exists has
turned to extinction. I am now entering nirvana. From now on my words will
end. This then is my ﬁnal teaching.”
104. [The Buddha] entered the samādhi of the ﬁrst trance153 and the nine
concentrations154 in due order. He followed the concentrations in reverse
order, and again entered the ﬁrst trance.

189

49c

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

50a

105. He again rose from the ﬁrst trance and he entered the fourth trance.
As he left concentration and his thoughts had nowhere to resort to, [the
Buddha] immediately entered nirvana.
106. Because of Buddha’s nirvana the great earth quaked all around.
From the sky ﬁrebrands rained all around. The blaze was without any fuel.
107. Furthermore, [ﬁre] rose from the earth and the eight directions were
all ablaze. Even the celestial palaces were ablaze in the same way.
108. Thunder moved heaven and earth. The sound of the thunder shook
the mountains and rivers, like the sounds of battle between gods and asuras.
109. A violent gale arose in all four directions. Mountains crumbled and
ashes and dust rained down. The sun and moon lost their brightness. All clear
streams boiled. The śāla grove withered and the blossoms and leaves fell
down out of season.
110. Flying dragons ascended in the black clouds. Thier ﬁve heads hung
down and their tears ﬂowed. The four kings155 and their retinues generated
worship in their sadness.
111. The gods of the pure abodes156 descended and waited upon [the
Buddha] in the sky. As they observed the development of impermanence,
they were neither sorrowful nor glad. They sighed that the world was separated
from its celestial teacher. “How quick is his destruction!”
112. The celestial spirits of the eight classes157 thronged in the sky. Scattering ﬂowers to bring worship, they felt anxious and were not joyful at heart.
Only King Māra was glad. He played music to amuse himself.
113. Jambudvīpa had lost its splendor, as if a mountain had collapsed
and its peak had crumbled, as if the white tusks of a great elephant had
snapped, and as if both horns of an ox king were broken.
114. In the sky there was no sun or moon, and the lotuses met with severe
frost. The world was downcast like this by the Tathāgata’s parinirvāṇa.

190

Chapter XXVII

The Eulogy of Nirvana
1. There was then a celestial son who had ascended to his palace with a thousand white geese. High in the sky he observed the Buddha’s parinirvāṇa,
and for the multitude of gods all around he widely proclaimed gāthās about
impermanence:
2. “All is by nature impermanent. It is quickly born and quickly extinguished. When born, it is accompanied by suffering. Only tranquility means
happiness.
3. “While the fuel of actions is amassed, the ﬁre of [the Buddha’s] wisdom
has been ablaze. When the smoke of his fame rises to the heavens, a timely
rain falls and brings extinction, just as when the ﬁre of the eon arises it is
extinguished by a ﬂood.”
4. There was also a god, a brahman seer, a seer of the highest meaning,
as it were, who dwelled in the exquisite happiness of the gods but who was
not attached to his celestial reward. He praised the Tathāgata’s tranquility.
With his mind concentrated, he spoke:
5. “When I observe the factors of the three worlds, throughout there is
none that is not destroyed. With his thorough insight into the highest meaning
[the Buddha] is unequaled in the world. His wisdom is the highest of any
understanding. A savior of the world!
6. “All are destroyed by impermanence. Who can remain long? Alas!
Beings in the whole world fall into wrong paths.”
7. Aniruddha would not be ruddha (kept back) in the world then. After
his extinction, he would not be ruddha (kept back). His birth and death would
be niruddha (stopped).
8. He praised the Tathāgata’s tranquility: “Beings are all blind. The mass
of formations is impermanent, just like light clouds ﬂoating. They quickly
arise and are quickly extinguished. A wise one does not protect them.
9. “The adamantine bolt of impermanence has destroyed the muni, the
seer king. How base is the world’s ﬁckleness! It will be destroyed and is not
191

50b

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

50c

ﬁrm. The ﬁerce lion of impermanence has harmed the dragon-elephant, the
great seer.
10. “When even the adamantine banner of the Tathāgata is destroyed by
impermanence, how much more so would one who has not renounced desire
be fearful!
11. “Six seeds and one shoot, rained on by all waters. Deep roots of four
stretches.158 Two boughs159 and ﬁve kinds of fruits.
12. “Consisting of three divisions160 but one and the same trunk. The
tree of afﬂictions has been uprooted by the muni, the greatest elephant, but
[even] he was not spared from impermanence.
13. “He was like the crested bird161 that enjoys the water and swallows
poisonous snakes. Suddenly meeting a great drought, he lost the water and
died.
14. “A swift horse is valiant in battle, but when the battle is over it returns,
well proven. A ﬁerce ﬁre burns because of ﬁrewood, but when the fuel is all
used up, [the ﬁre] is extinguished by itself. The same applies to the Tathāgata.
When his task was over, he turned to nirvana.
15. “When, for instance, bright moonlight removes the darkness all
around for the world and when all beings receive its light, it is concealed
again by Sumeru.
16. “The same applies to the Tathāgata. The light of his wisdom has
been shining in the darkness. It removed the darkness for beings, but it is
concealed by the mountain of nirvana.
17. “The excellent light of his fame has shined all over the world. It has
dispelled all darkness, unstopped like a swift current.
18. “While he skillfully drives his seven swift horses, his army and his
attendants travel on. But the celestial son who is the sun in all its brightness
still enters Yanzi Mountain.162
“When the sun and moon are blocked ﬁve times, beings lose their light.
19. “After offerings to ﬁre and sacriﬁces to the gods [are made] there
remains only burning black smoke. After the Tathāgata hid his brightness,
the world likewise lost its splendor.
20. “He has stopped all lust or expectations, in response to the expectations of beings all around. When the expectations of beings are fulﬁlled,
after the completion of his task, he stopped any expectation.

192

Chapter XXVII

21. “He abandoned his personal bonds of afﬂiction and obtained the
path of truth. He left his mass of troubles and entered the place of quietude.
22. “Through his divine power he ascended in the sky and wanders. His
vessel of suffering163 has therefore been abandoned. The light of his knowledge
has dispelled the heavy darkness of delusion.
23. “The dust of afﬂiction was washed away by the water of his knowledge, so that he was puriﬁed. He will not return time and again. He has forever
gone to the place of quietude.
24. “He has extinguished all birth and death and is respected by all. He
has made all happy with the Law and has imbued all with his wisdom.
25. “He has completely comforted all and all his qualities have widely
spread. His fame shines again and again all over for all up to this day.
26. “For those who emulated his qualities he had merciful thoughts. He
was not made happy by the four beneﬁts164 and was not grieved by the four
losses.165
27. “He controlled his feelings well and all his faculties were thoroughly
clear. He impartially observed with a pure mind and was not attached to the
six objects.
28. “What he has obtained is wonderful. He has obtained what others
have not obtained. While they thirsted in vain, he has fully satisﬁed them
with the waters essential for salvation.
29. “He donated what others had not donated, and did not expect any
recompense. He has quieted his body with ﬁne marks, and completely knows
all thoughts.
30. “He was moved neither by pleasant nor foul, and his strength has
overcome all enemies. The ﬁne medicine for any illness is yet destroyed by
impermanence.
31. “All kinds of beings have a different end when they are pleased with
the Law, but he has widely responded to their aspirations. He has completely
fulﬁlled their wishes.
32. “Once the great generous giver of noble wisdom has gone, he will
not return, just as a ﬁerce ﬁre in the world will burn no more when the fuel
is consumed.
33. “Not tainted by the eight factors, he subdued the group of ﬁve that
is hard to subdue.166 With the three he has seen the three,167 and free from

193

51a

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

51b

the three he has accomplished the three.168 Retaining the one, he has obtained
the one.169 Having surpassed the seven,170 he will sleep for a long time.171
34. “He has completely achieved the path of tranquility, honored by the
noble. He has ended the impediments of afﬂiction and saved those who have
respectfully served it. Those who have hungered in vain and who have been
weary with thirst, he let them drink the nectar of immortality.
35. “Wearing the heavy armor of forbearance, he has subdued any anger.
With the subtle meaningfulness of his excellent Law, he has caused rejoicing
in the minds of his multitude.
36. “In those who developed goodness in the world, he planted the seed
of nobility. Those who developed what is right or what is not right, he equally
received them and did not abandon them.
37. “He turned the wheel of the unsurpassed Law and the world all
around accepted it with joy. If they had previously planted a cause to ﬁnd
happiness in the Law, they were all delivered.
38. “Wandering among the people, he saved all those who had not yet
been saved. Those who had not yet seen the truth were all made to see the
truth.
39. “To those who practiced a heretical path, he gave them his profound
Law. He expounded that birth and death are impermanent, without any ruler172
and without happiness in any existence.
40. “He erected the great banner of his fame and destroyed the armies
of Māra. He had no delight or grief about advance or retreat and, making
light of life, he praised tranquility.
41. “He caused those who were not yet saved to be saved. He caused
those who were not yet freed to be freed. He caused those who were not yet
quiet to become quiet. He caused those who were not yet awakened to awaken.
The muni received beings with his path of quietude.
42. “While beings disregard the noble path and indulge in wrong actions,
as if at the end of a great eon, the one who knows the Law is in the long sleep.
43. “While dense clouds roll and crash and bring destruction to the forest,
they let the rain of immortality fall down. A young elephant may destroy a
thorny forest, but when his consciousness is trained he can beneﬁt others.
The [feeling of sorrow] when the clouds have parted and when the elephant
has grown old—all this is unbearable.

194

Chapter XXVII

44. “The destruction of one view can accomplish another view, bringing
salvation by saving the world. Having destroyed wrong argumentation, he
obtained the path of sovereignty. He has now entered the great tranquility
and the world is without salvation.
45. “When the forces of the great army of King Māra shook heaven and
earth, [Māra] wanted to harm the worthy muni, but he could not make [the
Buddha] move. Why is he unexpectedly at once destroyed by the māra of
impermanence?
46. “Gods and humans are gathered in great numbers all around, they
ﬁll the sky. Afraid of birth and death without end, they feel great fear in their
hearts.
47. “Whether far or near in the world, his celestial eye clearly sees all.
He truly understands the retribution of actions, as if observing an image in
a mirror.173
48. “His celestial ear excels in intelligence. There is no far-distant thing
it does not hear. Ascending in the sky, he instructs the gods, and as he walks
he converts the regions of humans.
49. “He may divide himself and unite his parts. When he crosses over
water, he is not immersed. He remembers his past lives, not forgetting any
part of an entire eon.
50. “When the [sense] faculties roam their objective ﬁelds, they each
have different memories, but with his supernatural knowledge that knows
the thoughts of others, [the Buddha] is omniscient. With the pure ﬁne knowledge of his supernatural power he impartially observes all.
51. “He has completely ended all impurities, and completed all his tasks.
His knowledge has abandoned his remaining elements of existence. Having
appeased his knowledge, he is in the long sleep.
52. “The hard minds of beings become soft upon seeing him. When
beings with dull faculties meet him, their intelligence becomes sharp. As
countless evildoers pass him by, they each gain the road to insight upon meeting him.
53. “Suddenly and unexpectedly, he is in the long sleep. Who will further
show these qualities? The world is without salvation. Hope has ended and
life’s breath has stopped. Who will sprinkle cool water over it, so that it will
breathe again?

195

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

51c

54. “His own task that he had to do is completed. His great compassion
has stopped for a long time. Who will rend the net of the world’s foolishness?
55. “Facing the swift current of birth and death, who will explain it and
make it turn back? Who will expound the path of quietude for the deluded
minds of beings?
56. “Who will show the place of tranquility and who will show the true
meaningfulness? While beings experience great suffering, who will bring
salvation as a kind father?
57. “Even if, for instance, one may have recited much, all is forgotten.
When a horse changes its territory, it loses its majesty. When the ruler dies,
he loses his country. The same applies to a world without the Buddha.
58. “The learned are without eloquence. Being a doctor, one is without
wisdom. Human kings have lost their bright appearance. When the Buddha
is extinguished, the common lose their splendor.
59. “When a ﬁne chariot loses its skillful charioteer and when the boat
one is on loses its boatmaster, when the three armies174 lose their brave general,
and when merchants lose their guide,
60. “when the sick lose their good physician, and when a noble king
loses his seven precious things, when the stars lose the bright moon, and
when one loves a long life but loses his life, when the Buddha is extinguished
the world likewise loses its great teacher.”
61. In this way the arhat,175 who had completed all he had to do and
whose impurities had all ended, spoke to show his gratitude, conscious of
the [Buddha’s] kindness and bound by sad longing. He praised [the Buddha’s]
qualities and related the suffering of the world.
62. Those who had not yet renounced desire were overcome by sorrowful
tears. Those whose impurities had ended just sighed at the suffering of birth
and extinction.
63. Then, when the multitude of the Mallas heard that the Buddha was
in nirvana, they mourned with confused cries and wept sadly, just like a ﬂock
of snow geese when encountering a hawk.
64. They all came to the twin [śāla] trees and saw that the Tathāgata was
in the long sleep, and it did not appear that he would wake up again. They
beat their breasts and cried out to heaven, just as all the cows cry out in confusion when a lion has seized a calf.

196

Chapter XXVII

65. Among them was one Malla whose mind had found happiness in the
Right Law. He truly observed that the noble righteous king had entered the
great tranquility.
66. He said, “Beings were asleep when the Buddha opened up their
minds, so that they woke up. He has entered the great tranquility now. He
ﬁnally is in the long sleep. He erected the banner of the Law for all, but now
it has suddenly collapsed.
67. “The sun of the Tathāgata’s wisdom, his great awakening, has shined
brightly. His zeal has been a sweltering heat, and his wisdom has dazzled
with a thousand rays. He has dispelled all darkness. Why [will there be] a
long darkness again?
68. “His unique wisdom has been shining in the three worlds for the
eyes of beings all around. But now they are suddenly blind. No one in the
whole world knows the way.
69. “As the great river of birth and death ﬂows, greed, anger, and delusion
are giant waves. The bridge of the Law has suddenly collapsed and beings
will drown for a long time.”
70. Some in that crowd of Mallas wept sadly and wailed bitterly. Some
felt moved in secret, without making a sound. Some threw themselves down
to the ground. Some meditated in silence and some moaned deeply with disappointment.
71. They prepared a precious bier with gold and silver, fully adorned
with fragrant ﬂowers, and placed the Tathāgata’s body on it. A precious
curtain covered it over.
72. They prepared hanging streamers and a ﬂower parasol, and [offered]
all kinds of music. The men and women of the Mallas led the way and brought
offerings.
73. The gods scattered fragrant ﬂowers and in the sky there was the
celestial music of drums. Humans and gods sighed sadly in unison. Their
cries combined as they shared a common grief.
74. They entered the city and after [the Buddha’s body was] worshiped
by young and old, men and women, [the funeral party] left through the
Dragon-Elephant Gate and crossed the Hiraṇyavatī River.
75. They arrived at the place of the caitya176 for the extinction of the
buddhas of the past. They accumulated oxhead sandalwood177 and famous
aromatic wood.
197

52a

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

52b

76. They placed the Buddha’s body on [the bier] and poured many fragrant oils over it. Then they tried to light the ﬁre underneath. Three times
they tried to set it aﬁre but it did not light up.
77. At that time, the great Kāśyapa had been staying in the city of
Rājagṛha, but when he knew that the Buddha was about to go to his nirvana,
he came along with his retinue.
78. With a pure heart [Kāśyapa] made a ﬁne wish, wishing to see the
body of the World-honored One. Because of that sincere wish, the ﬁre was
extinguished and [the bier] did not catch ﬁre.
79. When Kāśyapa and his retinue had arrived, they sighed sadly as they
all gazed at his appearance. Only after they had saluted him at his feet did
the ﬁre light up.
80. Inwardly [the Buddha] had stopped the ﬁre of afﬂiction, and an external ﬁre could not burn him. Even though it burned his external skin and ﬂesh,
his adamantine actual bones were preserved.
81. After the fragrant oil was all burned up, they kept the bones in golden
pitchers. Just as the realm of the real was not destroyed, in the same way his
bones were not destroyed.
82. [The Mallas] chanted, “As the result of his adamantine wisdom he
was as difﬁcult to move as Sumeru. The very powerful Garuḍa could not
move him, but in the precious pitchers he has shifted with the world.
83. “Wondrous is the power of the world! [The Buddha] could turn [the
wheel of] the Law of tranquility, and the fame of his qualities has spread
widely, completely ﬁlling the ten directions. Complying with the world, he
is in the long-lasting tranquility. Just the remaining bones are preserved.
84. “His great light has dazzled the world and shined on all beings, but
suddenly he hid his brightness and left his relics in pitchers.
85. “His adamantine sharp wisdom destroyed the painful mountain of
afﬂiction. All suffering was assembled in his person, but his adamantine
determination put it at ease.
86. “For beings who experience great suffering, he removed it all. Such
an adamantine person is now consumed by ﬁre.”
87. The multitude of Mallas was valiant, peerless in the world. They
repressed the suffering that is the enemy, and could escape from suffering

198

Chapter XXVII

by taking refuge. When their loved ones met with hardship, their determination
was strong and they could free them from sorrow.
88. Now they had seen the Tathāgata’s extinction and all felt grief in
their hearts. They were ablebodied and their vigor was strong, but their pride
was idle as they walked like gods. Grief heavy on their minds, they entered
the city as if it were a vast marsh.
89. Carrying the relics178 they entered the city. In the alleys and streets
everywhere people brought offerings. They placed them high on a pavilion
and the humans and gods all made offerings.

199

Chapter XXVIII

The Division of the Relics
1. The crowd of Mallas made offerings to the relics. They brought unsurpassed
worship with exquisite fragrant ﬂowers.
2. Then the kings of seven countries179 heard that the Buddha was extinguished. They sent messengers to the Mallas requesting the Buddha’s relics.
3. The multitude of Mallas revered the Tathāgata’s body but, completely
relying on valiance, they had proud thoughts. They would rather give up their
own lives than give up the Buddha’s relics.
4. The messengers all returned empty-handed and the seven kings became
very angry. They raised armies and like clouds and rain they came to Kuśinagara.
5. The people who were outside the city all returned in fear. They notiﬁed
the multitude of Mallas that the armies and horses of the [other] countries
were coming, that their chariots with elephants and horses and their multitudes
on foot had surrounded Kuśinagara.
6. The groves outside the city, the springs and ponds, the ﬂowers, fruit,
and trees, were all trampled by the armies. The splendid observation towers
were all smashed.
7. When the Mallas climbed the observation towers on the city wall,
[they saw that] their property was all destroyed. They prepared their weapons
for battle in order to aim them at the enemy outside.
8. Bows and crossbows, carriages for catapults, and ﬂying torches—all
came forth. The seven kings surrounded the city and each of their armies
were [composed of] elite troops.
9. Their ceremonial plumes were very bright, just like the light of the seven
luminaries.180 Their bells and drums were like thunder and their ferocity formed
a profuse cloud. The Mallas were very rash. They opened the gates and ordered
[their warriors] to confront them.
10. The elderly men and women who believed wholeheartedly in the
Buddha’s Law were startled and made a sincere vow: “May they not cause
201

52c

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

53a

harm when subduing the others!” They lovingly admonished them to not
wish to do battle.
11. But the valiant men were wearing their heavy armor. They wielded
their battle-axes and brandished their long swords. As bells and drums
sounded in confusion, they grasped their weapons, though they had not yet
crossed them in battle.
12. There was a brahman called Droṇa. He was learned and possessed
superior cleverness. His modesty was honored by all. He was kind at heart
and found happiness in the Right Law. He said to the kings:
13. “Observe the state of these walls! Even one man is enough to withstand you. How much less could you subdue them with their singleminded
vigor!
14. “Yes, if you destroy them, what meritorious fame would there be?
After you have crossed your sharp weapons, the conditions would not be
good for either of you.
15. “If you harm others because of this, both will be hurt. In battle there
is much volatility, and the conditions are difﬁcult to predict.
16. “The strong may overcome the weak or the weak may overcome the
strong. When a man in his vigor makes light of a poisonous snake, how could
he not hurt himself?
17. “Some men are gentle by nature, praised by women and children,
but when facing the enemy they become warriors, as if oil had been poured
onto a ﬁre.
18. “Do not make light of a weak enemy in battle, thinking he is ﬁt for
nothing! His physical strength may not be sufﬁcient to rely on, but the force
of his strategy may be stronger.
19. “Once there was an excellent king, called Karandhama. Sitting
upright, he gave rise to friendly thoughts, yet he could subdue his enemies.
20. “Even though he ruled over the four worlds and his fame and riches
were abundant, eventually all was destroyed, just as an ox turns back when
he has had enough to drink.
21. “You should apply yourselves to your duty, to righteousness, and to
harmony! A victory in war increases resentment, but after a victory of harmony
there is no distress.
22. “Your present bloodthirsty hostility, this is absolutely not possible!

202

Chapter XXVIII

As you wish to bring worship to the Buddha, you should follow the Buddha’s
forbearance!”
23. Thus the brahman decidedly expressed his sincerity. As his way was
proper and his meaning was in agreement with what is reasonable, he had
spoken out without fear.
24. The kings then said to the brahman, “You have now skillfully responded
to the occasion. You are clever and [what you say] makes much sense.
25. “Your friendly and utterly honest words comply with the Law and
rely on a strong principle. Do listen to our explanation of our duty as a ruler!
26. “One may feel contempt for a clash of strong forces competing due
to the ﬁve desires, or one must not hurry off to ﬁght seeking some diversion.
We are ﬁghting for the Law now. What is astonishing about that?
27. “When one is proud and disregards righteousness, people in the
world still humbly comply. All the more so in the case of the Buddha, who
is free from pride and converts others to humility! But we cannot bring him
worship if we destroy ourselves.
28. “In the past the rulers of the great earth, the Vṛṣṇis and the Andhakas,
fought over a beautiful maiden and destroyed each other.
29. “How much more should we now bring worship to our teacher, who
is in quietude, free from desire! Holding oneself dear and valuing life, do
not strive with force!
30. “The former kings, the Kauravas, fought with the Pāṇḍavas, and in
the process they destroyed each other, all due to their greed. How much more
do we further wish for life for the sake of our teacher, who is without greed!
31. “The son of a seer, Rāma, was angry at the thousand-armed king.
He destroyed the land and killed its people, just because he was angry. How
much more should we value life for the sake of our teacher who is without
anger!
32. “Rāma killed the demons for the sake of Sītā. How much less should
we destroy life for the sake of our teacher who is received by the gods!
33. “The two demons, Alāyudha and Baka, were steadfast enemies. Due
only to their foolishness, they greatly harmed beings. How much more should
we further value life for the sake of the wise teacher!
34. “Among many others, such ones senselessly ruined themselves. How
much more should the teacher of gods and humans now be revered by the

203

53b

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

53c

world all around! Should we not diligently strive to bring worship, considering
ourselves and valuing life?
35. “If you want to stop the ﬁghting, enter the city for us and urge them
to open up [their minds], so that our wish is fulﬁlled!
36. “You have appeased our minds for a while because of your right
words, just as a venomous snake is stopped for a while by the power of an
incantation!”
37. The brahman then accepted the kings’ instructions. He entered the
city and went to the Mallas. He made polite inquiries and expressed his sincerity to them.
38. “The kings among people outside all want to destroy this city. They
have their sharp weapons in hand and are wearing their heavy armor. Their elite
troops dazzle in the sunlight and they will burst forth with the ferocity of a lion.
39. “But because of the Law they are still afraid of [committing] wrong
behavior. That is why they have sent me here. Their purpose is to inform you
of something.
40. “‘[We do not wish to take] your land and neither do we seek cash
possessions. Nor [do we come] out of pride and neither do we feel resentment
in our hearts.
41. “‘We have come here because we respect the great seer. Since you
know our intention, why take pains to oppose us?
42. “‘As both parties are the same as to whom they respect, we are brothers in the Law. Let us with all our hearts bring worship together to the
bequeathed spirit of the World-honored One!
43. “‘Stinginess concerning money is not the greatest fault. The fault of
parsimony concerning the Law is the worst, despised by all in the world!
44. “‘Those who have decided not to be open should develop a way of
hospitality! But if you do not have the ways of a kṣatriya, close the gates
and guard yourselves!’
45. “They are all like this in expressing the way of their destiny. I have
my personal feelings, but I have expressed their sincerity.
46. “Both parties must not oppose one another! All should reasonably
be united! When the World-honored One was in the world, he always taught
forbearance. If one does not comply with his noble teaching, why would one
use the term ‘worship’?

204

Chapter XXVIII

47. “People in the world argue about the ﬁve desires, about riches and
lands and dwellings. If one acts according to the Right Law, one should
follow its noble principle. When one tries to act according to the Law but
feels enmity, this contradicts reason.
48. “The Buddha is quiet and compassionate, and he always wishes to
put all at ease. Yet by [wishing to] worship the One with Great Compassion
you may bring great harm. You should equally divide his relics and let them
be worshiped everywhere!
49. “By complying with the Law, your fame will spread. When righteousness pervades your principles, it will be proclaimed! If others behave
wrongly, you should bring harmony to them with the Law! That then is happiness with the Law, so that the Law may abide for a long time.
50. “The Buddha has said that of all gifts the gift of the Law is most
excellent. People perform the giving of riches, but it is difﬁcult to perform
the gift of the Law.”
51. When the Mallas heard these words, they were ashamed and looked
at each other. They responded to the brahman, “We are deeply moved by
your purpose in coming.
52. “Your words, which show friendliness and which comply with the
Law, are spoken in a reﬁned and correct way, in agreement with reason. Beﬁtting a brahman, [your words] agree with your qualities.
53. “You have skillfully brought harmony to the contentions of both parties and have shown us the essential path, just as when one controls a horse
which has lost its way and returns to the correct way.
54. “We should adopt this as reasonable and follow your explanation!
If we do not accept your sincere words, we would certainly feel regret later!”
55. They immediately opened the [container of] the Buddha’s relics and
divided them equally into eight parts. They themselves brought worship to
one part and the seven other parts were handed over to the brahman.
56. When the seven kings obtained the relics, they rejoiced and accepted
them, [raising them] to their heads [as a sign of respect]. They took [the
relics] and returned to their own countries. There they erected stupas and
brought worship.
57. The brahman asked the Mallas for the container of their relics as his
share. He further asked the seven kings about the division of the eighth share.

205

54a

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

54b

He took it181 back and enshrined it in a caitya, calling it the Shrine of the
Golden Pitcher.182
58. The people of Kuśinagara collected the remaining ashes and erected
a caitya, called the Ashes Shrine.183
59. The eight stupas erected by the eight kings, the Golden Pitcher, and the
Ashes [Shrine]—in this way ten stupas were initially erected in Jambudvīpa.
60. The men and women of the whole country all held up a precious
ﬂowered parasol and brought worship to their stupas, decorating them like
the golden mountain.184 Night and day they brought lasting praise with all
kinds of music.
61. At that time, ﬁve hundred arhats had forever lost the protection of
their great teacher. They were afraid, having no one on whom to rely, and
returned to Mount Gṛdhrakūṭa. They gathered at the cliff [dwelling] of Lord
Śakra185 and assembled the treasury of scriptural texts.
62. All together they promoted the elder Ānanda. “From the ﬁrst to the
last expositions of the Tathāgata, great and small, you have heard them all!
Vaideha muni, proclaim them for the great assembly!”
63. In the great assembly Ānanda ascended the lion throne. Just as the
Buddha had expounded his expositions, he declared, “Thus have I heard.”
64. All in the entire council let their tears ﬂow. They were moved by the
sound [of this phrase], “I have heard.” It was written down as expounded,
as to the doctrine, as to the time, as to the place, and as to the persons [present
at the time of the teaching]. Finally they completed the treasury of the scriptural texts.
65. Through diligent application and study they all obtained nirvana.
The same applies to the nirvana one now obtains or will obtain.
66. When King Aśoka (“Without Sorrow”) appeared in the world, as an
imposing person he could well cause sorrow. As a gentle person he removed
sorrow, just like a blossoming aśoka tree.
67. Ruling over Jambudvīpa, his mind was steadfastly without any worry
and he deeply believed in the Right Law. That is why he was named King
Aśoka.
68. Progeny of the Mauryas, he was born endowed with the correct
nature. He saved the world all around and erected shrines. His former name
was Caṇḍāśoka but his present name is Dharmāśoka.186

206

Chapter XXVIII

69. He opened the stupas of the seven kings to collect the relics. He
divided them and erected eighty-four thousand stupas in a day.
70. Only the eighth stupa, situated in Rāmagrāma, was guarded by
divine dragons. The king could not take those [relics].
71. Even though he did not obtain its relics, he knew that the Buddha’s
bequeathed spirit was there, worshiped by divine dragons, and his serene
faith increased.
72. While the king ruled over the land, he obtained the ﬁrst noble
fruition.187 He let all in the world everywhere bring worship to the Tathāgata’s
stupas. In the past, in the future, and in the present, all may obtain deliverance.
73. Those who respectfully brought worship to the Tathāgata when he
was in the present world, when he was in nirvana, and to his relics—their
merits are equal and without any difference.
74. When a wise one profoundly observes the Tathāgata’s qualities with
a supreme mind, when he cherishes his path and brings worship, his merits
will be excellent too.
75. When the Buddha had obtained his worthy excellent Law, he was
worthy of receiving everyone’s worship. After he had reached the deathless
place, his believers were at ease too. That is why all gods and humans should
always bring worship.
76. The highest and most compassionate one has thorough insight into
the highest meaning, and saves all beings. Who would not be moved by hearing about him?
77. The suffering of birth, old age, illness, and death—no suffering in
the world surpasses these. The suffering of death is the greatest suffering,
feared by gods.
78. When he is forever free from the two kinds of suffering,188 why not
bring him worship? The happiness of not having to experience a later experience [of existence] is unsurpassed among any worldly happiness.
79. The endless round of birth [and rebirth] is the greatest suffering.
This suffering is unequaled in the world. The Buddha is free from the suffering
of rebirth and neither will he experience the happiness of a later existence.
He has extensively shown this to the world. Why not bring him worship?

207

54c

Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts

80. I have praised the most worthy of the munis and his acts throughout
[this text]. I did not manifest my own understanding, nor did I seek fame. I
have followed the explanations of the Buddha’s scriptural texts in order to
rescue the world.

208

Notes
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

8
9

10

11

12
13
14
15
16
17

The translator, who produced the Chinese text, is actually Baoyun. See Translator’s
Introduction.
The seven stars of the constellation Ursa Major, the “Big Dipper.”

The highest ﬁve heavens in the fourth trance (dhyāna) are the pure abodes, śuddhāvāsa.
The term used here for spiritual beings is bhūtas.

The Rāja-śāstras, the ﬁrst treatises on political science.

Maheśvara is Śiva. He had a six-faced son, Kārttikeya, the god of war, also known
as Skanda.

The fourfold attitudes of the noble are contentment with clothing, with food, and with
a monk’s bedding and seating, and also devotion to the way of deliverance by means
of appropriate behavior.
The fourfold pure conduct is practicing kindness (maitrī), compassion (karuṇā), sympathetic joy (muditā), and equanimity (upekṣā). Also called the four immeasurables.
I.e., gold.

The explanations of the phrases in this passage vary: “The one” is himself; “the seven”
are the seven constituents of royal authority. “Free from the seven”: the seven vices
of a king; “the ﬁve” are skillful diplomatic means. “Having obtained the three”: duty,
riches, and desire, i.e. dharma, artha, and kāma. See Chapter X, stanza 31. “He understood three”: the three strengths a king should have; or the three elements listed in
stanza 6, above; or the three conditions of continuance, increase, and diminution.
“Knowing the two”: good and bad policy; “he gave up the two”: desire and anger.
The northern park of Indra, atop Mount Sumeru.
I.e., Vyāsa.

I.e., Ṛṣyaśṛṅga.
I.e., Ahalyā.

I.e., Prabhāsa.

The two Aśvins appear in the sky before dawn, and are considered to be the physicians
of heaven.

Māra rules the realm of desire (kāmadhātu), which contains six kinds of desiring
gods.

209

Notes

18
19
20

21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32

33

34
35
36
37
38

39
40

The brahmakāyika gods are the ﬁrst in the ﬁrst trance (dhyāna) of the material realm,
above the realm of desire.
The three existences are those of the past, present, and future.

The Vindhya Mountains are a famous mountain range, far to the south of the Snowy
Mountains (the Himalayas). In stanza 42, above, the Bodhisattva was warned by the
brahmans not to go south.

Ārāḍa was Śākyamuni’s famous Sāṃkhya teacher. See Chapter XII, especially stanzas
14–34 and 38–54.
Jñeya water: the water of what is to be known.

Vṛtra was killed by Indra, who then hid himself in the waters. A drought ensued.
Cakravāka birds: a pair of ducks, symbols of conjugal love. In China they are usually
called yuanyang, mandarin ducks.
King Daśaratha mourned for the loss of his son, Rāma.
Śakunta, a bird (of prey).

The ﬁve ceremonial ornaments are all emblems of social rank.
Jayanta was the son of Indra and Śacī.

Vāmadeva and Vasiṣṭha were King Daśaratha’s chief minister and his preceptor (purohita).
Śukra and Bṛhaspati, the son of Āṅgirasa, were ministers of Indra.
Bṛhaspati, Indra’s minister, addressing Jayanta, Indra’s son.

The Sanskrit version, Chapter IX, stanza 25, mentions Rāma, son of Daśaratha, and
Rāma, descendant of Bhṛgu. The Chinese seems to phonetically render rāme(ṇa) ca
bhā(rgaveṇa).

Chinese mythology holds that the sun comes up in the east underneath a giant mulberry
tree, which has one root but two mutually supporting trunks. This tree, the rodhra
tree, has yellow ﬂowers, like the color of the Law.

I.e., Purūravas, an ancient king of the lunar race. His celestial queen was Uruvaśī.

Having practiced asceticism, Bali defeated Indra, but Viṣṇu took away his power and
Indra regained the upper hand.
I.e., Ugrāyudha.

During the Han, the eastern market in Chang’an was the site of executions.

Of the seven vices of kings, four are said to be the result of desire: gambling, drinking,
hunting, and womanizing. The Kauravas were gamblers. The Vṛṣṇis and the Andhakas
were fond of wine, and the Mekhalas and the Daṇḍakas were addicted to hunting.
For the fourth vice, see stanza 37, below.

The eight worldly factors are gain and loss, eulogy and defamation, ridicule and
praise, joy and sorrow. They are also known as the “eight winds.”
The three happinesses: dharma, artha, kāma; i.e., duty, riches, desire. See note 10.

210

Notes

41
42
43

44
45
46
47
48
49
50

51

52
53
54

The three realms are the realms of desire (kāmadhātu), of form (rūpadhātu), and of
no-form (ārūpyadhātu).
The birds drink from the rain to extinguish the ﬁre, the enemy.

Here we have an early explanation of Sāṃkhya philosophy. The individual corporal
being, sattva, is made up of eight constituents for primary nature or matter (prakṛti),
sixteen constituents for secondary matter, change (vikāra), birth (jāti), death (maraṇa),
and old age ( jarā). Nature’s constituent is mainly the unseen power (avyakta; the
text has “seeing,” perhaps meaning the unseen), but also intellection (buddhi), the
self (ahaṃkāra), and the ﬁve great elements (earth, water, ﬁre, wind, and space). The
sixteen secondary material elements are the ﬁve sense faculties and their objects (eye
and form; ear and sound; nose and smell; tongue and taste; body and tactile sensation),
hands, feet, speech or voice, the organs of generation and secretion, and the faculty
of the mind. The ﬁve faculties are called the faculties of intellection. Hands, feet,
speech, and the two “paths” are the faculties of action. The faculty of the mind is
twofold: action and intellection.
Instead of the term “knower of the ﬁeld,” the text always has “knower of the cause,”
i.e., the self (ātman). See also stanza 56, below.

Prajāpati is thought to be Hiraṇyagarbha. Kapila, the traditional founder of Sāṃkhya,
is said to be a personiﬁcation of Hiraṇyagarbha, the creator.
“The seen”: vyakta.

These are the eight causes of the three items listed in the stanza above: foolishness,
action, and desire.

The ﬁve modes are the ﬁvefold types of ignorance listed here: darkness, delusion,
great delusion, anger, and fear.

Stanzas 41–47 describe the four trances (dhyānas). The Abhidharma explains them
in the same way.

In Buddhism, the four trances (dhyānas) occur in the realm of form. The number of
heavens associated with them varies. In the case of Aśvaghoṣa, the total number probably was seventeen or eighteen. “Brahma heaven” is a term used to designate all the
heavens of the ﬁrst trance. Ābhāsvara (Universal Light) and Śubhakṛtsna (Universal
Purity) are the highest heavens in the second and third trances. Bṛhatphala is a heaven
of the fourth trance, the highest heaven of which is Akaniṣṭha. As Ārāḍa is explaining
Sāṃkhya yoga, it seems that the four heavens mentioned in these stanzas may be the
highest of his respective trances.

Stanzas 48–50 give an explanation of the three spheres (āyatanas) in the immaterial
realm. They are the spheres of unlimited space, of unlimited consciousness, and of
emptiness. For the fourth sphere, see stanza 70, below.
Muñja is a sedge-like grass.

Jaigīṣavya, Janaka, and Vṛddha Parāśara, also known as Pañcaśikha, are all Sāṃkhya
seers.
The “three” that are rejected: foolishness, action, and desire.

211

Notes

55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70

71
72
73

74
75

76
77
78

Sāṃkhya is understood as “enumeration.” Here, in particular, anything counted as
“I” and “mine” seems to be meant.
Guṇa: attribute, quality, or psychic state, speciﬁcally of the self.
The possessor of an attribute (guṇa) is a guṇin, i.e., a self.

Udraka taught the fourth immaterial sphere, i.e., that of of neither perception nor nonperception.
Gaja means “elephant.” This refers to Mount Gayaśiras, famous for its numerous
ascetics (whence probably the name Nagarī, “town”), near Gayā.
Kumuda is a lotus ﬂower.

See Chapter V, stanza 12ff.

The aśvattha, or bodhi tree (ﬁcus religiosa).

Three existences of past, present, and future. See note 19.
Kṣatriya is the warrior, or noble, caste.
See Chapter XI, stanza 17.

The maiden of the Snowy Mountains is Pārvatī. Maheśvara is Śiva.
Bhūta, a spiritual being. See also Chapter I, stanza 30, and note 4.
Abhisaṃbodhi: enlightenment.

Both ﬁve and six destinations are mentioned throughout the text. Is this Baoyun’s
“correction”? Or a later scribal error? Or was the number not ﬁxed?

The ﬁve signs of imminent death are: 1) the ﬂowery crown withers, 2) one’s armpits
sweat, 3) one’s clothes are dirty, 4) the body’s brightness is lost, or one has bad body
odor, 5) one ceases to enjoy one’s original status.

The three classes are a sense faculty, its object, and the corresponding consciousness.

I.e., contact (sparśa), one of the links of dependent origination. See notes 72 and 73
below.

Stanzas 41–44 mention ten links of dependent origination: consciousness (vijñāna),
name-and-form (nāmarūpa), six sense faculties (ṣaḍāyatana), contact (sparśa), experiencing (vedanā), craving (tṛṣṇā), grasping (upādāna), existence (bhava), birth (jāti),
and old age and death (jarāmaraṇa).

Here two more links, ignorance or delusion (moha) and formation (saṃskāra), are
added, adding up to the twelve links of dependent origination.

The four kings are the guardians of the world and of the Law, dwelling on Sumeru.
In the east, Dhṛtarāṣṭra; in the south, Virūḍhaka; in the west, Virūpākṣa; and in the
north, Vaiśravaṇa.

The context makes it clear that “Tathāgata” is interpreted here as “Thus-come,” i.e.,
one who has come to enlightenment.
The ﬁve stars are the constellation Hastā.

I.e., the ﬁre that destroys the world at the end of the kalpa (eon).

212

Notes

79
80

81
82
83

84

85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92

93
94
95
96
97
98
99

100
101

Gaja is usually called Gayā Kāśyapa.

I.e., the four pure abodes: 1) of those in the realm of form, and 2) of those in the
realm of no-form. Collectively referred to here as the brahmavihāras. 3) the celestial
abodes of the six kinds of desiring gods, and 4) the abodes of the noble ones who
have embarked on the noble path.
Bhadrā, the wife of Mahākāśyapa.

The four analytical knowledges ( pratisaṃvid): 1) of factors, 2) of the meanings, 3)
of expression, and 4) of inspired speech.

The Abhidharmahṛdaya explains that with the ten kinds of knowledge, the ten kinds
of afﬂiction are removed. Dharmaśreṣṭhin’s work is older than the Buddhacarita and
so is Kātyāyanīputra’s Aṣṭagrantha. See the Introduction in C. Willemen, The Essence
of Scholasticism (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 2006).

I.e., having converted from “the three” of brahmans—duty (dharma), riches (artha),
and desire (kāma)—to “the three” of Buddhists, the Three Jewels (triratna): Buddha,
Dharma, and Sangha.
The three disciples are Śāriputra, Maudgalyāyana, and Mahākāśyapa.
The three poisons, or primary afﬂictions: greed, anger, and delusion.
The three-starred constellation, Jyeṣṭhā.

The thirty-three gods of the Trāyastriṃśa Heaven, plus the sun and moon.
I.e., fulﬁllment of the celestial ﬁve desires.

I.e., of a stream-winner (srotaāpanna), the ﬁrst of the four fruitions of a śramaṇa.
In the highest of the four immaterial attainments, also known as the highest existence
(bhavāgra).

The world is not made by Iśvara (stanzas 22–32); neither by any wrong cause, i.e.,
a speciﬁc nature (stanzas 33–47); or by time (stanzas 48–49); or by a self, ātman
(stanzas 50–54), nor is it uncaused (stanzas 55–57).
Speciﬁc nature is svabhāva, cosmic force.

Attribute: guṇa. See Chapter XII, stanza 62, and note 56.

This means a substantial entity (dravya). In Chapter XII, stanza 64, the term guṇin
is used. The text does not explicitly mention the three attributes (guṇas) of Sāṃkhya.

The body is the support (āśraya) for thought (citta) and for what is counted as thought
(caitta).

The eight mindfulnesses are wanting little, satisfaction, renunciation, right mindfulness,
right concentration, zeal, right wisdom, and absence of idle speech.
Jambhala, the lord of wealth.

The city of the ﬁve mountains is Rājagṛha.
The Himalayas.

The three actions of body, speech, and mind.

213

Notes

102
103
104

105
106
107
108
109
110
111

112

113
114

115
116
117
118
119
120
121
122
123
124

I.e., the three poisons: greed, anger, and delusion.

The fourth action is that which leads to quietude, insight.

Amṛtodana was the younger brother of the king, and the father of Devadatta. Another
tradition says that Droṇodana, another brother, was the father of Devadatta and the
elder brother of Ānanda.
Yaśodharā.

Mount Kailāsa is the location of Śiva’s palace and the residence of Kuvera.

The ten directions are the eight cardinal directions, plus the nadir and zenith; i.e.,
everywhere.

Countryman: Triśaṅku; seer: Viśvāmitra, son of Gādhin. The constellation Triśaṅku
is thought to be that known as the Southern Cross.

I.e., the ﬁrst three items listed here but not the last one: from “one brightness” (royal
position) to another (wisdom).
The term for violent whirlwind here is vairambhaka.
I.e., the wheel, or cycle, of samsara.

Any seer may obtain the ﬁve supernatural powers: 1) divine eye, 2) divine ear, 3)
knowledge of others’ thoughts, 4) knowledge of former existences, and 5) bases of
psychic or miraculous powers.
I.e., Sāṃkāśya.

All converted in or near Rājagṛha. Jyotiṣka was a wealthy person, son of the nirgrantha
(Jain) Subhadra. Jivaka was the physician of King Bimbisāra and King Ajātaśatru.
Prince Abhaya was a son of Bimbisāra and Āmrapālī. Nyagrodha stayed in the Udumbarīkārāma, in Rājagṛha. Upāli from Nālandā was a Jain who became an upāsaka,
lay disciple.

Puṣkara is known in Pāli as Pukkusāti, friend of Bimbisāra; he ruled over the northern
region, Uttarāpatha, whose capital was Takṣaśilā.
Haimavata and Sātāgra were two yakṣa demons.

Mount Vipula was largest of the ﬁve mountains around Rājagṛha.

On Mount Pāṣāṇaka there was a shrine where Pārāyaṇika, one of the sixteen disciples
of Bāvari, seems to have been converted.

At Sthāṇumatī, a village in Magadha, the Buddha stayed in the Āmrayaṣṭikā Grove
and converted people.
Pañcaśikha was a heavenly musician, present when Śakra met the Buddha.
Veṇukaṇṭakī was a village in the land of Avanti.
Known as Veṇukaṇḍikā Nandamātā.
Pūrṇabhadra, a yakṣa.

“Village of dwarfs” translates such words as, for example, vāmana(ka). Āpaṇa, in
the land of Aṅguttarāpa, is meant.

214

Notes

125
126
127
128
129
130
131
132
133
134
135

136
137
138
139
140
141
142
143
144
145

146
147
148
149
150
151

Aṅgulimāla (“Garland of Fingers”) was a famous, cruel thief from Kośala. He robbed
and mutilated travelers in the woods of Jālinī.

The wealthy Meṇḍhaka from Bhadrika or Bhadra in Aṅgā, seems to be meant here
by “Prajīvana.”
Bhadravālin and Bhadra: two yakṣas.

Satyaka Nirgranthaputra was a famous Jain, as was Siṃha.

Alakāvatī is the city were Kuvera dwells, together with his yakṣa attendants.
Called Khara.

The gautamakas and māgaṇḍikas are two heretical groups of brahmans.
Upāsikās are female lay disciples.

Uttarā is better known as Kubjottarā.

Devadatta was the nephew of the Buddha. See note 104.

Ajātaśatru was the son of Bimbisāra and Vaidehī. He succeeded to the throne after
he had his father put in jail. He had been under the inﬂuence of Devadatta but repented
and became a devout Buddhist.
Avīci literally means “without any choice,” with the implication of “interminable.”
Āmrapāli was a popular courtesan in Vaiśālī. The text actually just says Āmra.
Parinirvāṇa, ﬁnal nirvana, death.

A shrine, often a place where sacred relics are enshrined.
I.e., Varṣākāra.

The eastern gate.

The three woeful destinations are those of hell, hungry ghosts, and animals.

The ﬁve insignia of royalty: sword; canopy; crown; chowrie (cāmara), a type of
whisk; and ornamental footwear.
In the Mahāvana, on the banks of the Markaṭa (Monkey) Pond.

The four ranges, or spheres, of action (gocara) refer to the four applications of mindfulness (smṛtyupasthāna), i.e., to the body (impure), to experiencing (painful), to
thoughts (impermanent), and to factors (without a self). These four are explained in
stanzas 22–25.
I.e., Mount Sumeru.

A makara is a huge mythical ﬁsh, a fabulous sea creature.

The śāla grove mentioned here seems to be the place of the Ānanda Shrine, or Caitya.

“The Law” is Dharma; “the discipline” is Vinaya; “what I have proclaimed” refers
to the Abhidharma.

“Clear expositions” are upadeśa. In stanzas 34–35 Aśvaghoṣa’s ideas are mentioned.

Usually bhavarāga. Here the term is used as an interpretation of the Sāṃkhya term
sattva, goodness, a quality that should be developed.

215

Notes

152
153
154

155
156
157
158
159
160
161
162
163
164
165
166
167

168
169
170

171
172
173

The prātimokṣa is the moral code of the monastic precepts (Vinaya).

The ﬁrst dhyāna of the realm of form (rūpadhātu). See Chapter XII, stanzas 42–43.

The “nine concentrations” are the four trances (dhyānas) of the realm of form, and
the four immaterial attainments, samāpattis. See Chapter XII, stanzas 44–50 and 70.
The ninth is the attainment of extinction, nirodhasamāpatti.
See note 75.
See note 3.

The celestial spirits of the eight classes are eight types of supernatural beings: devas,
nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas.
A stretch, yin, is a unit of measure corresponding to a hundred-foot length.

The Chinese character here, gu, may be understood as having the radical “wood,”
meaning a branch, which agrees with the Tibetan Chapter XXVII, stanza 11.
Three divisions: trikāṇḍaka.

A śikhi is a crested bird, presumably a peacock or perhaps some kind of crane.

The sun, Sūrya, has seven horses. Chinese mythology explains that it descends at
night into a cave of Yanzi Mountain, far to the west.
I.e., the body.

The four beneﬁts, or the four “favorable winds”: gain, eulogy, praise, and joy. See
note 39.

The four losses, or four “unfavorable winds”: loss, defamation, ridicule, and sorrow.
See note 39.

Eight factors: see note 39. “Group of ﬁve”: the ﬁve hindrances (nīvaraṇa) to attention?
I.e., lustful desire, malice, sloth and torpor, excitability, doubt.

“With the three”: the triple sight? I.e., 1) the physical eye, 2) the divine eye, and 3)
the eye of noble wisdom. “Has seen the three”: the three realms or worlds? Or the
Three Jewels (Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha)?

“Free from the three”: the three poisons of greed, anger, and delusion? “Has accomplished the three”: the three actions of body, speech, and mind?
“The one”: bodhi, enlightenment?

Seven births or existences, saptabhava? I.e., the ﬁve destinations (gati), the existence
of actions (karmabhava), and the intermediate existence (antarābhava), as in the
Saptabhava-sūtra mentioned in the Abhidharmakośabhāṣya, Chapter 3. One may
also think of the seven abodes of consciousness, vijñānasthiti.
“Long sleep” means death.
I.e., a self, ātman.

Stanzas 47–51 deal with the ﬁve higher knowledges or superknowledges, abhijñā:
1) the divine eye, 2) the divine ear, 3) bases of psychic power (ṛddhipāda), 4) knowledge of others’ mental states, and 5) knowledge of the end of impurities.

216

Notes

174

175
176
177
178
179

180
181
182
183
184
185
186
187
188

During the Zhou dynasty (eleventh century–221 B.C.E.) a feudal state of the ﬁrst class
was entitled to maintain three kinds of troops. From this comes the general meaning
of “three armies.” Of course, one may think of infantry, chariots, and cavalry.
Aniruddha.

A caitya is a shrine or funeral monument. The Makuṭabandhana Caitya is meant here.

The oxhead sandalwood (gośīrṣa candana) referred to here is a special variety of
sandalwood.
Relics (śarīras) are the bones, etc., that remain after cremation.

The seven countries are: 1) the Mallas from Pāpā, 2) the Bulukas from Calakalpā, 3)
the Krauḍyas from Rāmagrāma, 4) the Brahmans from Viṣṇudvīpa, 5) the Śākyas
from Kapilavastu, 6) the Licchavis from Vaiśālī, and 7) the Varṣākāra, sent by Ajātaśatru
from Magadha. It just so happens that in China there were also seven well-known
states during the Warring States period (475–221 B.C.E.).

The seven luminaries are the sun, moon, and ﬁve planets: Venus, Jupiter, Mercury,
Mars, and Saturn. The term may be used to indicate the days of the week.

After the Mallas of Kuśinagara and the seven kings had agreed to share the relics,
the eighth share was transported in a golden pitcher.
Sauvarṇakumbha bhṛṅgāra. The stupa may be called Kumbha Stupa.
Aṅgāra Stupa.

Mount Kailāsa? See note 106.

Indraśailaguhā, the cavern of Indra’s Rock.

As a conqueror, Aśoka (lit., “Without Sorrow”) was called Caṇḍa (“Fierce”). After
his conversion he was known as Dharma (virtuous, dutiful).

The fruition of stream-winning. He was a srotaāpanna, having gained the ﬁrst of the
four fruitions of a śramaṇa, asceticism.

The two kinds of suffering: 1) On earth (stanza 77ab), and 2) in heaven (stanza 77cd).

217

Glossary
Abhidharma: A collection of treatises containing detailed analyses of the psychological
and spiritual content of early Buddhist teachings; one of the three divisions of the
Tripiṭaka. See also Tripiṭaka.

Abhidharmakośa: The Treatise on the Storehouse of the Abhidharma by Vasubandhu
(ca. 350–430); a very important text in the propagation and development of Chinese
Buddhism.

abhisaṃbodhi: Full and complete enlightenment attained by the Buddha.

Ānanda: The cousin of the Buddha who served as his close disciple and personal
attendant.

arhat: “One who is worthy,” a saint who has eradicated the passions and attained liberation
from the cycle of birth and death (samsara); arhatship is the highest of the four
stages of spiritual development in early Buddhism. See also samsara.

Aśoka (“Without Sorrow”): King of the Maurya kingdom in northern India (ca. 264–227
B.C.E.). A convert to Buddhism after a particularly bloody series of battles, Aśoka
implemented a “reign of Dharma” and state support of Buddhism. According to the
Sarvāstivāda tradition, during his reign the Buddhist sangha was divided by a schism
that led to the development of two main schools.
asura: A supernatural being, or demigod, constantly engaged in warring against the gods;
one of the six woeful destinations in samsara. See also destinations; samsara.

Avīci: The worst of the eight hot hells, located deep beneath Jambudvīpa, the continent
where human beings live. In Chinese it is rendered in different ways, e.g., “without
any choice,” with the implication of “interminable.” See also hell.

bhikṣu: A mendicant or Buddhist monk, a fully ordained member of the sangha.

bodhi: Enlightenment, the state of undeﬁled purity and eternal bliss.

bodhisattva: Lit., “enlightenment being.” Originally an appellation of the Buddha, before
his enlightenment. Later the term was used generally for an excellent practitioner or
teacher. In the Mahayana, the bodhisattva is one who has engendered the profound
aspiration to achieve enlightenment (bodhicitta) on behalf of all sentient beings,
through the practice of the six perfections (pāramitās) and the eventual attainment
of a series of spiritual stages (bhūmis). See also Mahayana; six perfections.

brahmadeva: Brahma, the highest god according to certain Hindu beliefs; the ﬁrst and
lowest of the four dhyāna (trance) heavens in the realm of form. See also dhyāna;
three realms.
219

Glossary
caitya: A shrine or funerary monument. See also stupa.

dependent origination (pratītyasamutpāda): The fundamental Buddhist doctrine that all
phenomena (dharmas) arise in relation to causes and conditions and in turn are the
causes and conditions for the arising of other phenomena. Nothing exists independently of its causes and conditions. See also dharma.
destinations: The six realms of rebirth in which sentient beings transmigrate in samsara,
consisting of three upper relams of gods, asuras, and human beings; and three lower
realms of animals, hungry ghosts, and hell. Both ﬁve and six destinations are mentioned in this text, and are often referred to as “woeful,” because they are part of
the cycle of samsara. See also asura; hell; hungry ghost; samsara.

dharma: Phenomenon, factor, element; the elements that make up the perceived phenomenal world.

Dharma: The Buddhist teaching, truth, or law. See also Law.

dhyāna: Meditation; a state of meditative concentration and absorption, also referred to
as a trance.

four great kings: Acording to Buddhist cosmology, the guardian gods of the four directions,
the kings of the four great continents surrounding Mount Sumeru: 1) Dhṛtarāṣṭra
in the east; 2) Virūḍhaka in the south; 3) Virūpākṣa in the west; and 4) Vaiśravaṇa
in the north. See also Mount Sumeru.

four noble tuths: The fundamental doctrine of Buddhism: 1) the truth of suffering, 2) the
truth of the cause of suffering, 3) the truth of the cessation of suffering, and 4) the
truth of the path that leads to the cessation of suffering, i.e., the noble eightfold
path. See also noble eightfold path.

gandharva: A type of supernatural being; a heavenly musician.

gāthā: Stanza; one of the twelve (or nine) types of Buddhist scriptures; gāthā repeat in
verse form the substance of the discourses in prose found in sutras. See also sutra.

hell (naraka): The lowest level of samsaric existence, where those who have committed
offenses are reborn and suffer torment for many eons. There are eight hot hells and
eight cold hells. See also Avīci; destinations; samsara.

hungry ghost (preta): One who is reborn into one of the lower destinations of samsaric
existence, where beings suffer the torment of insatiable hunger. See also destinations;
samsara.

Jainism: One of India’s traditional religions, known for its emphasis on nonviolence
(ahiṃsā). The founder, Vardharmāna, known as Mahāvīra, was nearly contemporary
of Śākyamuni. After twelve years of asceticism he gained insight and was called
jina, “excellent one.”
kalpa: An eon, an immensely long period of time; also a period of great cosmic change.

kāṣāya: A dyed garment; the robe worn by a Buddhist monastic.

Law: Dharma, the Buddhist teaching or truth, the understanding and application of which
leads ultimately to nirvana. Also appears in this text as “Law of delivernace,” “Law
of tranquility.” See also Dharma; nirvana.
220

Glossary
Mahayana: Lit., “Great Vehicle”; a movement within Buddhism that developed in India
around 100 B.C.E. and which exalts as its religious ideal the bodhisattva. See also
bodhisattva.

mandāra, mahāmāndārava ﬂowers: Flowers of the mandāra (coral) tree.

Māra: Lit., “death-agent,” the Evil One, arch-enemy of all who seek to live a holy life.
He rules the sensual world.

Mount Sumeru: In Buddhist cosmology, the highest mountain rising from the center of
the world (axis mundi); it has four sides, is narrower in the center, and is surrounded
by eight mountain ranges. In the ocean between the seventh and eighth of these
ranges are the four great continents. See also four great kings.

muni: Sage; one who has achieved tranquility.

Nirgrantha: Jain ascetic, a follower of Mahāvīra, said to be a contemporary of the Buddha.
See also Jainism.
nirvana: Liberation from samsara, a state of perfect peace in which all the passions are
extinguished and the highest wisdom attained. See also samsara.

noble eightfold path: The eight aspects of practice for attaining nirvana, as taught by the
Buddha; the fourth of the four noble truths: 1) right view, 2) right thought, 3) right
speech, 4) right action, 5) right livelihood, 6) right effort, 7) right mindfulness, and
8) right concentration. See also four noble truths; nirvana.

parinirvāṇa: Complete nirvana, commonly used to describe the death of the Buddha (ca.
483 B.C.E.). See also nirvana.

prātimokṣa: The code of precepts contained in the Vinaya, one of the three parts of the
Tripiṭaka; the moral code for monastic life. See also Vinaya.

Śākyamuni: Lit., “Sage of the Śākyas”; the historical Buddha who lived in Central India
in the ﬁfth century B.C.E., and whose life and teachings form the basis of Buddhism.
samādhi: Concentration, focusing the mind on one point.

Sāṃkhya: Lit., “Enumeration.” One of the six schools of classical Hindu philosophy.

samsara: The cycle of existence, the continuous round of birth and death through which
beings transmigrate; the world of suffering, contrasted with the liberation and peace
of nirvana. See also nirvana.

sense faculties: The sense perceptions that correspond to the six sense organs—visual
(eye), auditory (ear), olfactory (nose), gustatory (tongue), tactile (body), and mental
perceptions (mind).

six perfections (pāramitās): Six qualities that are to be perfected by bodhisattvas as they
progress along the path to enlightenment: 1) giving or generosity (dāna), 2) ethics
or morality (śīla), 3) patience or forbearance (kṣānti), 4) energy or effort (vīrya),
5) meditation (dhyāna), and 6) wisdom (prajñā). See also bodhisattva.

soma: An intoxicating drink made from the juice of the milkweed plant.

śramaṇa: A wandering ascetic, mendicant.

221

Glossary
stream-winner (srotaāpanna): The ﬁrst of the four stages of spiritual attainment in early
Buddhist teachings; one who has entered the stream of the Dharma.

stupa: A monument, usually conical in form, containing relics of the Buddha or marking
the site of an important event in the Buddha’s life and which serves as a site for
worship and veneration. See also caitya.

sutra: A scriptural text, discourses of the Buddha. Capitalized, the term refers to one of
the parts of the Tripiṭaka, the Buddhist canon. See also Tripiṭaka.

Tathāgata: An epithet of the Buddha, meaning one who has gone to (gata) and come
from (āgata) suchness (tathā). In Chinese it is rendered as “Thus-come.”
three realms: The three realms of samsaric existence, consisting of the realm of desire
(kāmadhātu), i.e., the world of ordinary consciousness accompanied by desires; the
realm of form, or material realm (rūpadhātu), in which desires have been eliminated
but the physical body remains; and the realm of no-form, or immaterial realm
(ārūpyadhātu), in which the physical form no longer exists.

Tripiṭaka: Lit., “three baskets”; the three divisions of the Buddhist canon, consisting of
Abhidharma (treatises), Sutra (discourses), and Vinaya (monastic code). See also
Abhidharma; sutra; Vinaya.

unique vehicle (ekayāna): Aside from its obvious meaning, this term is also used to
denote the “one vehicle,” as mentioned in the Lotus Sutra, which unites the teachings
of early Buddhism and the Mahyana. The latter meaning was popular in Nanjing
in the ﬁfth century, propagated by such scholars as Huiguan.

Vinaya: Precepts and rules of conduct for monastics; one of the three divisions of the
Tripiṭaka. See also Tripiṭaka.

yakṣa: A type of supernatural being; a kind of demon, fearsome in appearance.

222

Bibliography
Bareau, A. Recherches sur la biographie du Buddha. 3 vols. Paris: Presses de l’École
Française d’Extrême-Orient, 1971–1995.

Beal, S. Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king. A Life of Buddha by Aśvaghosa Bodhisattva. Delhi:
Motilal Banarsidass, 1975, reprint.

Hokazono, K. “Amṛtānanda ni yoru Buddhacarita no fuka bubun,” Kagoshima Keizai
Daigaku Ronshū 22 (1981): 2–4; Daigaku Ronshū 23 (1982): 1; Daigaku Ronshū
24 (1983): 2.
Jackson, D. P. “On the Date of the Tibetan Translation of Aśvaghoṣa’s Buddhacarita,”
Studia Indologiczne 4 (1997): 41–62.

Johnson, E. H. “The Buddha’s Mission and Last Journey: Buddhacarita, XV–XXVIII,”
Acta Orientalia 15 (1937): 26–62, 85–111, 231–92.
—. The Buddhacarita or Acts of the Buddha. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 2004, reprint.

Ōminami, R. Busshogyōsan, in Shin kokuyaku Daizōkyō, Hon’enbu 1, pp. 125–426.
Tokyo: Daizō Shuppansha, 2002.

Siegling, W. Ein Glossar zu Aśvaghoṣas Buddhacarita. Göttingen: Veröffentlichungen
des Seminars für Indologie und Buddhismuskunde der Universität Göttingen Nr.
3, 1985.

Waldschmidt, E. Das Mahāparinirvāṇasūtra. Berlin: Abhangdlungen der Deutschen
Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin. Klasse für Sprachen, Literatur und Kunst
Jahrgang, Nr. 2 (1950), Nr. 3 (1951).
Weller, F. Das Leben des Buddha von Aśvaghoṣa. Liepzig: Verlag von Eduard Pfeiffer,
1926. Veröffentlichungen des Forschunginstitut für vergliechende Religionsgeschichte
an der Universität Liepzig, Reihe II, Heft 3.

Wohlgemuth, E. Über die Chinesische Version von Aśvaghoṣas Buddhacarita. Berlin:
Abt. 1 (Osasiatische Studien), 1916.

223

Index
A

Ābhāsvara Heaven 86, 212
Abhaya 151, 215
Abhidharma (see also Tripiṭaka) 211,
216
Abhidharmahṛdaya 213
Abhidharmakośabhāṣya 217
abhisaṃbodhi 99, 212
abode(s) 63, 81, 110, 175, 217
brahma 123
celestial 123, 213
of the noble 111, 123, 213
pure 5, 21, 23, 32, 36, 44, 90, 96, 134,
135, 136, 145, 190, 209, 213
accumulation 33, 49, 111
adamantine 10, 98, 170, 191, 192, 198
Āditya 14, 71
afﬂiction(s) 86, 104, 105, 107, 111, 113,
114, 117, 118, 119, 124, 135, 163,
167, 174, 185, 188, 192, 193, 194,
198, 213
ten kinds of 127, 213
Agastya 28
Agniveśya 152
Ahalyā 209
Aiḷa (see also Purūravas) 76, 94
Aja 57
Ajātaśatru 154, 215, 216, 218
Ājñāta Kauṇḍinya 112
Alakāvatī 152, 215
Alāyudha 203
alms, almsround(s) 70, 71, 72, 80, 86,
105, 123, 124, 138, 141, 143, 185

Ambarīṣa 65
Āmra Garden, Grove 158, 161
Āmrapālī 157–160, 165, 215, 216
Āmrayaṣṭikā Grove 215
Amṛtānanda xiii
Amṛtodana 141, 214
Ānanda 141, 154, 167, 168, 169, 176,
177, 181, 206, 214
Ānanda Caitya, Shrine 216
Anāthapiṇḍada 129–130, 133, 135, 136,
145
anchorite(s) 45, 48, 60
Andhakas 78, 203, 211
Aṅgā 215
Aṅgada 151
Aṅgapura 151
Aṅgāra Stupa (see also Ashes Shrine)
218
Aṅgiras 7
Āṅgirasa 60, 210
Aṅgulimāla 152, 215
Aṅguttarāpa 215
animal(s) (see also beast) 5, 21, 24, 39,
47, 52, 63, 65, 91, 96, 100, 101, 108,
162, 177, 184, 185
destination 100, 134, 216
king(s) of (see also lion) 4, 45, 105
six domestic 20
Aniruddha 141, 188, 189, 191, 218
annihilation (see also two extremes;
views, two, of the two extremes) 33,
111, 183
Antideva 8, 61, 66
225

Index
Anuja 61
Apalāla 153
Āpaṇa 215
Ārāḍa 50, 59, 81, 83, 84, 86, 88, 105,
210, 212
arhat(s), arhatship xiii, 109, 113, 114,
125, 196, 206
Arhat (see also Buddha) 114
Āṣāḍha 61
ascetic(s) 8, 9, 147, 212
asceticism (see also austerities) 10, 28,
34, 46, 48, 49, 55, 66, 76, 89, 94, 97,
98, 101, 108, 109, 110, 115, 118, 126,
162, 210, 218
forest of 40, 44, 45, 52, 53, 59, 65, 89,
117
Ashes Shrine (see also Aṅgāra Stupa)
206
Asita 8, 11, 57
Aśoka xiii, 206, 218
aśoka tree 206
Aṣṭagrantha 213
asura(s) 78, 163, 188, 190, 217
Aśvaghoṣa xiii–xiv, 1, 211, 216
Aśvajit 108, 113, 123, 124
aśvattha grove, tree (see also bodhi
grove, tree) 93, 212
Aśvins 45, 210
Āṭavika 152
ātman. See self
Ātreya 7, 152
Atri 7, 141
attachment(s) 28, 73, 77, 84, 85, 100,
107, 110, 135, 146
attribute(s) 88, 132, 133, 212, 214
augur (see also seer) 157
Aurva 4
austerities (see also asceticism) 41, 46,
47, 50, 66, 89, 108, 109, 140, 185
Avanti 215
Avīci Hell 155, 216

226

awakening (see also bodhi; enlightenment) 6, 10, 91, 97, 111, 197
right 9, 11, 50, 89, 91, 97, 103, 107,
109, 140
āyatanas. See three spheres
Ayodhyā 153

B

Bāhu 61
Bahuputraka Shrine 125
Baka 203
Bali 76, 210
Baoyun xiv–xvii, 209, 212
Bāvari 215
beast(s) (see also animal) 28, 45, 95
Bhadra 152, 215
Bhadrā 213
Bhadraka 152
Bhadrakarma 152
Bhadravālin 152, 215
Bhadrika 108, 152, 215
Bhārgas 153
Bhārgava 39
Bheṣaka 153
bhikṣu(s) (see also monk) 32, 107, 114,
115, 117, 123, 124, 125, 136, 154,
158, 159, 175, 183, 185
ﬁve 89, 90, 105, 109, 113
Bhīṣma 61
Bhoganagara 175
Bhṛgu 7, 210
bhūta. See spiritual beings
Bimbisāra 69, 70, 73, 75, 113, 117, 119,
120, 123, 215, 216
bird(s) 5, 10, 19, 24, 28, 36, 39, 42, 45,
46, 47, 52, 58, 61, 63, 65, 70, 77, 78,
81, 87, 91, 95, 108, 145, 146, 149,
162, 166, 177, 185, 187, 192, 210,
211, 217
birth (see also birth and death) xvi, 4, 6,
10, 17, 29, 32, 38, 40, 42, 49, 62, 63,

Index
65, 75, 80, 84, 85, 102, 103, 118, 120,
130, 139, 140, 147, 164, 170, 182, 187,
207, 211, 213, 217
of the Buddha, Śākyamuni xiii, xvi,
3–6, 9, 11, 14
birth and death (see also rebirth; samsara)
10, 31, 32, 34, 43, 46, 47, 59, 80, 83,
89, 97, 99, 101, 102, 105, 110, 111,
114, 117, 118, 119, 120, 124, 126,
130, 132, 135, 139, 140, 148, 163,
169, 170, 175, 178, 181, 182, 187,
189, 191, 193, 194, 195, 196, 197
bodhi (see also awakening; enlightenment) 90, 217
bodhi grove, tree 93, 95, 104, 105, 212
bodhisattva(s) xiv, 17
Bodhisattva (see also Buddha) 3, 4, 5, 6,
10, 11, 15, 21, 22, 23, 25, 27, 46, 48,
49, 61, 70, 71, 81, 83, 88, 89, 90, 91,
93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 101, 103,
210
Bodhisattva Aśvaghoṣa’s Kāvya. See
Maming pusa zan
body(ies) 11, 13, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 26,
31, 36, 41, 44, 45, 47, 48, 52, 56, 71,
78, 84, 87, 88, 90, 91, 95, 96, 100, 102,
109, 110, 111, 114, 119, 125, 126, 130,
138, 146, 148, 154, 158, 159, 160, 162,
167, 168, 177, 178, 183, 185, 187, 211,
212, 214, 216, 217
of the Crown Prince, Buddha, Tathāgata 4, 15, 22, 33, 42, 43, 53, 59,
63, 89, 90, 91, 95, 115, 141, 142,
166, 168, 169, 175, 176, 177, 178,
193, 197, 198, 201
luminous (see also star) 7
body, speech, and mind (see also three
actions) 214, 217
bond(s) (see also fetters) 10, 83, 87, 98,
114, 119, 130, 132
brahmadeva 8

Brahma, Brahmadeva 15, 104, 105, 115,
117, 137
Brahma Heaven 86, 105, 112, 211
brahmakāyika god(s) 46, 210
brahman(s) xiii, 6, 7, 11, 25, 26, 45, 46,
48, 49, 55, 57, 59, 83, 85, 87, 107,
108, 115, 151, 152, 153, 157, 181,
182, 183, 191, 202, 203, 204, 205,
210, 213, 215
Brahmans 218
brahmavihāras. See abode(s), brahma, of
the pure
Brahmāyus 152
Bṛhadvājin 152
Bṛhaspati 7, 28, 48, 60, 210
Bṛhatphala Heaven 87, 212
Buddha (see also Bodhisattva; Crown
Prince; Gautama; Śākyamuni; Tathāgata; World-honored One) xiv, xvi,
103, 104, 105, 109, 112, 113, 114, 115,
116, 117, 118, 119, 123, 124, 125, 126,
127, 129, 134, 135, 136, 137, 138, 140,
141, 142, 145, 146, 147, 149, 150, 151,
152, 153, 154, 157, 158, 159, 160, 161,
164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 169, 170, 173,
174, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179, 181, 182,
183, 188, 189, 190, 191, 195, 196, 197,
198, 201, 203, 205, 206, 207, 208, 215,
216
body (see also body, of the Crown
Prince, Buddha, Tathāgata) 141,
169, 197, 198
disciple(s) 112, 119
divine power 140, 149, 150, 161
extinction, nirvana, parinirvāṇa 183,
189, 190, 191, 196, 198
name 129, 136
path 4, 182
qualities, virtue 104, 116, 153, 196
relics 201, 205
wisdom 175, 191

227

Index
buddha(s) 4, 109, 150
eye 104
former, of the past 5, 33, 91, 98, 170,
197
of future worlds 170
Buddhabhadra xiv, xv
Buddhacarita xiii–xvii, 213
Chinese xiii, xiv, xv, xvi, xvii
Indian xv
Nepalese xvi
Sanskrit xiii, xvi
Taishō edition xv
Tibetan xiii
Buddhacarita-kāvya. See Fo benxing zan
Buddhacarita-sūtra. See Fo benxing jing
Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha (see also
Three Jewels) 157, 213, 217
Buddha’s Acts. See Buddhacarita
Buddhism xiii, 211
Buddhist(s) xiv, 213, 216
Bulukas 218
Busshogyōsan xiv

C

caitya (see also stupa) 197, 206, 218
Calakalpā 218
Caṇḍa, Caṇḍāśoka (see also Aśoka) xiii,
206, 218
Caṇḍa. See Kaniṣka
Candramas 25, 28
causality 9, 62, 87, 115, 120, 124, 132,
146, 147, 178, 183
cause(s) 7, 47, 84, 85, 87, 88, 89, 100,
102, 111, 124, 125, 126, 129, 130,
131, 132, 133, 139, 147, 166, 183,
194, 211, 214
for, of birth 65, 102
and conditions 87, 133, 169, 183
for, of deliverance 40, 61, 64, 135
and effect, fruition, result 9, 55, 64,
133, 139

228

knower of (see also self) 84, 87, 88,
124, 211
of suffering 47, 111, 140, 188
celestial 5, 9, 14, 15, 25, 44, 48, 51, 56,
63, 73, 94, 103, 130, 146, 158, 170,
190, 191, 195, 214
abodes 123, 213
crown(s) 53, 61, 71, 79, 142, 161
ﬂowers 98, 112
happiness(es) 47, 57, 76, 78
king(s), ruler 4, 12, 63, 76, 93, 104,
136, 139
maiden(s) 55, 76, 93, 159
music 15, 35, 103, 112, 165, 197
palace(s) 43, 104, 150, 165, 190
queen 15, 25, 26, 28, 210
son(s) 25, 28, 36, 43, 44, 46, 191, 192
spirit(s) 11, 12, 23, 38, 41, 50, 55, 56,
59, 73, 90, 105, 112, 151, 157, 190,
217
Celestial Nanda Garden 24
Central Asia xiv
Central India(n) (see also India) xiii, xv,
221
Chandaka 36, 37, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44,
45, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56
Chang’an xiv, xvii, 211
Chengshi lun xiii
China xiv, 210, 218
Chinese xiv, xvi, xvii, 210, 217
language xiii, xiv, xv, xvi, xvii, 209,
210, 217
Classics xvi
common, commonplace 3, 23, 26, 45,
55, 70, 79, 86, 113, 114, 117, 131,
137, 141, 143, 146, 149, 169, 173,
196, 197
commoner(s), common people, person 75,
83, 85, 105, 108, 109, 114, 130, 137, 149
compassion, compassionate 16, 31, 42,
60, 97, 105, 126, 135, 143, 154, 164,

Index
170, 173, 174, 179, 188, 189, 205,
207, 209
great 3, 10, 99, 104, 105, 109, 126,
140, 159, 183, 196
concentration(s) 98, 99, 101, 102, 110,
112, 126, 134, 187, 189, 190, 214
nine 189, 216
Confucian xvi
consciousness(es) 23, 56, 65, 102, 103,
120, 174, 194, 213, 217
six 120
unlimited 87, 212
constellation(s) (see also planet; star)
20, 146, 209, 213, 214
conversion, convert(ed) xiii, xiv, 15, 16,
66, 115, 123, 129, 137, 145, 150, 151,
152, 153, 154, 157, 158, 162, 165,
174, 195, 203, 213, 215, 218
covetousness, hatred, and delusion (see
also greed, anger, and delusion; three
poisons) 78
craving 80, 101, 102, 103, 139, 182, 213
Crown Prince (see also Buddha; Siddhārtha) 6, 9, 12, 14, 15, 17, 19, 20, 21, 22,
23, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33,
34, 35, 36, 37, 39, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45,
46, 51, 52, 53, 55, 59, 64, 66, 67, 69,
70, 71, 73, 75, 83, 84, 86, 87, 137, 142
Cunda 176

D

Daṇḍa 151
Daṇḍakas 78, 211
Daochang Temple xv
Daśabala Kāśyapa 108
Daśaratha 57, 210
Da Zhoushi (see also Tan Wuchen) xv
death (see also birth and death; old age,
illness, and death) 10, 11, 16, 24, 27,
35, 36, 38, 40, 42, 47, 54, 57, 62, 63,
78, 80, 84, 85, 90, 100, 101, 102, 103,

120, 130, 139, 148, 153, 160, 185,
187, 207, 211, 213, 216, 217
ﬁve signs of 101, 212
of Śākyamuni (see also parinirvāṇa)
xiii
deathless, deathlessness 37, 207
deer 14, 35, 37, 44, 45, 46, 78, 80
deliverance 5, 6, 32, 59, 64, 65, 84, 85,
87, 88, 89, 93, 104, 109, 117, 118,
125, 126, 132, 133, 135, 168, 184,
186, 189, 207, 209
cause for, of 40, 61, 64, 135
gate of 10, 170
path of 10, 65, 81, 93, 110, 125, 181,
186
true 34, 50, 75, 81, 87, 186
delusion (see also ignorance) 10, 22, 27,
62, 85, 101, 103, 125, 127, 149, 168,
174, 182, 193, 211, 213
eight kinds of 85
four kinds of 188
great 85, 188
demon(s) (see also yakṣa) 93, 151, 152,
153, 203, 215
dependent origination 213
desire(s) (see also duty, riches, desire) 5,
10, 11, 14, 15, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 32,
40, 50, 72, 73, 76, 77, 78, 84, 85, 86,
88, 90, 96, 101, 108, 110, 111, 117,
118, 126, 129, 135, 142, 143, 159,
160, 163–64, 167, 174, 177, 182, 186,
189, 192, 196, 203, 209, 211, 212, 217
ﬁve 10, 17, 21, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32,
34, 35, 40, 47, 62, 63, 66, 67, 72,
73, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 85, 93, 118,
135, 139, 142, 148, 149, 158, 159,
174, 187, 203, 205, 214
for existence 130, 182
for matter 87, 126
object(s) of 10, 50, 77, 78, 80, 83, 148
realm of 86, 210, 211, 222

229

Index
destination(s) 42, 81, 154
animal 100, 134, 216
ﬁve, six 85, 99, 101, 131, 134, 139,
159, 212, 216, 217
of humans 100
of hungry ghosts 57, 100, 134
woeful 43, 77, 80, 99, 104, 111, 129,
133, 140, 146, 159, 163, 184, 216
Devadatta 153, 155, 214, 216
devas (see also god) 217
dharma, artha, kāma. See duty, riches,
desire
Dharma (see also Buddha, Dharma, and
Sangha; Law) 216
Dharma, Dharmāśoka (see also Aśoka)
206, 218
Dharmaguptaka xiv
Dharmarddhin (see also Tan Wuchen)
xv
Dharmaśreṣṭhin 213
Dharmavṛddhin (see also Tan Wuchen)
xv
Dhṛtarāṣṭra 213, 220
Dīrghatapas Gautama 25
disciple(s) 84, 112, 113, 116, 118, 119,
123, 125, 127, 137, 141, 177, 183,
189, 213, 215
lay 215, 216
discipline (see also Vinaya) 97, 175,
176, 216
dragon(s) 37, 38, 43, 73, 91, 93, 95, 96,
103, 104, 145
-elephant 26, 61, 192
kings 4, 153
-snakes 96
Dragon-Elephant Gate 197
Droṇa 202
Droṇodana 214
Druma 61, 66
duck(s) (see also mandarin ducks) 55,
210

230

duty, riches, desire (see also three happinesses) 72, 209, 211
dyed garment, robe (see also kāṣāya;
robe) 44, 60, 114, 142, 162

E

eightfold path 103, 110, 111, 182
eight winds. See eight worldly factors
eight worldly factors 79, 193, 211, 217
element(s) 130, 195, 211
ﬁve great 84, 91, 211
four 22
objective 84, 85, 87
elephant(s) 11, 13, 26, 33, 41, 56, 83,
95, 139, 154, 167, 185, 187, 190, 192,
194, 201, 212
dragon- 26, 61, 192
maddened 19, 33, 34, 149, 151, 153,
154, 184
emptiness 87, 212
enlightenment (see also awakening;
bodhi) 212, 213, 217
eon(s) 4, 13, 17, 97, 98, 101, 147, 155,
177, 189, 194, 195
ﬁre of 115, 148, 191, 213
Essence of Scholasticism, The (Willemen) 213
evil, evildoer(s) 14, 47, 54, 77, 86, 95,
96, 97, 99, 100, 115, 116, 131, 133,
145, 146, 147, 153, 155, 159, 163,
184, 185, 187, 195
extinction 10, 32, 47, 49, 65, 80, 84,
103, 111, 119, 120, 124, 126, 130,
132, 134, 135, 140, 148, 165, 167,
169, 170, 178, 181, 182, 183, 187,
188, 189, 191, 196, 197, 199, 217
eye (see also sense faculties, senses) 84,
211, 217
buddha 104
celestial, divine, highest, of purity,
universal 50, 99, 101, 102, 111,
135, 195, 215, 217

Index

F

of the Law 110, 112, 120, 124, 125
of wisdom 93, 188, 217
of the world (see also Buddha) 177

factor(s) 84, 124, 126, 132, 133, 183,
188, 191, 213, 216
eight worldly 79, 93, 211, 217
faculties 15, 16, 21, 23, 33, 52, 59, 65,
72, 84, 86, 89, 90, 102, 107, 110, 113,
114, 117, 119, 120, 123, 129, 142,
147, 158, 159, 184, 193, 195, 211
of action 84, 211
of intellection 84, 211
of mind 84, 211
sense 71, 89, 102, 103, 109, 120, 159,
177, 184, 195, 211, 213
faith 118, 125, 129, 140, 147, 149, 151,
153, 154, 160, 183, 185, 207
Faxian xiv, xv
Fei Changfang xv
fetters (see also bond) 135, 188
First Council xiii
ﬁve desires 17, 21, 27, 29, 30, 31, 32,
34, 35, 40, 47, 62, 63, 66, 67, 72, 73,
75, 76, 78, 79, 85, 93, 135, 139, 159,
203, 205, 214
objects of 10, 28, 29, 34, 73, 75, 77,
118, 148, 174, 187
ﬁve modes 85, 211
Fo benxing jing xv
Fo benxing zan xv
foolish, foolishness 22, 27, 32, 42, 54,
62, 63, 64, 75, 76, 77, 80, 85, 86, 97,
109, 110, 117, 126, 196, 203
foolishness, action, and desire 84, 211,
212
forbearance 97, 98, 185, 194, 203, 204
forest (s) (see also mountain; wilderness)
3, 6, 8, 17, 33, 39, 43, 45, 46, 48, 52,
53, 55, 56, 57, 59, 60, 62, 63, 65, 66,

78, 90, 95, 98, 99, 105, 108, 110, 113,
114, 143, 146, 162, 188, 194
of asceticism 40, 44, 45, 52, 53, 59,
65, 89, 117
formation(s) 103, 130, 167, 169, 191,
213
four analytical knowledges 126, 213
four beneﬁts, four losses (see also eight
worldly factors) 193, 217
fourfold attitudes of the noble (see also
abodes, of the noble) 13, 209
fourfold pure conduct 14, 209
four kings 105, 190, 213
four pure abodes. See abodes, pure, of
the noble
four ranges (see also mindfulness, four
applications of) 168, 169
fruition(s) 9, 21, 43, 46, 64, 65, 81, 83,
87, 90, 113, 114, 118, 120, 125, 129,
134, 135, 139, 140, 141, 147
of arhatship 113
ﬁrst 130, 207, 214, 218
of a śramaṇa 214, 218

G

Gādhin 7, 214
Gaja (see also Gayā Kāśyapa) 116, 213
Gaja Mountain (see also Mount Gayaśiras) 89, 115, 152, 178
Gandhāra 151, 153
gandharva(s) 15, 35, 217
Ganges River 16, 69, 108, 157, 158,
162, 170
Gansu province xv
Gardabha 152
Garuḍa 198
garuḍas 217
gāthā(s) (see also stanza) 151, 175, 191
Gautama (see also Buddha) 28, 108, 109
Gautama Ford 158
Gautama Gate 157, 158

231

Index
gautamaka(s) 152, 215
Gautamī (see also Mahāprajāpāti Gautamī) 41
Gayā 108, 212
Gayā Kāśyapa (see also Gaja) 213
god(s) 3, 4, 5, 12, 14, 16, 20, 22, 25, 26,
28, 37, 38, 44, 45, 46, 48, 59, 60, 65,
71, 72, 89, 91, 93, 95, 99, 101, 102,
103, 104, 108, 112, 117, 123, 124,
125, 131, 134, 138, 139, 140, 148,
150, 151, 154, 158, 163, 165, 169,
177, 178, 187, 189, 190, 191, 192,
195, 197, 199, 203, 207, 209, 210
brahmakāyika 46, 210
immaterial, of no form 126, 148
of the pure abodes 5, 21, 23, 32, 36,
90, 96, 190
six kinds of desiring 210, 213
thirty-three 76, 213
Vasu 45
going forth (see also renunciation) 11,
17, 34, 60, 64, 141
greed, anger, and delusion (see also
covetousness, hatred, and delusion;
three poisons) 63, 97, 104, 139, 154,
197, 213, 214, 217
guṇa. See attribute
Guzang (see also Liangzhou) xv, xvi

H

Haimavata 151, 215
Han dynasty xvii, 211
happiness(es) 6, 16, 17, 21, 28, 29, 31,
32, 33, 46, 47, 64, 73, 77, 79, 80, 81,
86, 102, 107, 120, 131, 133, 134, 135,
139, 140, 147, 148, 149, 161, 162,
163, 175, 186, 191, 194, 207
celestial 47, 57, 76, 78, 129
of the ﬁve desires 35, 129, 139
of going forth, renunciation 35, 64, 86

232

in, of the Law, Right Law 8, 49, 55,
60, 63, 73, 129, 146, 160, 181, 194,
197, 202, 205
of prosperity 37, 141
of quietude, subtle, of tranquility 129,
178, 188
of rebirth in heaven 17, 46, 49, 50, 79,
94, 101, 135, 151, 186
three (see also duty, riches, desire) 80,
211
worldly 17, 22, 108, 141, 163, 207
Harivarman xiii
Haryaṅka family 75
Haryaśva 134
Hastā 213
Hastaka 152
heaven(s) 14, 17, 40, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50,
52, 57, 65, 69, 72, 73, 76, 79, 80, 85,
94, 95, 96, 98, 101, 104, 111, 119,
129, 130, 135, 136, 146, 151, 163,
167, 170, 186, 190, 191, 195, 196,
210, 211–212, 218
hell(s) 99, 101, 216
heretic(s), heretical 7, 16, 47, 149, 150,
153, 173, 181, 194, 215
Hotan. See Khotan
Hikata Ryūshō xv
Himalayas (see also Snowy Mountains)
210, 214
Hindu xvi
Hiraṇyagarbha (see also Kapila; Prajāpati) 211
Hiraṇyavatī River 176, 197
horse(s) 9, 11, 13, 14, 19, 24, 26, 31, 37,
38, 39, 40, 41, 43, 44, 51, 52, 53, 54,
55, 56, 59, 95, 139, 184, 192, 196,
201, 205, 217
householder(s) (see also worldling) 149,
186, 187
Huiguan xv, xvii

Index
hungry ghost(s) 57, 100, 101
destination of 57, 100, 134, 216

I

ignorance (see also delusion) 88, 110,
127, 149, 168, 170, 174, 176, 187,
211, 213
Ikṣvāku 3, 7, 45, 59, 83, 104, 123
immortal, immortality 9, 37, 83, 107,
110, 112, 121, 124, 130, 134, 139,
140, 141, 151, 154, 175, 194
impermanence 24, 28, 29, 32, 40, 62, 76,
77, 80, 126, 130, 134, 147, 169, 170,
173, 174, 175, 190, 191, 192, 193, 195
incense (see also sandalwood) 5, 53, 145
India, Indian (see also Central India)
xiii, xiv, xv, xvi, 1, 219
Indra 209, 210, 218
Indra’s Rock. See Indraśailaguhā
Indraśailaguhā 218
insight 4, 17, 60, 83, 107, 112, 114, 133,
135, 141, 154, 164, 174, 181, 183,
191, 195, 207, 214
Īśvara 65, 69, 89, 102, 124, 131, 148,
169

J

Jaigīṣavya 87, 212
Jain (see also nirgrantha) 151, 215
Jālinī 215
Jambhala 214
Jambudvīpa 150, 190, 206
jāmbūnada 14
jambū tree 32, 90
Janaka 7, 61, 87, 212
Japanese xiv
Jātiśroṇi 152
Jayanta 59, 60, 210
Jeta 135, 136
Jetavana 145
Jiankang xv, xvi, xvii

Jīvaka 151
Johnston, E. H. xiv
jñeya water 50, 210
Jupiter 218
Jyeṣṭhā 213
Jyotiṣka 151, 215

K

Kakśīvat 4
Kāla 91
Kālaka 153
Kālāma family 83
Kālidāsa xiii
Kalmāṣadamya 152
kalpa. See eon
Kalpanāmaṇḍitikā xiii
kāmadhātu. See realm, of desire
Kaniṣka xiii
Kapila (see also Hiraṇyagarbha; Prajāpati) 84, 123, 152, 211
Kapilavastu 12, 41, 43, 51, 137, 141,
145, 218
Kapiñjalāda 28
Karandhama 202
karṇikāra ﬂowers 36, 171
Kārttikeya 209
kāṣāya (see also dyed garment; robe)
44, 71, 141
Kāśi (see also Vārāṇasī) 105, 108
Kaśmīra xiii
Kāśyapa (see also Mahākāśyapa) 115,
116, 118, 119, 198
Kāśyapa family, seers (see also Daśabala
Kāśyapa; Gaya Kāśyapa; Kāśyapa;
Mahākāśyapa; Uruvilva Kāśyapa)
115, 117, 118, 125
Kātyāyana 152
Kātyāyanīputra 213
Kauṇḍinya family (see also Ājñāta
Kauṇḍinya) 108, 112
Kauravas 78, 203, 211

233

Index
Kauśāṃbī 153
kāvya literature xiii, xiv
Kenya 151
Khotan xiv
kiṃnaras 217
king(s) xiii, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12,
14, 15, 17, 19, 22, 23, 24, 26, 27, 29,
30, 31, 34, 35, 37, 38, 40, 41, 42, 44,
52, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 64,
65, 66, 67, 70, 71, 77, 79, 80, 81, 82,
83, 107, 117, 118, 121, 123, 134, 137,
138, 139, 140, 141, 146, 147, 149,
151, 154, 157, 162, 196, 197, 202,
203, 204, 207, 209, 210, 214
animal 105
of the animals (see also lion) 4, 45
celestial 4, 5, 12, 63, 93, 104, 136, 139
dragon 4, 153
eight 206
of the ﬁve desires (see also Māra) 93
former, of the past, previous 7, 17, 63,
73, 83, 148, 203
four 105, 136, 190, 213
of the gods of the pure abodes 21
goose 37
human, of humans 17, 25, 139, 146,
196
of the Law, physician-, Śākya, of the
Śākyas (see also Buddha) 3, 9, 10,
170
lion 33, 71, 96, 177
ox 33, 53, 105, 138, 162, 190
seer 17, 93, 94, 140, 169, 191
seven 201, 205, 207, 218
thousand-armed (see also Ugrāyudha)
77, 203
vices of 209, 211
wheel-turning 6, 8, 57, 72, 76, 140, 169
Kośala 129, 135, 145, 153, 215
Krauḍyas 218
Kṛmila 141

234

Kṛśāśva 146
kṣatriya 77, 94, 204, 212
Kubjottarā (see also Uttarā) 216
Kukustā River 176
Kumāra 152
Kumārajīva xv
Kumāralāta xiii
Kumbha Stupa (see also Shrine of the
Golden Pitcher) 218
Kumbhīra 153
kumuda ﬂower (see also lotus) 89, 212
Kuṇṭhadhāna 141
Kuśika 7
Kuśinagara 113, 176, 201, 206, 218
Kūṭadatta 151
Kuṭi 158
Kuvera 214, 215

L

Law (see also Dharma; Right Law; True
Law) xiv, 5, 10, 14, 16, 20, 33, 34, 35,
37, 40, 49, 55, 57, 59, 60, 63, 64, 71,
72, 73, 81, 90, 93, 94, 95, 97, 103,
104, 105, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116,
117, 119, 124, 125, 129, 130, 137, 138,
141, 142, 146, 147, 149, 150, 151,
154, 157, 158, 159, 160, 161, 164,
167, 168, 169, 173, 175, 176, 179,
183, 184, 186, 193, 194, 197, 201,
203, 204, 205, 210, 213, 216
bridge of 170, 197
excellent, ﬁne, wonderful 4–5, 32,
116, 124, 140, 149, 151, 168, 169,
174, 194, 207
eye of 111, 112, 120, 124
ﬁrst exposition of 105
garment, robe of xvii, 52, 63, 71
happiness in, with 49, 55, 60, 63, 73,
146, 160, 162, 181, 193, 194, 205
profound 107, 112, 140, 151, 194
superior, unsurpassed 61, 97, 194

Index
of tranquility 76, 105, 198
wheel of 104, 107, 198
lay disciple(s) (see also upāsaka;
upāsikā) 215, 216
Liangzhou xiv, xv, xvi
Licchavi(s) 152, 161, 164, 165, 167,
169, 170, 171, 173, 175, 218
lion(s) 4, 31, 45, 53, 91, 95, 105, 112,
138, 161, 175, 192, 196, 204, 206
king 33, 71, 96, 177
Liuheshan Temple xv
Liu Song dynasty xv
lotus(es) 3, 4, 5, 20, 38, 53, 56, 63, 124,
138, 154, 190, 212
Lotus Sutra xvii
Lumbinī 3, 5
lunar (see also moon) 61, 210

M

Magadha 117, 137, 157, 215, 218
māgaṇḍika 152, 215
Mahākāśyapa (see also Kāśyapa) 126,
127, 213
mahāmāndārava ﬂowers (see also
mandāra ﬂowers) 102
Mahāparinirvāṇa-sūtra xv
Mahāprajāpāti Gautamī (see also Gautamī) 14, 53
Mahāsāṃghika(s) xiii
Mahāsudarśana 55
Mahāvana 216
Mahāvibhāṣā xiii
Mahāyus 152
Maheśvara (see also Śiva) 12, 71, 94,
209, 212
Mahīvatī 152
mahoragas 217
makara ﬁsh 174, 216
Makuṭabandhana Caitya 218
Mallas 175, 176, 177, 178, 179, 196,
197, 198, 201, 204, 205, 218

Maming pusa zan xv
mandāra ﬂowers (see also
mahāmāndārava ﬂowers) 5, 221
mandarin ducks (see also duck) 55, 211
Māndhātṛ 4, 72, 76, 138, 169
maṇi 40
Manu 14, 57
Māra(s), Māra Pāpīyas (see also Pāpīyas)
6, 46, 93–98, 99, 104, 165, 190, 194,
195, 210
mark(s) 6, 37, 72, 125
of the Buddha’s body (see also wheel,
on the palms or soles) 69, 70, 141,
152, 170, 193
Markaṭa Pond 165, 216
Mars 218
Mathurā 152
Maudgalyāyana xiv, 124, 213
Mauryas 206
Māyā 3, 14
medicines(s) 14, 56, 62, 78, 164, 178,
185, 188, 193
meditation 7, 81, 90, 139
Meghākalī 96
Mekhalas 78, 211
Meṇḍhaka (see also Prajīvana) 215
mendicants (see also bhikṣu; monk) 149
Mercury 218
merit(s), meritorious 16, 41, 43, 46, 47,
48, 53, 56, 72, 75, 94, 101, 117, 118,
130, 134, 136, 140, 146, 163, 170, 177,
202, 207
ﬁeld of 105, 136
roots of 21, 28
mind(s) (see also body, speech, and mind)
11, 14, 15, 16, 17, 19, 21, 23, 24, 27,
29, 34, 36, 41, 42, 44, 45, 47, 49, 54,
57, 58, 59, 61, 71, 73, 76, 77, 83, 84,
85, 86, 88, 89, 90, 94, 97, 104, 109,
113, 114, 116, 117, 119, 124, 125, 126,
133, 135, 136, 138, 139, 140, 146, 147,

235

Index
mind(s) (continued)
154, 158, 159, 160, 162, 163, 164,
169, 175, 177, 178, 179, 183, 184, 185,
186, 187, 191, 194, 195, 196, 197, 199,
204, 206, 207, 211
of the Bodhisattva, Buddha, Crown
Prince, Tathāgata 4, 15, 16, 17, 22,
25, 26, 28, 32, 33, 34, 35, 37, 38,
42, 43, 46, 54, 63, 66, 70, 75, 88,
89, 94, 96, 98, 99, 104, 109, 110,
117, 134, 138, 142, 143, 154, 165,
189, 193
compassionate 154, 189
controlled, ﬁrm, settled, stable 26, 34,
37, 42, 54, 117, 162
ﬁckle 175, 184
ﬁne 47, 89
open 66, 83, 182, 185
upright 81, 159
mindful, mindfulness(es) 135, 147, 149,
154, 162, 173, 175, 185, 187
eight 135, 214
four applications of (see also four
ranges) 216
of the Law, Right Law 33, 169
right 110, 112, 118, 158, 159, 187, 214
minister(s) 11, 12, 13, 19, 22, 30, 31, 35,
56, 57, 59, 60, 64, 66, 67, 69, 137,
141, 161, 210
monk(s) (see also bhikṣu) xiv, 209
monkey(s) 184, 187
moon, moonlight (see also lunar) 3, 4, 5,
7, 14, 22, 33, 42, 44, 46, 60, 67, 71,
79, 83, 89, 90, 94, 98, 104, 107, 113,
138, 169, 173, 181, 183, 188, 190,
192, 196, 213, 218
morality 10, 81, 86, 93, 112, 117, 129,
161, 162–63, 181, 184
mountain(s) (see also forest; wilderness)
5, 6, 8, 17, 33, 35, 42, 43, 45, 53, 56,
57, 60, 62, 63, 65, 66, 78, 95, 100,

236

102, 105, 108, 113, 114, 115, 137,
143, 147, 149, 162, 170, 176, 178,
188, 190, 192, 198, 206, 210
ﬁve 69, 137, 214, 215
Mount Aṭavī 152
Mount Gayaśiras (see also Gaja Mountain) 212
Mount Gṛdhrakūṭa (see also Vulture
Peak) 153, 206
Mount Kailāsa 145, 214, 218
Mount Lu xiv
Mount Pāṇḍava 70, 71
Mount Pāṣāṇaka 151, 215
Mount Sumeru (see also Sumeru) 7, 35,
97, 209, 216
Mount Tai xvii, 154
Mount Vaidehaka 151
Mount Vipula 151, 215
mūlācārya xiii
mulberry tree xvii, 71, 210
muni(s) (see also seer) 42, 50, 66, 81, 83,
91, 93, 94, 96, 103, 104, 108, 152,
191, 192, 194, 195, 206, 208
muñja grass 87, 212

N

Nadī 116
Nādikā 158
Nagarī 89, 212
nāgas (see also dragon) 217
Nahuṣa 76
Nairañjanā River 89, 90, 165
Nakula 153
Nalakūbara 12
Nālandā 215
Nanda xiv, 141, 151
Nandā Balajā 90
Nanjing. See Jiankang
Nārāyaṇa 61
nature(s) 6, 15, 26, 31, 36, 45, 62, 64,
65, 84, 85, 87, 94, 97, 111, 120, 124,

Index
126, 130, 132, 153, 168, 169, 182,
186, 188, 191, 202, 206, 211
speciﬁc 7, 64, 65, 101, 102, 132–33,
154, 168, 182, 214
Nepalese xvi
Nikumbha 146
nirgrantha (see also Jain) 151, 215
nirvana 33, 113, 139, 183, 191, 192, 206
of the Buddha, World-honored One
157, 165, 167, 170, 173, 175, 176,
177, 183, 189, 190, 192, 196, 198,
206, 207
ﬁnal, great (see also parinirvāṇa) 135,
157, 216
Nirvana Sutra (see also Mahāparinirvāṇasūtra) xv–xvi
Northern Liang dynasty 1
Nyagrodha 151, 215

O

obeisance 12, 20, 40, 59, 60, 69, 108,
119, 124, 125, 140, 141, 154, 159,
160, 164, 169, 177, 183
offering(s) 8, 11, 65, 136, 145, 157, 160,
165, 176, 197, 199, 201
ﬁre, to ﬁre 16, 48, 115, 116, 118, 162,
192
old age, illness, and death 27, 28, 29, 32,
59, 62, 65, 75, 84, 89, 110, 111, 118,
130, 147, 164, 174, 207
Ōminami Ryūshō xiv
omniscience, omniscient 103, 109, 119,
123, 174, 195
Omniscient One (see also Buddha) 149,
175, 178
“On the Date of the Tibetan Translation of
Aśvaghoṣa’s Buddhacarita” (Jackson)
xiii
order (see also Sangha) 136, 145, 153,
157
origination 32, 47, 84, 102, 103

ox, oxen 14, 31, 45, 95, 159, 185, 202
king 33, 53, 105, 138, 162, 190

P

Pāli 215
Pañcaśikha (see also Vṛddha Parāśara)
151, 212, 215
Pāṇḍavas 203
Pāpā 176, 218
Pāpīyas (see also Māra, Māra Pāpīyas)
93, 165
Parāśara (see also Vṛddha Parāśara) 7,
28, 212
Pārāyaṇika 151, 215
parinirvāṇa 173, 181, 183, 190, 191, 216
Pārvatī 212
Pāṭalī Caitya 157
Pāṭaliputra 157
path(s) 9, 17, 26, 45, 46, 55, 57, 72, 77,
87, 89, 90, 91, 94, 108, 110, 113, 116,
118, 124, 125, 130, 136, 137, 138,
141, 142, 149, 162, 174, 178, 187,
188, 195, 207
of arhatship 125
of a buddha, Buddha, Tathāgata 4,
109, 153, 181, 182
of deliverance 10, 65, 81, 93, 110,
125, 181, 186
eightfold 103, 110, 111, 182
essential 109, 205
ﬁnal 87, 182
of freedom from desire, of little desire
110, 143
heretical 181, 194
of meditation, quietude, silence, tranquility 7, 17, 194, 196
middle 110
noble 194, 213
of right awakening 9, 11, 91, 97, 103
right, pure, straight 66, 90, 109, 111,
118, 151, 186

237

Index
path(s) (continued)
of seers 11, 16, 17
true, of truth 46, 50, 193
two 84, 211
of the unique vehicle 169
wrong 97, 147, 173, 174, 182, 191
peacock(s) 45, 70, 217
permanence (see also two extremes;
views, two, of the two extremes) 32,
76, 139, 169, 183
planet(s) (see also constellation; star)
218
power(s) 38, 65, 76, 96, 100, 113, 118,
131, 157, 166, 173, 198, 204, 210,
211, 215, 217
of beauty 25, 26, 162
divine 11, 21, 37, 119, 140, 141, 149,
150, 152, 155, 157, 161, 165, 173,
174, 193
of the Law 90, 160
royal 72, 147
supernatural 125, 138, 150, 195, 215
of wisdom 107, 174
Prabhāsa 209
practice(s) 16, 46, 47, 48, 55, 59, 66,
118, 120, 175, 185
of austerities 101, 109
of the Law 34, 49, 114, 160
of the path 11, 17, 149, 178
Prajā 153
Prajāpati (see also Hiraṇyagarbha;
Kapila) 84, 211
Prajīvana (see also Meṇḍhaka) 152, 215
Prakrit xvi
Prasenajit 134, 145
prātimokṣa (see also Vinaya) 183, 184,
216
precepts 45, 89, 97, 119, 126, 163, 184,
216
preceptor 57, 59, 60, 67, 69, 137, 183,
210

238

Prodbhūtopadeśa. See Chengshi lun
propriety(ies) 15, 35, 70, 75, 80, 109,
136
Pṛthu 4
Pukkusāti. See Puṣkara
Punarvasu 60
pure conduct 8, 14, 17, 26, 66, 85, 86,
117, 209
Pūrṇabhadra 151, 152, 215
Purūravas (see also Aiḷa) 210
Puṣkara 151, 215
Puṣkarasārin 153

Q

qualities 42, 47, 52, 71, 75, 162, 164,
175, 181, 205, 212, 216
of the Crown Prince, Bodhisattva,
Buddha, Gautama, Tathāgata 5, 8,
48, 70, 71, 116, 141, 153, 157, 193,
195, 196, 198, 207
excellent, ﬁne, good, noble 11, 47, 97,
118, 163, 184
pure 3, 15, 111
ten 127
quietude 3, 64, 81, 86, 87, 90, 94, 96,
107, 112, 129, 130, 139, 141, 149,
168, 175, 177, 178, 187, 193, 194,
195, 203, 214

R

Rāgā 93
Rāhula 17, 56, 142
Rājagṛha xiii, 70, 82, 117, 123, 153,
157, 198, 214, 215
Rāja-śāstras 209
rākṣasa 152
Rāma (descendant of Bhṛgu) 42, 51, 61,
77, 203, 210
Rāma (son of Daśaratha) 60, 61, 65, 66,
210
Rāmagrāma 207, 218

Index
Rāṣṭrapāla 152
Ratī 93
realm(s) 93, 198
of desire 86, 210, 211
of form, material 149, 210, 211, 213,
216
of no-form, immaterial 149, 211, 212,
213
three (see also three worlds) 81, 149,
211, 217
rebirth 17, 40, 46, 47, 49, 50, 79, 85, 86,
94, 101, 118, 120, 130, 135, 139, 151,
186, 188, 207
relics xiii, 198, 199, 201, 205, 207, 216,
218
renunciation (see also going forth) 25,
35, 86, 129, 130, 170, 175, 214
retreat, summer, three-month 136, 150,
165
Right Law (see also Law; True Law) 8,
9, 10, 11, 15, 17, 33, 40, 41, 43, 48,
59, 80, 90, 105, 107, 108, 112, 113,
114, 116, 141, 147, 151, 152, 153,
155, 160, 163, 173, 175, 183, 186,
187, 189, 197, 202, 205, 206
eye of 110, 125
faith in 153, 160
happiness in 8, 129
receptacle, vessel for, of 83, 116, 129,
140, 162, 181
robe (see also dyed garment; kāṣāya)
44, 133, 186
of the Law xvii, 63, 71
rodhra. See mulberry tree
root(s) xvii, 40, 46, 97, 162, 174, 192,
210
meritorious, of merit 21, 28
wholesome 113, 143, 185
Ṛṣyaśṛṅga 209

S

Śacī 210
sacriﬁce(s), sacriﬁcial 11, 16, 17, 50, 55,
56, 65, 73, 80, 81, 118, 125, 151, 170,
192
Sagara 7
Sāketa xiii
śakunta bird 210
Śakra 3, 12, 26, 28, 33, 45, 48, 56, 59,
60, 71, 72, 76, 81, 108, 117, 146, 169,
188, 206, 215
Śākyamuni (see also Buddha) xiii, 125,
210
Śākya(s) 39, 51, 70, 118, 141, 161, 218
śāla grove, trees 175, 176, 190, 196, 216
Śālvadruma 61
Śālvas 66
salvation 6, 145, 173, 178, 193, 195, 196
samādhi(s) 10, 32, 99, 130, 135, 149,
165, 166, 187, 189
Saṃjaya 57
Sāṃkāśya 215
Sāṃkhya philosophy xvi, 210, 211, 212,
214, 216
samsara (see also birth and death; rebirth)
26, 148, 168, 215
Sanatkumāra 15
sandalwood 5, 14, 35, 167, 218
oxhead 197, 218
Sandalwood Hall 152
Sangha (see also Buddha, Dharma, and
Sangha) 157, 213, 217
Sanskrit xiii, xiv, xv, xvi, 210
Saptabhava-sūtra 217
Sārasvata 7
Śāriputra xiv, 123, 124, 136, 213
Śāriputraprakaraṇa xiv
Sarvāstivāda xiii
Sātāgra 151, 215
Saturn 218

239

Index
Satyaka Nirgranthaputra 152, 215
Saundarānanda xiv
Sautrāntika(s) xiii, xiv
scriptural text(s), scripture(s) (see also
sutra) 7, 11, 65, 84, 85, 86, 110, 157,
176, 206, 208
seer(s) (see also muni) 7, 8–9, 11, 20,
26, 28, 29, 39, 44, 45, 46, 47, 50, 59,
60, 65, 76, 77, 84, 87, 88, 89, 94, 103,
104, 105, 108, 115, 116, 117, 123,
137, 146, 149, 152, 153, 169, 191,
203, 212, 214, 215
brahman 26, 48, 115, 191
celestial, divine 8, 14, 16, 25, 45, 48,
150
great, greatest 25, 81, 83, 93, 103,
105, 112, 115, 162, 175, 192, 204
king(s) 17, 93, 94, 140, 169, 191
path of 11, 16
royal 48, 115, 141
serpent- 46
Śela 151
self 65, 84–85, 87, 88, 102, 104, 111,
119, 120, 124, 126, 130, 133, 164,
168, 169, 183, 211, 212, 214, 216, 217
self-discipline, self-control 25, 112, 142
Senajit kings 61
Sengyou xiv, xv
sense faculties, senses 71, 89, 103, 109,
159, 177, 184, 195, 211, 213
six 102, 103, 120, 213
sense objects 28, 184, 187, 211, 213
serpent(s) (see also snake) 46, 76
Śetavika 153
seven precious things 12, 13, 35, 63,
150, 196
Shrine of the Golden Pitcher (see also
Kumbha Stupa) 206
Śibi 100
Siddhārtha (see also Crown Prince;
Buddha) 14, 141

240

Siṃha 152, 161, 173, 175, 215
singleminded(ness) 20, 202
Sītā 203
Śiva (see also Maheśvara) 209, 212, 214
Skanda. See Kārttikeya
snake(s) (see also serpent) 63, 75, 77,
79, 95, 96, 139, 165, 178, 184, 185,
192, 202, 204
Snowy Mountains (see also Himalayas)
13, 48, 54, 67, 94, 210, 212
solitude 26, 63, 79, 86, 141, 168, 175
soma 16
Southern Cross. See Triśaṅku
spirit(s) 3, 4, 6, 16, 38, 55, 96, 103, 104,
112, 118, 121, 131, 151, 152
celestial 11, 12, 23, 38, 41, 50, 55, 56,
59, 73, 90, 105, 112, 151, 157, 190,
217
spiritual beings 5, 209, 212
śramaṇa(s) 11, 32, 33, 114, 125
four fruitions of 214, 218
Śrāvastī 134, 136, 152
Śrīguptaka 151
Śroṇa 151
srotaāpanna. See stream-winner
stanza(s) (see also gāthā) xvi, xvii, 7,
209, 210, 211, 212, 213, 214, 216,
217, 218
star(s) (see also constellation; planet) 7,
20, 38, 52, 60, 95, 98, 137, 139, 173,
183, 196
ﬁve 113, 213
seven 4, 209
three 127, 213
Stavakarṇin 152
Sthāṇumatī 151, 215
Sthūlakoṣṭhaka 152
stream-winner (see also fruition, ﬁrst) 214
stupa(s) (see also caitya) 205, 206, 207,
218
Subhadra 181, 182, 183, 215

Index
Śubhakṛtsna Heaven 86, 212
Śūcīloma 152
Śuddhodana 3, 11, 13, 17, 59, 142
suffering 6, 10, 19, 22, 28, 29, 32, 35, 36,
37, 39, 42, 43, 46, 47, 49, 54, 55, 61,
63, 77, 78, 79, 81, 86, 89, 97, 99, 100,
101, 102, 110, 111, 117, 119, 120, 126,
130, 131, 133, 140, 147, 148, 149,
154, 160, 162, 163, 164, 169, 170,
177, 178, 179, 181, 186, 187, 189,
191, 196, 198, 207
basis of 118, 130, 148
beings, of beings 37, 104, 107, 115,
118, 170
of birth and death 31, 43, 85, 89, 105,
110, 140, 164, 178, 196, 207
cause(s) of 47, 100, 111, 140, 188
great 22, 29, 32, 47, 55, 79, 85, 101,
111, 129, 140, 160, 174, 177, 196,
198
of illness 22, 28, 65, 130, 164, 207
of old age 21, 28, 65, 130, 164, 207
receptacle, vessel of 22, 189, 193
of separation 42, 49, 61, 62, 101
truth of 188
two kinds of 207, 218
of woeful destinations 43, 159
Suhmas 152
Śukra 7, 60, 210
Śūla 129
Sumantra 42
Sumeru (see also Mount Sumeru) 5, 40,
51, 67, 73, 138, 146, 148, 165, 192,
198, 213
sun xvii, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 14, 17, 29, 31,
35, 37, 40, 44, 45, 46, 51, 59, 60, 67,
71, 91, 97, 120, 124, 137, 138, 141,
150, 153, 154, 161, 163, 170, 181,
190, 192, 197, 210, 213, 217, 218
Sunda 78
Sundarī 25

supernatural 116, 195
being(s) 217
power(s) 125, 138, 150, 195, 215
Śūra 151
Śūrpāraka 152
Sūrya (see also sun) 217
sutra(s) (see also scriptural text, scripture) xv, 175
Sutra (see also Tripiṭaka) xiii
Sūtrālaṃkāra xiv
Suvarṇākṣī xiii
svabhāva. See nature(s), speciﬁc

T

Ṭakana 152
Takṣaśilā 215
Tan Wuchen xiv, xv, 1
Tathāgata (see also Buddha) 5, 7, 105,
107, 108, 109, 112, 113, 114, 117, 124,
129, 136, 141, 143, 147, 151, 152, 154,
155, 158, 164, 165, 168, 170, 177, 178,
181, 183, 190, 191, 192, 196, 197, 199,
201, 206, 207, 213
Tattvasiddhi-śāstra. See Chengshi lun
“The Buddha’s Mission and Last Journey: Buddhacarita XV–XXVIII”
(Johnston) xiv
three actions (see also body, speech, and
mind) 139, 214, 217
three existences 49, 94, 166, 174, 210,
212
three happinesses (see also duty, riches,
desire) 80, 211
Three Jewels (see also Buddha, Dharma,
and Sangha) 213, 217
three poisons (see also covetousness,
hatred, and delusion; greed, anger, and
delusion) 213, 214, 217
three spheres 212
three worlds (see also realms, three)
110, 112, 139, 167, 170, 191, 197

241

Index
Tibetan xiii, 217
tonsure 52, 60, 142, 186
trance(s) 11, 86–87, 90, 99, 153, 211–212,
216
ﬁrst 32, 86, 189, 210, 212
fourth 86, 87, 189, 209, 212
second 86, 212
third 86, 212
tranquil, tranquility 15, 16, 34, 49, 64,
66, 70, 71, 89, 90, 98, 99, 103, 110,
111, 113, 118, 126, 130, 138, 140,
159, 168, 169, 173, 174, 176, 178,
182, 183, 185, 187, 188, 191, 194,
195, 196, 197, 198
Law of 76, 105, 198
Trāyastriṃśa Heaven 43, 76, 127, 150,
213
treatises 7, 209
Tripiṭaka (see also Abhidharma; Sutra;
Vinaya) xiii, 1
Triśaṅku 146, 214
Tṛṣṇā 93
True Law (see also Law; Right Law)
112, 168, 175, 176
twice-born 7, 46, 124, 125, 151
two extremes (see also annihilation;
permanence; views, two, of the two
extremes) 110, 119

U

Udāyin 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 141
Udraka Rāmaputra 83, 88, 89, 105, 212
Udumbarīkārāma 215
Ugrāyudha 210
unique vehicle xvii, 169
Universal Light. See Ābhāsvara Heaven
Universal Purity. See Śubhakṛtsna
Heaven
Upaga 107, 108
Upāli 141, 151, 215

242

Upananda 141
upāsaka (see also lay disciple) 215
upāsikā(s) (see also lay disciple) 153,
216
Upasunda 78
Upatiṣya 124, 135
Ursa Major 209
Uruvaśī 210
Uruvilva Kāśyapa 116
Uttarā (see also Kubjottarā) 153, 216
Uttarāpatha 215

V

Vaibhāṣika xiii
Vaibhrāja 61
Vaideha 206
Vaidehī 216
Vairañjā 152
Vaiśālī 152, 158, 161, 165, 170, 173,
175, 216, 218
Vaiśravaṇa 12, 35, 213
Vajra 61
Vālmīki 7
Vāmadeva 60, 210
Vāraṇa 152
Vārāṇasī (see also Kāśi) 105, 107, 152
Vārāṇasī River 108
Varṣākāra 216, 218
Vasiṣṭha 8, 60, 66, 169, 210
Vāṣpa 108
Vasu god 45
Vedas 7
Veṇugrāmaka 165
Veṇukaṇḍikā Nandamātā 215
Veṇukaṇṭakī 151, 215
Venus 218
Veṇuvana 123, 124, 129
Vibhāṇḍaka 26
Videha 61
Videhapura 152

Index
view(s) 15, 85, 119, 130, 150, 183, 195
of annihilation 183
of permanence 183
right 103, 110, 131
of self 119, 126
two, of the two extremes (see also two
extremes) 119, 126
wrong 41, 104, 131, 147, 149, 174, 181
Vinaya (see also prātimokṣa; Tripiṭaka)
216
Vindhya Mountains 50, 210
Virūḍhaka 213
Virūpākṣa 213
Viṣṇu 210
Viṣṇudvīpa 218
Viśvāmitra 26, 214
Vṛddha Parāśara (see also Pañcaśikha;
Parāśara) 87, 212
Vṛṣṇis 78, 203, 211
Vṛtra 52, 210
Vulture Peak (see also Mount Gṛdhrakūṭa)
69
Vyāsa 7, 209

W

Warring States period 218
wheel(s) 22
of existence, the ﬁve destinations,
samsara 46, 84, 85, 101, 103, 111,
118, 131, 139, 140, 215
of the Law, Right Law, True Law 104,
107, 108, 112, 194, 198
on the palms or soles (see also marks,
of the Buddha’s body) 9, 43, 152
wheel-turning king(s) 6, 8, 57, 72, 76,
140, 169
wilderness (s) (see also forest; mountain)
19, 33, 34, 42, 48, 97, 110, 163, 178
of afﬂictions 167
of birth and death 10, 80, 163

wisdom 7, 10, 17, 61, 64, 81, 86, 87, 93,
97, 110, 113, 125, 134, 135, 158, 160,
164, 170, 173, 176, 182, 187, 188,
193, 196, 214
adamantine 10, 198
arrow of 93, 159
boat of 10, 97, 149, 174, 187
of the Crown Prince, Bodhisattva,
Buddha, Tathagata 10, 21, 32, 49,
70, 83, 97, 140, 167, 170, 175, 191,
192, 193, 197
eye of 93, 188, 217
lamp of 97, 108, 110, 123, 127, 168,
187
power of 107, 174
pure 97, 117
three kinds of 188
world(s) 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15,
16, 17, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 28, 32, 42,
47, 50, 51, 53, 54, 68, 72, 73, 75, 76,
77, 79, 80, 81, 85, 91, 93, 97, 101, 103,
104, 105, 107, 108, 109, 111, 112, 115,
118, 119, 123, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133,
136, 139, 140, 145, 148, 158, 160, 162,
163, 164, 167, 170, 173, 174, 176, 178,
179, 181, 182, 183, 184, 185, 187, 188,
189, 190, 191, 192, 193, 194, 195, 196,
197, 198, 203, 204, 205, 206, 207, 208,
213, 214
eye of (see also Buddha) 177
four 6, 72, 76, 79, 138, 202
future, later 64, 80, 81, 143, 147, 162,
163, 170
present 39, 80, 146, 162, 163, 178, 184,
207
three 110, 112, 139, 167, 170, 191,
197, 217
two 80, 110
World-honored One (see also Buddha)
105, 109, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119,

243

Index
World-honored One (continued)
120, 123, 125, 134, 145, 149, 157,
159, 161, 167, 173, 174, 177, 181,
188, 189, 198, 204
worldling (see also householder) 21, 44
worldly 5, 10, 11, 15, 16, 17, 22, 25, 33,
34, 39, 42, 43, 57, 70, 71, 75, 80, 94,
108, 110, 114, 132, 139, 141, 142,
146, 148, 161, 163, 174, 175, 182,
207
factors, eight. See eight worldly factors
worship 5, 8, 39, 43, 46, 69, 89, 90, 98,
103, 104, 105, 109, 114, 115, 146,
154, 157, 183, 190, 201, 203, 204,
205, 206, 207

244

Wuwei district xv

Y

yakṣa(s) (see also demon) 152, 153,
215, 217
Yanzi Mountain 192, 217
Yaśas 113
Yaśodharā 15, 17, 41, 54, 55, 214
Yaṣṭivana 117

Z

zeal 97, 159, 182, 187, 197, 214
Zhi Qian xv
Zhou dynasty 218

BDK English Tripiṭaka
(First Series)

Title

Abbreviations
Ch.: Chinese
Skt.: Sanskrit
Jp.: Japanese
Eng.: Published title

Ch. Chang ahan jing (長阿含經)
Skt. Dīrghāgama

Taishō No.

1

Ch. Zhong ahan jing (中阿含經)
Skt. Madhyamāgama

26

Ch. Dasheng bensheng xindi guan jing (大乘本生心地觀經)

159

Ch. Fo suoxing zan (佛所行讃)
Skt. Buddhacarita
Eng. Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts (2009)

192

Ch. Faju piyu jing (法句譬喩經)
Eng. The Scriptural Text: Verses of the Doctrine, with Parables (1999)

211

Ch. Zabao zang jing (雜寶藏經)
Eng. The Storehouse of Sundry Valuables (1994)

203

Ch. Xiaopin banruo boluomi jing (小品般若波羅蜜經)
Skt. Aṣṭasāhasrikā-prajñāpāramitā-sūtra

227

Ch. Daluo jingang bukong zhenshi sanmoye jing
(大樂金剛不空眞實三麼耶經)
Skt. Adhyardhaśatikā-prajñāpāramitā-sūtra

243

Ch. Jingang banruo boluomi jing (金剛般若波羅蜜經)
Skt. Vajracchedikā-prajñāpāramitā-sūtra

245

235

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Renwang banruo boluomi jing (仁王般若波羅蜜經)
Skt. *Kāruṇikārājā-prajñāpāramitā-sūtra

Taishō No.
245

Ch. Banruo boluomiduo xin jing (般若波羅蜜多心經)
Skt. Prajñāpāramitāhṛdaya-sūtra

251

Ch. Wuliangyi jing (無量義經)

276

Ch. Dafangguang fo huayan jing (大方廣佛華嚴經)
Skt. Avataṃsaka-sūtra

278

Ch. Wuliangshou jing (無量壽經)
Skt. Sukhāvatīvyūha
Eng. The Larger Sutra on Amitāyus
(in The Three Pure Land Sutras, Revised Second Edition, 2003)

360

Ch. Miaofa lianhua jing (妙法蓮華經)
Skt. Saddharmapuṇḍarīka-sūtra
Eng. The Lotus Sutra

262

Ch. Guan Puxian pusa xingfa jing (觀普賢菩薩行法經)

277

Ch. Shengman shizihou yisheng defang bianfang guang jing
(勝鬘師子吼一乘大方便方廣經)
Skt. Śrīmālādevīsiṃhanāda-sūtra
Eng. The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of the Lion’s Roar (2004)

353

Ch. Guan wuliangshou fo jing (觀無量壽佛經)
Skt. *Amitāyurdhyāna-sūtra
Eng. The Sutra on Contemplation of Amitāyus
(in The Three Pure Land Sutras, Revised Second Edition, 2003)

365

Ch. Da bannie pan jing (大般涅槃經)
Skt. Mahāparinirvāṇa-sūtra

374

Ch. Dizang pusa benyuan jing (地藏菩薩本願經)
Skt. *Kṣitigarbhapraṇidhāna-sūtra

412

Ch. Amituo jing (阿彌陀經)
Skt. Sukhāvatīvyūha
Eng. The Smaller Sutra on Amitāyus
(in The Three Pure Land Sutras, Revised Second Edition, 2003)
Ch. Fochuibo niepan lüeshuo jiaojie jing (佛垂般涅槃略説教誡經)
Eng. The Bequeathed Teaching Sutra (in Apocryphal Scriptures, 2005)

246

366

389

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Banzhou sanmei jing (般舟三昧經)
Skt. Pratyutpanna-buddhasaṃmukhāvasthita-samādhi-sūtra
Eng. The Pratyutpanna Samādhi Sutra (1998)

Taishō No.
418

Ch. Yaoshi liuli guang rulai benyuan gongde jing
(藥師琉璃光如來本願功徳經)
Skt. Bhaiṣajyaguru-vaiḍūrya-prabhāsa-pūrvapraṇidhāna-viśeṣavistara

450

Ch. Wenshushili wen jing (文殊師利問經)
Skt. *Mañjuśrīparipṛcchā

468

Ch. Yueshangnü jing (月上女經)
Skt. Candrottarādārikā-paripṛcchā

480

Ch. Damoduoluo chan jing (達磨多羅禪經)

618

Ch. Shoulengyan sanmei jing (首楞嚴三昧經)
Skt. Śūraṅgamasamādhi-sūtra
Eng. The Śūraṅgama Samādhi Sutra (1998)

642

Ch. Dasheng rulengqie jing (入楞伽經)
Skt. Laṅkāvatāra-sūtra

672

Ch. Yulanpen jing (盂蘭盆經)
Skt. *Ullambana-sūtra
Eng. The Ullambana Sutra (in Apocryphal Scriptures, 2005)

685

Ch. Mile xiasheng chengfo jing (彌勒下生成佛經)
Skt. *Maitreyavyākaraṇa

Ch. Weimojie suoshuo jing (維摩詰所説經)
Skt. Vimalakīrtinirdeśa-sūtra
Eng. The Vimalakīrti Sutra (2004)

454

475

Ch. Zuochan sanmei jing (坐禪三昧經)
Eng. The Sutra on the Concentration of Sitting Meditation (2009)

614

Ch. Yuedeng sanmei jing (月燈三昧經)
Skt. Samādhirāja-candrapradīpa-sūtra

639

Ch. Jinguang ming zuishengwang jing (金光明最勝王經)
Skt. Suvarṇaprabhāsa-sūtra

Ch. Jie shenmi jing (解深密經)
Skt. Saṃdhinirmocana-sūtra
Eng. The Scripture on the Explication of Underlying Meaning (2000)

665

676

247

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Taishō No.

Ch. Sishierzhang jing (四十二章經)
Eng. The Sutra of Forty-two Sections (in Apocryphal Scriptures, 2005)

784

Ch. Dafangguang yuanjue xiuduoluo liaoyi jing
842
(大方廣圓覺修多羅了義經)
Eng. The Sutra of Perfect Enlightenment (in Apocryphal Scriptures, 2005)

Ch. Da Biluzhena chengfo shenbian jiachi jing
848
(大毘盧遮那成佛神變加持經)
Skt. Mahāvairocanābhisambodhi-vikurvitādhiṣṭhāna-vaipulyasūtrendrarājanāma-dharmaparyāya
Eng. The Vairocanābhisambodhi Sutra (2005)

Ch. Jinggangding yiqie rulai zhenshi she dasheng xianzheng dajiao
wang jing (金剛頂一切如來眞實攝大乘現證大教王經)
865
Skt. Sarvatathāgata-tattvasaṃgra-hamahāyānābhisamaya-mahākalparāja
Eng. The Adamantine Pinnacle Sutra (in Two Esoteric Sutras, 2001)

Ch. Suxidi jieluo jing (蘇悉地羯囉經)
Skt. Susiddhikara-mahātantra-sādhanopāyika-paṭala
Eng. The Susiddhikara Sutra (in Two Esoteric Sutras, 2001)

893

Ch. Modengqie jing (摩登伽經)
Skt. *Mātaṅgī-sūtra

1300

Ch. Sifen lü (四分律)
Skt. *Dharmaguptaka-vinaya

1428

Ch. Mohe sengqi lü (摩訶僧祇律)
Skt. *Mahāsāṃghika-vinaya

1425

Ch. Shanjianlü piposha (善見律毘婆沙)
Pāli Samantapāsādikā

1462

Ch. Youposaijie jing (優婆塞戒經)
Skt. Upāsakaśīla-sūtra
Eng. The Sutra on Upāsaka Precepts (1994)

1488

Ch. Shizha biposha lun (十住毘婆沙論)
Skt. *Daśabhūmika-vibhāṣā

1521

Ch. Fanwang jing (梵網經)
Skt. *Brahmajāla-sūtra

1484

Ch. Miaofa lianhua jing youbotishe (妙法蓮華經憂波提舍)
Skt. Saddharmapuṇḍarīka-upadeśa

1519

248

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Fodijing lun (佛地經論)
Skt. *Buddhabhūmisūtra-śāstra
Eng. The Interpretation of the Buddha Land (2002)
Ch. Apidamojushe lun (阿毘達磨倶舍論)
Skt. Abhidharmakośa-bhāṣya

Taishō No.
1530

1558

Ch. Zhonglun (中論)
Skt. Madhyamaka-śāstra

1564

Ch. Cheng weishi lun (成唯識論)
Eng. Demonstration of Consciousness Only
(in Three Texts on Consciousness Only, 1999)

1585

Ch. Weishi ershi lun (唯識二十論)
Skt. Viṃśatikā
Eng. The Treatise in Twenty Verses on Consciousness Only
(in Three Texts on Consciousness Only, 1999)

1590

Ch. Bian zhongbian lun (辯中邊論)
Skt. Madhyāntavibhāga

1600

Ch. Yuqie shidilun (瑜伽師地論)
Skt. Yogācārabhūmi

1579

Ch. Weishi sanshilun song (唯識三十論頌)
Skt. Triṃśikā
Eng. The Thirty Verses on Consciousness Only
(in Three Texts on Consciousness Only, 1999)

1586

Ch. She dasheng lun (攝大乘論)
1593
Skt. Mahāyānasaṃgraha
Eng. The Summary of the Great Vehicle (Revised Second Edition, 2003)
Ch. Dasheng zhuangyanjing lun (大乘莊嚴經論)
Skt. Mahāyānasūtrālaṃkāra

1604

Ch. Jiujing yisheng baoxing lun (究竟一乘寳性論)
Skt. Ratnagotravibhāga-mahāyānottaratantra-śāstra

1611

Ch. Dasheng chengye lun (大乘成業論)
Skt. Karmasiddhiprakaraṇa

1609

Ch. Yinming ruzheng li lun (因明入正理論)
Skt. Nyāyapraveśa

1630

249

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Dasheng ji pusa xue lun (大乘集菩薩學論)
Skt. Śikṣāsamuccaya

Taishō No.
1636

Ch. Jingangzhen lun (金剛針論)
Skt. Vajrasūcī

1642

Ch. Putixing jing (菩提行經)
Skt. Bodhicaryāvatāra

1662

Ch. Dasheng qixin lun (大乘起信論)
Skt. *Mahāyānaśraddhotpāda-śāstra
Eng. The Awakening of Faith (2005)

1666

Ch. Naxian biqiu jing (那先比丘經)
Pāli Milindapañha

1670

Ch. Miaofalianhua jing xuanyi (妙法蓮華經玄義)

1716

Ch. Zhang suozhi lun (彰所知論)
Eng. The Treatise on the Elucidation of the Knowable (2004)
Ch. Jingangding yuqie zhongfa anouduoluo sanmiao sanputi xin lun
(金剛頂瑜伽中發阿耨多羅三藐三菩提心論)

Ch. Shimoheyan lun (釋摩訶衍論)

1645

1665

1668

Ch. Banruo boluomiduo xin jing yuzan (般若波羅蜜多心經幽賛)
Eng. A Comprehensive Commentary on the Heart Sutra
(Prajñāpāramitā-hṛdaya-sūtra) (2001)

1710

Ch. Guan wuliangshou fo jing shu (觀無量壽佛經疏)

1753

Ch. Dasheng xuan lun (大乘玄論)

1853

Ch. Huayan yisheng jiaoyi fenqi zhang (華嚴一乘教義分齊章)

1866

Ch. Sanlun xuanyi (三論玄義)
Ch. Zhao lun (肇論)

1852
1858

Ch. Yuanren lun (原人論)

1886

Ch. Xiuxi zhiguan zuochan fayao (修習止觀坐禪法要)

1915

Ch. Guoqing bai lu (國清百録)

1934

Ch. Mohe zhiguan (摩訶止觀)

Ch. Tiantai sijiao yi (天台四教儀)

250

1911

1931

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Taishō No.

Ch. Zhenzhou Linji Huizhao chanshi wulu (鎭州臨濟慧照禪師語録)
Eng. The Recorded Sayings of Linji (in Three Chan Classics, 1999)

1985

Ch. Wumen guan (無門關)
Eng. Wumen’s Gate (in Three Chan Classics, 1999)

2005

Ch. Foguo Yuanwu chanshi biyan lu (佛果圜悟禪師碧巖録)
Eng. The Blue Cliff Record (1998)

2003

Ch. Liuzu dashi fabao tan jing (六祖大師法寶壇經)
Eng. The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch (2000)

2008

Ch. Xinxin ming (信心銘)
Eng. The Faith-Mind Maxim (in Three Chan Classics, 1999)

Ch. Huangboshan Duanji chanshi chuanxin fayao
(黄檗山斷際禪師傳心法要)
Eng. Essentials of the Transmission of Mind (in Zen Texts, 2005)

2010
2012A

Ch. Yongjia Zhengdao ge (永嘉證道歌)

2014

Ch. Yibuzonglun lun (異部宗輪論)
Skt. Samayabhedoparacanacakra
Eng. The Cycle of the Formation of the Schismatic Doctrines (2004)

2031

Ch. Maming pusa zhuan (馬鳴菩薩傳)
Eng. The Life of Aśvaghoṣa Bodhisattva
(in Lives of Great Monks and Nuns, 2002)

2046

Ch. Posoupandou fashi zhuan (婆藪槃豆法師傳)
Eng. Biography of Dharma Master Vasubandhu
(in Lives of Great Monks and Nuns, 2002)

2049

Ch. Chixiu Baizhang qinggui (勅修百丈清規)
Eng. The Baizhang Zen Monastic Regulations (2007)

Ch. Ayuwang jing (阿育王經)
Skt. Aśokāvadāna
Eng. The Biographical Scripture of King Aśoka (1993)

Ch. Longshu pusa zhuan (龍樹菩薩傳)
Eng. The Life of Nāgārjuna Bodhisattva
(in Lives of Great Monks and Nuns, 2002)

2025

2043

2047

Ch. Datang Daciensi Zanzang fashi zhuan (大唐大慈恩寺三藏法師傳) 2053
Eng. A Biography of the Tripiṭaka Master of the Great Ci’en
Monastery of the Great Tang Dynasty (1995)
251

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Gaoseng zhuan (高僧傳)

Taishō No.
2059

Ch. Biqiuni zhuan (比丘尼傳)
Eng. Biographies of Buddhist Nuns
(in Lives of Great Monks and Nuns, 2002)

2063

Ch. Gaoseng Faxian zhuan (高僧法顯傳)
Eng. The Journey of the Eminent Monk Faxian
(in Lives of Great Monks and Nuns, 2002)

Ch. Datang xiyu ji (大唐西域記)
Eng. The Great Tang Dynasty Record of the Western Regions (1996)
Ch. Youfangjichao: Tangdaheshangdongzheng zhuan
(遊方記抄: 唐大和上東征傳)

2085
2087
2089-(7)

Ch. Hongming ji (弘明集)

2102

Ch. Nanhai jigui neifa zhuan (南海寄歸内法傳)
Eng. Buddhist Monastic Traditions of Southern Asia (2000)

2125

Ch. Fayuan zhulin (法苑珠林)

Ch. Fanyuzaming (梵語雑名)
Jp.

2185

Hokke gisho (法華義疏)

2187

Yuimakyō gisho (維摩經義疏)

Jp.

Hannya shingyō hiken (般若心經秘鍵)

Jp.

2135

Shōmangyō gisho (勝鬘經義疏)

Jp.

Jp.

2122

2186

2203

Daijō hossō kenjin shō (大乘法相研神章)

2309

Jp. Risshū kōyō (律宗綱要)
Eng. The Essentials of the Vinaya Tradition (1995)

2348

Jp.

2376

Jp.

Kanjin kakumu shō (觀心覺夢鈔)

2312

Jp. Tendai hokke shūgi shū (天台法華宗義集)
Eng. The Collected Teachings of the Tendai Lotus School (1995)

2366

Jp.

2377

Kenkairon (顯戒論)

Sange gakushō shiki (山家學生式)

Jp. Hizōhōyaku (秘藏寶鑰)
Eng. The Precious Key to the Secret Treasury (in Shingon Texts, 2004)
252

2426

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Jp. Benkenmitsu nikyō ron (辨顯密二教論)
Eng. On the Differences between the Exoteric and Esoteric
Teachings (in Shingon Texts, 2004)

Taishō No.
2427

Jp. Sokushin jōbutsu gi (即身成佛義)
Eng. The Meaning of Becoming a Buddha in This Very Body
(in Shingon Texts, 2004)

2428

Jp. Unjigi (吽字義)
Eng. The Meanings of the Word Hūṃ (in Shingon Texts, 2004)

2430

Jp. Mitsugonin hotsuro sange mon (密嚴院發露懺悔文)
Eng. The Mitsugonin Confession (in Shingon Texts, 2004)

2527

Jp. Fukan zazengi (普勧坐禪儀)
Eng. A Universal Recommendation for True Zazen
(in Zen Texts, 2005)

2580

Jp. Shōji jissōgi (聲字實相義)
2429
Eng. The Meanings of Sound, Sign, and Reality (in Shingon Texts, 2004)
Jp. Gorin kuji myōhimitsu shaku (五輪九字明秘密釋)
Eng. The Illuminating Secret Commentary on the Five Cakras
and the Nine Syllables (in Shingon Texts, 2004)

2514

Jp. Kōzen gokoku ron (興禪護國論)
Eng. A Treatise on Letting Zen Flourish to Protect the State
(in Zen Texts, 2005)

2543

Jp. Shōbōgenzō (正法眼藏)
Eng. Shōbōgenzō: The True Dharma-eye Treasury (Volume I, 2007)
Shōbōgenzō: The True Dharma-eye Treasury (Volume II, 2008)
Shōbōgenzō: The True Dharma-eye Treasury (Volume III, 2008)
Shōbōgenzō: The True Dharma-eye Treasury (Volume IV, 2008)

2582

Jp. Senchaku hongan nenbutsu shū (選擇本願念佛集)
Eng. Senchaku Hongan Nembutsu Shū: A Collection of Passages
on the Nembutsu Chosen in the Original Vow (1997)

2608

Jp. Zazen yōjin ki (坐禪用心記)
Eng. Advice on the Practice of Zazen (in Zen Texts, 2005)

2586

Jp. Kenjōdo shinjitsu kyōgyō shōmon rui (顯淨土眞實教行証文類)
Eng. Kyōgyōshinshō: On Teaching, Practice, Faith, and
Enlightenment (2003)

2646

253

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Taishō No.

Jp. Tannishō (歎異抄)
Eng. Tannishō: Passages Deploring Deviations of Faith (1996)

2661

Jp. Rennyo shōnin ofumi (蓮如上人御文)
Eng. Rennyo Shōnin Ofumi: The Letters of Rennyo (1996)
Jp.

2668

Ōjōyōshū (往生要集)

2682

Jp. Risshō ankoku ron (立正安國論)
Eng. Risshōankokuron or The Treatise on the Establishment
of the Orthodox Teaching and the Peace of the Nation
(in Two Nichiren Texts, 2003)

2688

Jp. Kaimokushō (開目抄)
Eng. Kaimokushō or Liberation from Blindness (2000)

2689

Ch. Fumu enzhong jing (父母恩重經)
Eng. The Sutra on the Profundity of Filial Love
(in Apocryphal Scriptures, 2005)

2887

Jp. Kanjin honzon shō (觀心本尊抄)
Eng. Kanjinhonzonshō or The Most Venerable One Revealed
by Introspecting Our Minds for the First Time at the
Beginning of the Fifth of the Five Five Hundred-year Ages
(in Two Nichiren Texts, 2003)

2692

Jp. Hasshūkōyō (八宗綱要)
Eng. The Essentials of the Eight Traditions (1994)

extracanonical

Jp. Mappō tōmyō ki (末法燈明記)
Eng. The Candle of the Latter Dharma (1994)

extracanonical

Jp.

Sangō shīki (三教指帰)

Jp.

Jūshichijō kenpō (十七條憲法)

254

extracanonical
extracanonica

