THE CANONICAL BOOK OF THE
BUDDHA’S LENGTHY DISCOURSES
VOLUME II

dBET PDF Version
© 2017
All Rights Reserved

BDK English Tripiṭaka Series

THE CANONICAL BOOK
OF THE BUDDHA’S
LENGTHY DISCOURSES
VOLUME II
(Taishō Volume 1, Number 1)

Translated from the Chinese
by

Shohei Ichimura

BDK America, Inc.
2016

Copyright © 2016 by Bukkyo Dendo Kyokai and
BDK America, Inc.

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored
in a retrieval system, or transcribed in any form or by any means
—electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise—
without the prior written permission of the publisher.
First Printing, 2016
ISBN: 978-1-886439-61-0
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 2015943478
Published by
BDK America, Inc.
1675 School Street
Moraga, California 94556

Printed in the United States of America

A Message on the Publication of the
English Tripiṭaka
The Buddhist canon is said to contain eighty-four thousand different teachings.
I believe that this is because the Buddha’s basic approach was to prescribe a
different treatment for every spiritual ailment, much as a doctor prescribes a
different medicine for every medical ailment. Thus his teachings were always
appropriate for the particular suffering individual and for the time at which the
teaching was given, and over the ages not one of his prescriptions has failed to
relieve the suffering to which it was addressed.
Ever since the Buddha’s Great Demise over twenty-ﬁve hundred years ago,
his message of wisdom and compassion has spread throughout the world. Yet
no one has ever attempted to translate the entire Buddhist canon into English
throughout the history of Japan. It is my greatest wish to see this done and to
make the translations available to the many English-speaking people who have
never had the opportunity to learn about the Buddha’s teachings.
Of course, it would be impossible to translate all of the Buddha’s eighty-four
thousand teachings in a few years. I have, therefore, had one hundred thirty-nine
of the scriptural texts in the prodigious Taishō edition of the Chinese Buddhist
canon selected for inclusion in the First Series of this translation project.
It is in the nature of this undertaking that the results are bound to be criticized.
Nonetheless, I am convinced that unless someone takes it upon himself or herself
to initiate this project, it will never be done. At the same time, I hope that an
improved, revised edition will appear in the future.
It is most gratifying that, thanks to the efforts of more than a hundred Buddhist
scholars from the East and the West, this monumental project has ﬁnally gotten
off the ground. May the rays of the Wisdom of the Compassionate One reach
each and every person in the world.
NUMATA Yehan
Founder of the English
Tripiṭaka Project

August 7, 1991
v

Editorial Foreword
In January 1982, Dr. NUMATA Yehan, the founder of Bukkyo Dendo Kyokai
(Society for the Promotion of Buddhism), decided to begin the monumental
task of translating the complete Taishō edition of the Chinese Tripiṭaka (Buddhist
canon) into the English language. Under his leadership, a special preparatory
committee was organized in April 1982. By July of the same year, the Translation
Committee of the English Tripiṭaka was ofﬁcially convened.
The initial Committee consisted of the following members: (late) HANAYAMA
Shōyū (Chairperson), (late) BANDŌ Shōjun, ISHIGAMI Zennō, (late) KAMATA
Shigeo, (late) KANAOKA Shūyū, MAYEDA Sengaku, NARA Yasuaki, (late) SAYEKI
Shinkō, (late) SHIOIRI Ryōtatsu, TAMARU Noriyoshi, (late) TAMURA Kwansei,
URYŪZU Ryūshin, and YUYAMA Akira. Assistant members of the Committee
were as follows: KANAZAWA Atsushi, WATANABE Shōgo, Rolf Giebel of New
Zealand, and Rudy Smet of Belgium.
After holding planning meetings on a monthly basis, the Committee selected
one hundred thirty-nine texts for the First Series of translations, an estimated
one hundred printed volumes in all. The texts selected are not necessarily limited
to those originally written in India but also include works written or composed
in China and Japan. While the publication of the First Series proceeds, the texts
for the Second Series will be selected from among the remaining works; this
process will continue until all the texts, in Japanese as well as in Chinese, have
been published.
Frankly speaking, it will take perhaps one hundred years or more to accomplish
the English translation of the complete Chinese and Japanese texts, for they
consist of thousands of works. Nevertheless, as Dr. NUMATA wished, it is the
sincere hope of the Committee that this project will continue unto completion,
even after all its present members have passed away.
Dr. NUMATA passed away on May 5, 1994, at the age of ninety-seven, entrusting
his son, Mr. NUMATA Toshihide, with the continuation and completion of the
Translation Project. The Committee also lost its able and devoted Chairperson,

vii

Editorial Foreword

Professor HANAYAMA Shōyū, on June 16, 1995, at the age of sixty-three. After
these severe blows, the Committee elected me, then Vice President of Musashino
Women’s College, to be the Chair in October 1995. The Committee has renewed
its determination to carry out the noble intention of Dr. NUMATA, under the leadership of Mr. NUMATA Toshihide.
The present members of the Committee are MAYEDA Sengaku (Chairperson),
ICHISHIMA Shōshin, ISHIGAMI Zennō, KATSURA Shōryū, NAMAI Chishō, NARA
Yasuaki, SAITŌ Akira, SHIMODA Masahiro, Kenneth K. Tanaka, WATANABE Shōgo,
and YONEZAWA Yoshiyasu.
The Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research was established in
November 1984, in Berkeley, California, U.S.A., to assist in the publication of
the BDK English Tripiṭaka First Series. The Publication Committee was organized
at the Numata Center in December 1991. In 2010, the Numata Center’s operations
were merged into Bukkyō Dendō Kyōkai America, Inc. (BDK America) and
BDK America continues to oversee the English Tripiṭaka project in close cooperation with the Editorial Committee in Tokyo.
MAYEDA Sengaku

Chairperson
Editorial Committee of
the BDK English Tripiṭaka

viii

Publisher’s Foreword
On behalf of the members of the Publication Committee, I am happy to present
this volume as the latest contribution to the BDK English Tripiṭaka Series. The
Publication Committee members have worked to ensure that this volume, as all
other volumes in the series, has gone through a rigorous process of editorial efforts.
The initial translation and editing of the Buddhist scriptures found in this
and other BDK English Tripiṭaka volumes are performed under the direction of
the Editorial Committee in Tokyo, Japan. Both the Editorial Committee in Tokyo
and the Publication Committee, headquartered in Moraga, California, are dedicated to the production of accurate and readable English translations of the
Buddhist canon. In doing so, the members of both committees and associated
staff work to honor the deep faith, spirit, and concern of the late Reverend Dr.
Yehan Numata, who founded the BDK English Tripiṭaka Series in order to disseminate the Buddhist teachings throughout the world.
The long-term goal of our project is the translation and publication of the
texts in the one hundred-volume Taishō edition of the Chinese Buddhist canon,
along with a number of influential extracanonical Japanese Buddhist texts. The
list of texts selected for the First Series of this translation project may be found
at the end of each volume in the series.
As Chair of the Publication Committee, I am deeply honored to serve as the
fifth person in a post previously held by leading figures in the field of Buddhist
studies, most recently by my predecessor, John R. McRae.
In conclusion, I wish to thank the members of the Publication Committee for
their dedicated and expert work undertaken in the course of preparing this volume
for publication: Managing Editor Marianne Dresser, Dr. Hudaya Kandahjaya, Dr.
Carl Bielefeldt, Dr. Robert Sharf, and Rev. Brian Kensho Nagata, Director of the
BDK English Tripiṭaka Project.
A. Charles Muller

Chairperson
Publication Committee

ix

Contents
A Message on the Publication of the English Tripiṭaka
NUMATA Yehan

v

Editorial Foreword

MAYEDA Sengaku

vii

Translator’s Introduction

Shohei Ichimura

xiii

A. Charles Muller

Publisher’s Foreword

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

ix

Sutra 11. The Gradual Increase of Doctrines by One
Sutra 12. Doctrines in Groups of Three
Sutra 13. Greater Causality
Sutra 14. Indra’s Questions on Causality
Sutra 15. The Episode at Anupiya
Sutra 16. Kalyāṇi-jātika
Sutra 17. Purity
Sutra 18. Happiness Caused by Oneself
Sutra 19. A Great Assembly
Sutra 20. Ambaṭṭha

3
17
23
39
59
79
93
117
133
141

Bibliography

183

A List of the Volumes of the BDK English Tripiṭaka (First Series)

199

Notes
Index

xi

179

187

Translator’s Introduction
The Textual Origin and Contents of the
Canonical Collection of Lengthy Discourses

The complex historical context in which the textual translation of the Dīrgha
Āgama took place is beyond the scope of this brief introduction. I attempt to
provide here, however, an evaluation of three major features of this canonical
tradition: the nature of this sutra collection and its contents, the translators and
the times of translation, and the canonical legacy from the point of view of the
premodern and modern contemporary Tripiṭaka Buddhist library.
The Chang ahan jing (Skt. Dīrgha Āgama), or the Canonical Collection of
Lengthy Discourses, is one of the four canonical collections that were upheld
by the orthodox Dharmaguptaka school. Since this school descended from the
Sthāvira orthodoxy that had a prominent position in the few centuries around
the Third Buddhist Council, held around 250 to 236 B.C.E.,1 centuries after the
Buddha’s demise, the origin of this school’s canonical tradition (Āgamas) may
be traced back to some scriptural matrix2 whose contents had been compiled
and authenticated by the time of the Third Council.
There were three or four general councils during Buddhism’s early centuries.
The First Council was held at Rājagṛha (present-day Rājgīr, Bihar) immediately
after Śākyamuni’s passing (485 or 486 B.C.E.) in order to assure the oral preservation of the core teachings Śākyamuni Buddha taught directly to his disciples.
The Second Council was held at Vaiśālī (Vesālī) a century later to settle some
controversies on the Vinaya rules and disciplines set forth by Śākyamuni as the
moral and spiritual codes for Buddhist monks and their communities. This
council contributed to the ascertainment of legality on the nature of Vinaya
codes, despite some challenges and disputes raised by changing historical and
social contexts. At that time, it is said that some elder monks still remembered
how some of the ﬁrst-generation disciples had upheld the discipline while remaining active in daily life.

xiii

Translator’s Introduction

Though our knowledge of it is conﬁned to Theravāda documents,3 the Third
Council was held under the auspices of the Mauryan Buddhist ruler Aśoka in
the seventeenth year of his reign (251 B.C.E.) at the capital city Pāṭaliputra (Patna,
Bihar). Although this council failed in its intended goal of preventing schism
from sectarian movements, the Third Council was pivotal to the subsequent
history of the Buddhist canonical tradition for two reasons. First, since the
Buddha’s teaching and organization evolved in various forms during the initial
two and a half centuries of its development, Buddhist leaders were compelled
to reexamine their canonical traditions and establish an authenticated standard
to prevent sectarian diversion and doctrinal variation. Second, it was during this
council that Buddhist scriptures were formally classiﬁed into the threefold categories of Sutra (teaching), Vinaya (discipline), and Abhidharma (doctrine), i.e.,
the threefold canonical baskets (Skt. Tripiṭaka; Pāli Tipiṭaka). From that time on,
the Tripiṭaka served as the basic categorization of Buddhist literature.
The last general conference was held in Kāśmīra under the auspices of King
Kaniṣka, the Kuṣāṇa ruler (known in China as Great Yüeji), toward the end of
the ﬁrst century C.E., and it centered on the Hinayana orthodoxy, the SthāviraSarvāstivāda school. Though the historical veracity of this conference is not
conclusive, the likelihood of its occurrence can be argued based on the detailed
Abhidharma discussions recorded in the Mahāvibhāṣā-śāstra,4 and especially
in the epilogue left by its translator Xuanzang, as well as the historical fact of
the massive Hindu reaction which spurred efforts to compile their literary legacy
in the early second century C.E.5 In any case, after the Fourth Council meeting
in Kāśmīra, Kuṣāṇa monks began to reach the continent of China during the
Late Han period.

The Synopsis between the Sanskrit Dīrgha
Āgama and the Pāli Dīgha Nikāya

The Canonical Collection of Lengthy Discourses was one of the four Āgamas
essential to the Sutra-piṭaka that was preserved by the Dharmaguptaka school.
To explain the nature of this Āgama, it is best to show the synopsis between the
content of the Dīrgha Āgama and that of the Dīgha Nikāya (DN), upheld by the
Theravāda school as part of the ﬁvefold sutta-piṭaka. The Theravāda school prospered in Sri Lanka, and its descendants in Southeast Asia (Burma, Thailand, and
Indochina) preserved the ﬁvefold Nikāyas through the Pāli canonical language.

xiv

Translator’s Introduction

The Dharmaguptaka school, one of the descendants of the Sthāvira-Sarvāstivāda
school that prospered in Northern India, inherited the Dīrgha Āgama as part of
their Sutra-piṭaka through the canonical language of Sanskrit or, more precisely,
Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit.6
The fourfold Āgamas that constitute the Sutra-piṭaka of the Hinayana orthodoxy were preserved throughout the medieval period as part of the Mahayana
Tripiṭaka corpus through the Chinese versions since the ﬁfth century C.E. The
following is a chart of the synopsis between the four Dharmaguptaka Āgamas
originally in Sanskrit and the ﬁve Nikāyas (Pāli sutta collections) preserved by
the Theravāda school.

Four Sanskrit Āgamas
(Dharmaguptaka)
1. Dīrgha Āgama (Lengthy
Discourses)
2. Madhyama Āgama (Middle-length
Discourses)
3. Saṃyukta Āgama (Mixed
Discourses)
4. Ekottarika Āgama (Gradually
Increased Discourses)

Five Pāli Nikāyas
(Theravāda)
1. Dīgha Nikāya (Lengthy Discourses)

2. Majjhima Nikāya (Middle-length
Discourses)
3. Saṃyutta Nikāya (Mixed Discourses)
4. Aṅguttara Nikāya (Increasing Each
by a Doctrine)
5. Khuddaka Nikāya (Short
Discourses)

As can be inferred from this table, the Sanskrit Dīrgha Āgama and the Pāli Dīgha
Nikāya have many synoptic parallels in their respective content, namely, between
the thirty sutras of the Chang ahan jing and the thirty-four suttantas of the Pāli
Dīgha Nikāya.7 There are twenty-seven sutras that are identiﬁed with the twentyseven suttantas, but differences in their respective ordering and arrangement of
scriptures must be recognized. Seven suttantas8 are omitted in the Chang ahan
jing, but this includes a sutra that is not found in the Dīgha Nikāya. Because of
this close synoptic correlations, it is reasonable to assume that the Sanskrit
Dīrgha Āgama and the Pāli Dīgha Nikāya had a common canonical matrix that
could have been determined as standard during the Third Buddhist Council.
The Chang ahan jing is unique in two ways. First, the editors of the Āgama in
organizing the sutras set forth four major sections, reﬂecting their major concerns:
xv

Translator’s Introduction

(1) the centrality of Śākyamuni Buddha as the primary subject, (2) the importance
of the Dharma and doctrine, (3) the resultant practice, discipline, and advanced
spiritual states, and (4) a record of the cosmological origins of the world. Second,
the “Sutra on Buddhist Cosmology,” which is totally absent in the Dīgha Nikāya
of the Pāli canon, was added as the last text in the collection in order to present
the Buddha’s teaching more effectively and attractively to a non-Buddhist Hindu
audience. According to some scholars, the underlying principle of the Chang
ahan jing reﬂects a conciliatory impulse that was intended to bridge the original
Buddha’s teaching (the ninefold or twelvefold categories of discourses) on the
one hand, and early Mahayana Buddhist teaching and scriptures on the other.9
The correlations between the two scriptural traditions, the sutras of the Chang
ahan jing and the suttantas of the Pāli Dīgha Nikāya, are presented below. In
addition, the corresponding texts are noted at the beginning of each sutra in this
translation.
Four Sutras on the Subject of Śakyamuni Buddha
1. The Great Origin (Daban jing)
DN 14: Mahāpadāna Suttanta
2. Last Journey and Sojourns,
DN 16: Mahāpariṇibbāna Suttanta
Parts 1, 2, 3
3. A Great Treasury Councilor
DN 19: Mahāgovinda Suttanta
4. Janavasabha’s Exhortation
DN 18: Janavasabha Suttanta

Fifteen Sutras on the Subject of Dharma and Doctrine
5. Lesser Causality
DN 27: Aggañña Suttanta
6. Universal Ruler (Cakravartin)’s
DN 26: Cakkavatti-sīhanāda Suttanta
Practice
7. Pāyāsi[’s Dialogue]
DN 23: Pāyāsi Suttanta
8. Sandhāna
DN 25: Udumbarika-sīhanāda Suttanta
9. Numerically Assembled Doctrines DN 33: Saṅgīti Suttanta
10. Ten Progressively Classiﬁed
DN 34: Dasuttara-Suttanta
Doctrines
11. Gradual Increase of Doctrines
No Parallel in DN
by One
12. Doctrines in Groups of Three
No Parallel in DN
13. Greater Causality
DN 15: Mahānidāna Suttanta
14. Indra’s Question on Causality
DN 21: Sakkapañha Suttanta
xvi

Translator’s Introduction

15. Anupiya Episode
16. Kalyāṇa-jātika
17. Purity
18. Happiness Caused by Oneself
19. Great Assembly

DN 24: Pāṭika Suttanta
DN 31: Sīṇgālovāda Suttanta
DN 29: Pāsādika Suttanta
DN 28: Saṃpasānīya Suttanta
DN 20: Mahāsamaya Suttanta

Ten Sutras on the Subject of Practice and Resulting Spiritual States
20. Ambaṭṭha
DN 3: Ambaṭṭha Suttanta
21. Brahmā’s [Net]
DN 1: Brahmajāla Suttanta
22. One Who Cultivates Virtues
DN 4: Soṇadaṇḍa Suttanta
23. Brāhmaṇa Kūṭadanta
DN 5: Kūṭadanta Suttanta
24. Kevaddha
DN 11: Kevaṭṭa Suttanta
25. A Naked Brāhmaṇa Ascetic
DN 8: Kassapa-sīhanāda Suttanta
26. Knowledge of Three Vedas
DN 13: Tevijja Suttanta
27. The Rewards of the Life of a
DN 2: Sāmañña-phala Suttanta
Śramaṇa
28. Poṭṭhapāda
DN 9: Poṭṭhapāda Suttanta
29. Lohitya
DN 12: Lohicca Suttanta

Sutra 30 on the Subject of Cosmology (No Parallel in DN)
A 1. The Land of Jambudvīpa
2. The Land of Uttarakuru
3. The Universal Ruler (Cakravartin)
B 4. The Worlds of the Hells
5. Dragons and Birds
C 6. The Asura Demigods
7. The Four Guardian Gods of Heaven
8. The Trāyastriṃśa Heavens
D 9. Three Kinds of Disasters
10. The Asura Demigods
11. Three Kinds of Intermediate Eons (Kalpas)

Translators and
Historical Times

The translator of the Chang ahan jing was the śramaṇa Buddhayaśas, a native
of Kāśmīra who moved to Khotan in Central Asia, where he resided for some

xvii

Translator’s Introduction

time before he was invited to Chang’an speciﬁcally to engage in scriptural translation. There are two stories of how Buddhayaśas was invited to Chang’an and
what contribution his translation was to accomplish.
Fifth-century China was divided into northern and southern political regions
separated by the Yangzi River. In the north were Louyang and Chang’an, which
were the two major government seats of the Han and Tang dynasties, as well as
several other political and cultural centers. Since the north was dominated by
the descendants of the ﬁve racially foreign regimes, resulting in the short-lived
Sixteen States period, Buddhism had a fair chance to develop its inﬂuence despite
competition from indigenous Confucian and Daoist traditions. Two centuries
from the initial introduction of Buddhism to China during the Late Han period,
Chinese Buddhists began to be aware that they needed more scriptural sources
for deeper understanding as well as for consolidating their communities through
Buddhist ethical and moral practice.
According to one story, Buddhayaśas was invited to the capital by the ruler
of the Late Qin, Yaoxing (r. 394–415 C.E.), with the assistance of Kumārajīva,
his religious counselor. Kumārajīva (344–413) was a scholar-monk from the
country of Kuccha in Eastern Turkestan. Born to Indian and Central Asian
parents, he excelled in training in Buddhist studies in Kāśmīra and acquired linguistic skill in Chinese. He had been brought to Liangzhou as the captive of
Fujian’s general, Lüguang, and was subsequently invited to Chang’an in 401 to
serve as Yaoxing’s religious counselor and lead the government’s Buddhist translation project. Buddhayaśas had been Kumārajīva’s teacher on the Sarvāstivāda
Vinaya (the Daśabhāṇavāra-vinaya, the subject of Abhidharma treatises) more
than two decades previously.10 Because he had once been Kumārajīva’s teacher,
Buddhayaśas was reverentially nicknamed the “red-bearded professor” or the
“senior doctrinal professor” (Vaibhāṣika) in Chang’an.
It is said that, in part, Kumārajīva needed Buddhayaśas’ help in collaborating
on completing the translation of the Daśabhūmika-sutra (Sutra on the Ten Stages
of the Bodhisattva Career), and that the ruler Yaoxing also requested the śramaṇa
in 410 C.E. to translate both the Dharmaguptaka Vinaya (Dharmaguptaka-vinaya;
Sifen lü; Vinaya in Four Divisions) and the Dīrgha Āgama of the same school.
The Vinaya translation was completed 412 C.E. The next year, 413, Buddhayaśas began to translate the Dīrgha Āgama with Zhu Fonian, a śramaṇa of
Liangzhou, as co-translator, and the translation was completed that same year.

xviii

Translator’s Introduction

As for the reasons the Chang ahan jing originally belonged to the Dharmaguptaka school, we have four indirect proofs. First, the editorial point of view of
the Chang ahan jing itself coincides with the Dharmaguptaka tradition in which
the principle of the centrality of the Buddha is emphasized in terms of veneration
for Śākyamuni as founder of the religion. Second, the text displays a great emphasis
on the merit to be accrued by the cult worship of the sacred relics enshrined in
stupas (commemorative towers). Third, the text’s translator, Buddhayaśas, who
also translated the Dharmaguptaka-vinaya, was a bhikṣu afﬁliated with the Dharmaguptaka school. Finally, the Vinaya text, especially its ﬁfty-fourth chapter, refers
to seven sutras that were included in the Chang ahan jing, including the “Sutra
on Buddhist Cosmology” that is not found in the Pāli Dīgha Nikāya.11
The second story comes from the introduction to the Dharmaguptaka-vinaya,
which gives a somewhat different version. Zhi Faling, a Chinese śramaṇa, traveled to the Central Asia on the instructions of his master, Huiyüen, to search for
Vinaya texts, and happened to meet Buddhayaśas in Khotan, where he was
already renowned as a Mahayana Tripiṭaka master. With due respect, Faling
requested him to visit Chang’an and accompanied him there, transporting Uighur
textual sources. Faling’s master Huiyüen was a close friend of Kumarajīva, and
is known to have organized the Lotus Association at Lushan in the Pure Land
sectarian faith, whose adherents devoted their lives to the ideal of rebirth in the
Pure Land. There was a growing concern among Chinese Buddhists at the time
to consolidate their growing communities and regulate the conduct of their followers, and so there was a need for the Vinaya-piṭaka. As requested, Buddhayaśas
immediately began to translate the Dharmaguptaka-vinaya with the assistance
of three hundred monks and scholars involved in the project. Zhi Faling is said
to have had his own disciple, Huibian, participate in the sessions as he had excellent knowledge of Central Asian languages. The fact that active pursuit of Vinaya
texts was the major trend of the time can be attested by the independent case of
the monk Faxian’s (339–420) risky journey to India in search of Vinaya texts.12
Buddhayaśas did not extend his stay in Chang’an upon completion of the
translation project and soon returned to Kāśmīra. Kumārajīva likely suffered an
illness (Huangshi, thirteenth year) soon after completing the translation of the
Satyasiddhi-śāstra (Cheng shi lun; Treatise on the Establishment of Truth) and
passed away in 413 (Huangshi, ﬁfteenth year). Yaoxing abdicated his rule in the
seventeenth year of Huangshi (415 C.E.). Buddhayaśas is said to have sent the

xix

Translator’s Introduction

Xukongyun pusa jing (Ākāśagarbha-sūtra; Sutra on Ākāśagarbha Bodhisattva)
as a gift to the sangha of Liangzhou through a traveling messenger. In fact, the
translation of this text ascribed to him is recorded in the Chu sanzang ji ji (Collection of the Tripiṭaka Textual Records) (Taishō vol. 13, no. 405) compiled by
Sengyou (445–518).

The Significance of the Text in the
New Taishō Tripitaka Edition

The Chang ahan jing is placed at the very beginning of the ﬁrst volume of the
Taishō shinshū daizōkyō (Taishō New Tripiṭaka Edition) compiled by Japanese
Buddhists from 1924–1934 (Taishō 13 to Shōwa 9). This may represent an
entirely different reorganization of the Buddhist canon from all of the preceding
Tripiṭaka editions. The format of the preceding editions were based on the classiﬁcation order of Mahayana ﬁrst, Hinayana second, each of which was again
divided into the order of Sutra, Vinaya, and Abhidharma texts. The historical
legacy of the Chang ahan jing should be examined as to what the text is meant
to represent in the modern Taishō edition.
The earliest reliable catalogue of Buddhist texts was due to the work of
Dao’an (314–385), author of the Zhongjing mulu (Comprehensive Record of
the Textual Catalogues), and Sengyou, author of the Chu sanzang ji ji. Of the
two, Dao’an’s catalogues formed the core foundation of Sengyou’s enlarged
record of textual catalogues. These two sets of catalogues thus mark the reliable
beginning of all subsequent Chinese Tripiṭaka editions.
By the turn of the ﬁfth century, Buddhist communities in Chang’an began
to exercise their own choices in the history of Buddhist affairs. This change was
a natural development, because Buddhist leaders were more or less trained in
Confucian academism or Daoist philosophical training. Dao’an was invited to
Chang’an to serve as the religious counselor of Fujian (Yaoxing’s predecessor)
from the capital of a southern state. Dao’an profoundly regretted that the Buddhist
communities in China had not been properly equipped with the Tripiṭaka divisions
of Sutra, Vinaya, and Abhidharma. He actively promoted study on the Mahayana
Wisdom sutras, especially the Prajñāpāramitā sutras, and he recruited talented
young Buddhist converts to engage in exploration of their philosophical and
spiritual meaning. It is within this historical circumstance that Kumārajīva was

xx

Translator’s Introduction

invited to Chang’an in 401 by Yaoxing (Fujian’s successor) as his religious counselor. Sengzhao (374–414), a young Buddhist convert from a Daoist background,
became Kumārajīva’s dedicated disciple and quickly proved himself to be an
excellent scholar-monk among the Chang’an academic community. His monograph,
the Zhao lun, was praised as exhibiting superb comprehension of prajñā insight
and the philosophy of emptiness (śūnyatā),second only to that of his master.
Sengzhao’s introduction to the Chang ahan jing reﬂects Dao’an’s cherished
objective. At the outset he calls attention to the Tripiṭaka canonical tradition:
The great teaching consisted of three [basic] divisions. For regulating physical and verbal behavior there is the collection of injunctive disciplines
(Vinaya). For guiding human conduct by distinguishing good and bad there
is the collection of doctrinal scriptures (Sutra). For differentiating subtle
and delicate subject matter, there is the collection of analytical characteristics
of the mental and conscious elements (Abhidharma). Thus, there came to
be the three baskets of scriptures (Tripiṭaka).

Buddhayaśas’ translation of the Chang ahan jing was perhaps partial fulﬁllment of the goal sought by Dao’an.
Following Dao’an’s and Sengyou’s catalogues, a series of records of Buddhist
textual catalogues was compiled in the Gezhong qinding zhongjing mulu (Buddhist
Canonical Textual Catalogues or Complete Buddhist Tripiṭaka Library, literally,
“Great Textual Storehouse”). During the sixth century, the four catalogues came
to exist under the auspices of four different regimes. Unlike Dao’an’s and Sengyou’s catalogues, which placed the texts by the translators’ names in chronological
order, these state-supported enterprises adopted the new order of classiﬁcation by
placing the Mahayana Tripiṭaka catalogues ﬁrst, followed by those of the Hinayana
Tripiṭaka. The short-lived Sui dynasty (which dissolved at the uniﬁcation of north
and south into an empire in 589), twice supported the compilation of the entire
inclusive catalogues of the Tripiṭaka library: ﬁrst, the Sui Kaihuang lidai sanbao
ji (Sui Kaihuang Record of the Threefold Buddhist Treasures of the Successive
Dynasties) in 598, followed by its revised edition, the Renshou zhongjing mulu
(Renshou Record of Textual Catalogues) in 602, which streamlined the preexistent
catalogues and scrutinized the authenticity of each text. The Renshou zhongjing
mulu became the basic model of all subsequent Buddhist Tripiṭaka libraries.

xxi

Translator’s Introduction

The ﬁling of the catalogues of the Tripiṭaka library reached its apex during
the Tang period. The dynastic enterprises successfully compiled seven major
editions together with their respective records of catalogues. Any record of catalogues is supposed to provide not only the basic principles of textual classiﬁcation and those texts already catalogued as authentic, but also include new
translations and new discoveries as well as exclude suspicious and fraudulent
texts. For instance, the Kaiyuan shijiao lu (Kaiyuan Record of Buddhist Textual
Catalogues), compiled in 731, is said to have represented the best model format,
so that all subsequent editions followed it in recording catalogues of hand-copied
texts as well as printed texts. The classiﬁcation order, however, was unchanged
from the Sui-era Renshou zhongjing mulu of 602, following the format of: (1)
Mahayana sutras, (2) Mahayana Vinaya texts, (3) Mahayana Abhidharma texts,
(4) Hinayana sutras, (5) Hinayana Vinaya texts, (6) Hinayana Abhidharma texts,
and (7) works written by the “wise and saints.” We know, therefore, that the
Renshou zhongjing mulu model and that of Kaiyuan shijiao lu together became
the standard format of the Buddhist Tripiṭaka library as a whole, of which very
little had changed until the modern Taishō Tripiṭaka edition.
This extremely conservative nature developed due to two reasons. First, toward
the end of Tang dynasty the dissemination of the complete Tripiṭaka library was
based on hand-copied texts made under government supervision. Second, from
the Northern Song period on, the dissemination of the Buddhist Tripiṭaka was
based on printed texts, for which printing blocks had to be carved, a laborious
and expensive process. In the Northern Song, for instance, a 972 decree stipulated
the production of the entire set of textual woodcut prints and the carving of one
hundred and thirty thousand woodblocks by the year 983. The dissemination of
the Buddhist scriptures was under government supervision for centuries but gradually transferred to a number of Buddhist temples. While the main task of carving
woodblocks was still carried out by dynastic enterprises, private temple versions
began to appear and the distribution of texts was soon widely localized and even
spread beyond the Chinese border. This was roughly the history of the Buddhist
Tripiṭaka library through the Song, Yuan, Ming, and Jing periods.
The Taishō Tripiṭaka edition shows a striking innovation, especially in the
change of classiﬁcation order that follows the general historical development
of Buddhism. The method of detailed examination of textual contents for the

xxii

Translator’s Introduction

sake of new classiﬁcations also developed more precision due to modern scholarship. First, the Taishō Tripiṭaka editors changed the order by placing the Hinayana Sutra-piṭaka before the Mahayana texts. They set the Hinayana canon of
the four Āgamas and individual texts bearing their strains in the ﬁrst two volumes,
under the Āgama section. Second, they created a new classiﬁcation under the
name of “original causality” to collect those texts in which the bodhisattva ideal
and career is germinated in reference to early Mahayana history. Third, the
remaining Mahayana sutras are classiﬁed, more or less, similarly to those of
preceding editions, but each is assigned to different volumes by specifying type
or class:
1. Prajñā section: Taishō Tripiṭaka vols. 5–8;
2. Lotus and Huayan section: vol. 9 (both groups) and vol. 10 (Huayan only);
3. Ratnakūṭa and Nirvana section: vol. 11 (Ratnakūṭa only) and vol. 12 (both
groups);
4. Mahāsaṃnipāta-sutra (Great Collection Sutra) section: vol. 13;
5. Sutra collection (Hinayana and Mahayana) section: vols. 14–17;
6. Esoteric sutras section: vols. 18–21.

Fourth, the Taishō Tripiṭaka editors also placed the Vinaya- and Abhidharmapiṭakas after the Sutra-piṭaka in the order of Hinayana ﬁrst, then Mahayana:
1. Vinaya section: vols. 22–23 (all Hinayana) and vol. 24 (both Hinayana
and Mahayana);
2. Sutra expository treatise section: vols. 25–26 (partial Abhidharma);
3. Abhidharma section: vols. 27–29;
4. Madhyamaka-Yōgācāra section: vol. 30 (Madhyamaka only), vol. 31 (partially Yogācāra), and vol. 32 (Yogācāra only);
5. Collected logical treatises section: vol. 32.

From here, the Taishō Tripiṭaka places texts written as commentaries on
sutras and treatises (śāstras),13 sectarian documents and writings, and so forth
up to the one-hundredth volume, but for the purpose of evaluating the legacy
of the Chang ahan jing, these can be excluded from consideration.
Modern scholarship focuses on the fundamental spirituality of Śākyamuni
Buddha, because his spiritual insight and evangelical life were the foundation
of all the doctrines and practices that developed in the later history of Buddhism.

xxiii

Translator’s Introduction

In medieval China, every Tripiṭaka library started with the class of Wisdom texts
(Prajñāpāramitā sutras) under the Mahayana category, beginning with the massive,
six hundred-fascicle Mahāprajñāpāramitā-sutra (Great Perfection of Wisdom
Sutra) translated by Xuanzang. In contrast, the Hinayana Āgamas, which are
supposed to comprise the original, earliest sources and present Śākyamuni’s life
and teaching as closely as possible to his original time and social context, were
all buried amid thousands of ﬁles of textual catalogues or among the books and
fascicles in the Hinayana section. Finally, after many centuries, the Taishō edition
restored the proper place for the Hinayana Āgamas by moving this text to the
very beginning of the collection.
In his preface to the Chang ahan jing, Sengzhao deﬁnes Ahan (Āgama) as
“the authority to which the laws return” (fa-gui). The “authority to which laws
return” means, in all probability, the profound collection of all that is good upheld
by the secluded cloister of contemplative recollection (dhāraṇī). These are made
into the collection of sutras as the source of authority. It was in this sense that
Chang’an’s Buddhist communities, by the turn of the ﬁfth century, were motivated
to have the Prajñāparāmitā texts translated rapidly, within a decade, and to also
have the earliest canonical Sutra-piṭaka translated along with the Vinaya texts.
Most of all, this active motivation arose from the critical study of textual records
of translation and visually corroborated reliable textual collections.
Modern Buddhist studies began in the mid-nineteenth century, based on the
method of text criticism and aided by scholars’ knowledge of Pāli, Sanskrit,
Chinese, and Tibetan, and it has successfully promoted Buddhist studies throughout the world. It beneﬁted contemporary Japanese Buddhists in publishing the
Taishō Tripiṭaka library and its catalogue, with some success in reforming and
improving the longstanding Tripiṭaka traditions. Nearly three quarters of a
century after publication of the Taishō shinshū daizōkyō, Dr. Yehan Numata and
his associates established the project to put the entire corpus of texts collected
in the Taishō Tripiṭaka into English translation, with the global cooperation of
Buddhist scholars. When this massive project is completed, there will be a new
demand to build another ediﬁce of the Buddhist Tripiṭaka library for the sake
of Buddhist and human communities worldwide. Once again, the Chang ahan
jing will be highlighted as representing the earliest phase of Buddhism that
marked its beginning.

xxiv

Translator’s Introduction

Epilogue

I would like to make a few points regarding the way in which this translation has
been accomplished. First, since the original Sanskrit text is no longer extant, I
relied almost exclusively on the Pāli Dīgha Nikāya and its English translation,
especially that rendered by the founding members of the Pali Text Society, as
the sole corroborative references for the Chinese text.14 For instance, it is extremely
difﬁcult to identify from Chinese transliteration what a given proper name or
proper noun might be in the Sanskrit original. Second, I preferred a straightforward
style of narration to the Chinese idiomatic deﬁnitive style. As a cognate language
of Sanskrit, though to a lesser degree, Pāli has an intricate case system to specify
the contextual relationships between things that are referred to by words through
case indicatives, whereas Chinese expression often relies on word order alone,
without case indicative changes. Hence, in my English presentation of the Chang
ahan jing, I have relied on the English version of the Dīgha Nikāya presented in
scholarly translations of the text. This English version of the Chang ahan jing
may thus appear to be more like a translation made from the Pāli Dīgha Nikāya
than a directly rendered English version vis-à-vis the Chinese original. As English
is not my native language, I did not consider that presenting the textual contents
only through a grammatically learned second language would be successful. Due
to the length of the original text, this translation will be presented in three volumes.
This is Volume II of the translation, containing sutras 11–21. Volume I (published
in 2015) includes the Preface by Shi Sengzhao and contains sutras 1–10; Volume
III will contain the remaining sutras, 21–30.
I looked for a model narrative format to translate foundational Buddhist texts,
such as the Chang ahan jing. After searching for a feasible format among various
samples of translations of Buddhist texts, I ﬁnally decided that it was best to follow
the traditions established by the Pali Text Society in dealing with ancient Buddhist
literature by means of modern languages. I am, however, obliged to assert that
this translation has been produced totally based on my own understanding of
Buddhism accrued through my lifelong study and practice of the religion.
Śākyamuni’s religion began with a dialectical insight underling the fourfold
truths of the life process. While engaged in ﬁnal revision of this translation, I
personally encountered the messengers of old age, illness, and death, and my
attention was drawn to these messagers more acutely because of my engagement

xxv

Translator’s Introduction

in rereading the draft translation. It is my hope that readers of this text will
realize the fundamental wisdom of Buddhist spirituality in regard to these serious
matters. May the reader discover from this text his or her successful pathway
toward liberation.

xxvi

THE CANONICAL BOOK OF THE BUDDHA’S
LENGTHY DISCOURSES
VOLUME II

Sutra 11

The Gradual Increase
of Doctrines by One
Thus have I heard. At one time, the Buddha sojourned at the monastery built
by Anāthapiṇḍika in the Jetavana Forest accompanied by one thousand two
hundred and ﬁfty bhikṣus. At that time, the World-honored One spoke to the
bhikṣus:
I shall exhort on the subject of the subtle (supreme) Dharma. Whatever
I explain to you, whether it is at the beginning, the middle, or the end,
is true and genuine. It is endowed with meaning and essence and is well
balanced with the practice of pure and genuine austerity. This is called
the “teaching comprising ten ﬁvefold groups of doctrines.” You should
listen to me attentively and think about and remember what I explain to
you. The following is the teaching.

The bhikṣus were then attentive and ready to listen. The Buddha said to
the bhikṣus:

This teaching of ten ﬁvefold groups of doctrines comprises the following:
the group of doctrinal items that are very useful for religious salvation,
the group of doctrinal items that should be practiced, the group of doctrinal items that should be comprehensively understood, the group of
doctrinal items that should be relinquished, and the group of doctrinal
items that should be directly experienced by oneself.
What is the singular useful item? It is the discipline of not forsaking
whatever is good. What is the singular item to be practiced? It is the discipline of mindfulness in contemplation of one’s body. What is the singular item to be exactly known? It is the fact of contact of the [sense]
faculties with their respective objects under the inﬂuence of deﬁlement.
What is the singular item to be relinquished? It is the sense of selfconceit. What is a singular item to be directly experienced? It is the

3

57c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

deliverance of the mind that is unshakable or undisturbed toward the
realm beyond the inﬂuence of deﬁlement.
Again, there is the double doctrinal item that is very useful for religious
salvation, the double item that should be practiced, the double item that
should be comprehensively understood, the double item that should be
relinquished, and the double item that should be directly experienced
by oneself. (1) What is the double item that is very useful for religious
salvation? It consists of knowing shame upon self-reﬂection and knowing
shame before others. (2) What is the double item to be practiced? It consists of the practice of calming the mind (śamatha) and that of analytical
introspection (vipaśyana). (3) What is the double item to be understood
comprehensively? It consists of the (noetic) category of name, i.e. the
four mental skandhas, and the (corporeal) category of form, i.e., the one
material skandha. (4) What is the double item to be relinquished? It consists of ignorance of the Four Noble Truths and craving and desire for
existence. (5) What is the double item to be directly experienced by oneself? It is the acquisition of insight on the Four Noble Truths and the
realization of deliverance.
Again, there is the triple doctrinal item that is very useful for religious
salvation, the triple doctrinal item that should be practiced, the triple
doctrinal item that should be comprehensively understood, the triple
doctrinal item that should be relinquished, and the triple doctrinal item
that should be directly experienced by oneself. (1) What is the triple
item that is very useful for religious salvation? It means ﬁrst, associating
with good friends; second, attending discourses on the Dharma, and
third, realizing the truth of the Dharma. (2) What is the triple item to be
practiced? It means the practice of the threefold concentration: ﬁrst, the
concentration on the emptiness of the self and things attributed to it;
second, the concentration on signlessness or the nondifferentiation of
things; and third, the concentration on the objectless or goal-free state
of existence. (3) What is the triple item to be comprehensively understood? It means three kinds of sensation or feeling: ﬁrst, the feeling of
pain; second, the feeling of pleasure; and third, feeling neither pain or
pleasure. (4) What is the triple item to be relinquished? It means three
kinds of attachment: ﬁrst, craving for desire; second, craving for existence;

4

Sutra 11: The Gradual Increase of Doctrines by One

and third, craving for nonexistence. (5) What is the triple item to be
directly experienced by oneself? It means the three kinds of supernormal
knowledge: ﬁrst, the knowledge of recollection of past lives; second,
the knowledge derived from the supernormal power of vision; and third,
the knowledge of the total eradication of the inﬂuence of deﬁlements.
Again, there is the fourfold doctrinal item that is very useful for religious salvation, the fourfold doctrinal item that should be practiced, the
fourfold doctrinal item that should be comprehensively understood, the
fourfold doctrinal item that should be relinquished, and the fourfold doctrinal item that should be directly experienced by oneself. (1) What is
the fourfold item that is very useful for religious salvation? It means the
four kinds of blessings: ﬁrst, residing in the proper region;15 second,
associating with and receiving support from good friends; third, perfect
effort that is self-motivated; and fourth, having planted good roots in
one’s past lives. (2) What is the fourfold item to be practiced? It means
the practice of four kinds of application of mental awareness. First, while
observing his inner body or inner senses in concentration, a bhikṣu should
exert himself with no slackening, being mindful of his observations and
keeping them in memory, and thereby remove worldly desires and worries. Second, while observing his outer body or outer senses, a bhikṣu
should exert himself with no slackening, being mindful of his observations
to keeping them in memory, and thereby remove worldly desires and
worries. Third, while observing both the inner and outer body, a bhikṣu
should exert himself with no slackening, being mindful of his observations
and keeping them in memory, and thereby remove worldly desires and
worries. It is the same with the second application: observing one’s sense
perceptions; the third application, observing one’s mind or intellect; and
the fourth application, observing one’s psychophysical elements (skandhas). (3) What is the fourfold item to be comprehensively understood?
It means the four kinds of food: ﬁrst, edible, material food that is either
nutritious or exquisite; second, nutrition ingested by contact through
touch; third, volitional and mental nutrition; and fourth, consciousness
nutrition. (4) What is the fourfold item to be relinquished? It means four
kinds of grasping or attachment: ﬁrst, attachment to desires; second,
attachment to the self; third, attachment to the vow of precepts belonging

5

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

to other schools; and fourth, attachment to views. (5) What is the fourfold
item to be directly experienced by oneself? It means the four results of
the mendicant life: ﬁrst, attaining the result of the saintly state of streamwinner (srotaāpanna); second, attaining the result of the saintly state of
once-returner (sakṛdāgāmin); third, attaining the result of the saintly
state of nonreturner (anāgāmin); and fourth, attaining the result of the
saintly state of arhatship.
Again there is the ﬁvefold doctrinal item that is very useful for religious salvation, the ﬁvefold doctrinal item that should be practiced, the
ﬁvefold doctrinal item that should be comprehensively understood, the
ﬁvefold doctrinal item that should be relinquished, and the ﬁvefold doctrinal item to be directly experienced by oneself. (1) What is the ﬁvefold
item that is very useful for religious salvation? It means the ﬁve kinds
of effort toward ultimate cessation: ﬁrst, striving to believe that the
Buddha Tathāgata is perfectly endowed with the ten supreme titles,
such as One Liberated from Attachment and Fully Enlightened One;
second, striving to be free from illness and thus always maintaining
physical well-being and peace; third, striving to be honest and direct
without the vice of ﬂattery, for whom the Tathāgata has taught the path
to nirvana; fourth, striving to control the mind, upholding it intact and
not disrupted and keeping in memory whatever scripture was once
recited, even long ago; and ﬁfth, striving to be capable of skillfully
investigating the rising and falling of the psychophysical elements and
thus terminate the root of suffering through the same practice that is
accomplished by wise and saintly disciples. (2) What is the ﬁvefold
item to be practiced? It means the practice of ﬁve spiritual faculties:
the faculty of faith, the faculty of endeavor, the faculty of mindfulness,
the faculty of concentration, and the faculty of insight. (3) What is the
ﬁvefold item to be comprehensively understood? It means the ﬁve
aggregates that are the basis of clinging to existence: ﬁrst, the aggregate
of material elements (rūpa), second, the aggregate of sensation (vedanā),
third, the aggregate of perception (saṃjñā), fourth, the aggregate of
dispositional forces (saṃskāra), and the aggregate of consciousness
(vijñāna). (4) What is the ﬁvefold item to be relinquished? It means
ﬁve kinds of moral and spiritual hindrances: sexual desire, malice, sloth

58a

6

Sutra 11: The Gradual Increase of Doctrines by One

and drowsiness, agitation and worry, and doubt. (5) What is the ﬁvefold
item to be directly experienced by oneself? It means the ﬁve kinds of
religious doctrines for one who has realized the state of arhat and has
no further stage of training: ﬁrst, the doctrine of moral precepts and
disciplines; second, the doctrine of meditative concentration; third, the
doctrine of analytical insight; fourth, the doctrine of religious salvation;
and ﬁfth, the doctrine of the insight acknowledging liberation.
Again there is the sixfold doctrinal item that is very useful for religious
salvation, the sixfold doctrinal item that should be practiced, the sixfold
doctrinal item that should be comprehensively understood, the sixfold
doctrinal item that should be relinquished, and the sixfold doctrinal item
that should be directly experienced by oneself. (1) What is the sixfold
item that is very useful for religious salvation? It means the six principles
of harmony: if a bhikṣu adheres to the six principles of harmony in practice, his conduct is worthy of respect and reverence and can harmonize
the sangha, without creating any dispute or controversy, enabling him
to act independently without the admixture of confusion. What are these
six principles of harmony? First, if a monk always acts benevolently,
pays respect toward those who uphold the practice of austerity, and
abides with the mind of benevolence and love, his benevolence is
regarded as “the principle of harmony, worthy of respect and reverence,
capable of harmonizing the sangha, without creating any dispute or controversy, and he can independently proceed without the admixture of
confusion.” Second, through adherence to benevolent and friendly speech,
and third, through adherence to benevolent and friendly thought, a bhikṣu
may obtain material support on the basis of the doctrinal teaching; fourth,
he shares whatever he receives in his almsbowl with his colleagues without keeping it all for himself. Fifth, a bhikṣu upholds the practice of the
precepts belonging to those practitioners of saintly status, which should
not be violated or altered but kept free from immoral contamination,
and equips himself well with the foregoing principles that the learned
elders praise and realizes the state of mental concentration. Sixth, a
bhikṣu realizes the liberation of those of saintly status, terminates the
state of suffering together with others (i.e., equally), and continues to
adhere to right views and various practices of austerity. These principles

7

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

are worthy of respect and reverence, and can harmonize the sangha,
without creating any dispute or controversy, enabling one to act independently without the admixture of confusion. (2) What is the sixfold
item to be practiced? It means the six kinds of mindfulness: being mindful
of the Buddha, being mindful of the Dharma, being mindful of the
Sangha, being mindful of the precepts, being mindful of charity, and
being mindful of heavenly beings. (3) What is the sixfold item to be
comprehensively understood? It means the six internal bases of cognition:
ﬁrst, the sense faculty of seeing; second, the sense faculty of hearing;
third, the sense faculty of smell; fourth, the sense faculty of taste; ﬁfth,
the sense faculty of touch; and sixth, the intellectual faculty of consciousness. (4) What is the sixfold item to be relinquished? It means the
six kinds of craving desire that are directed to external bases of cognition
respectively, i.e., the objects of the sense faculties: craving for the object
of seeing, for the object of hearing, for the object of smell, for the object
of taste, ﬁfth, for the object of touch, and for the object of the intellect.
(5) What is the sixfold item to be directly experienced by oneself? It
means the six kinds of supernormal powers: supernormal psychic power,
supernormal hearing, the supernormal power of knowing the minds of
others, the supernormal power of recollecting and knowing past lives,
supernormal vision, and the supernormal power of eradicating deﬁlements.
Again there is the sevenfold doctrinal item that is very useful for religious salvation, the sevenfold doctrinal item that should be practiced,
the sevenfold doctrinal item that should be comprehensively understood,
the sevenfold doctrinal item that should be relinquished, and the sevenfold
doctrinal item that should be directly experienced by oneself. (1) What
is the sevenfold item that is very useful for religious salvation? It means
the seven kinds of possessions (or wealth, treasure, etc.): ﬁrst, the possession of faith; second, the possession of precepts; third, the possession
of “shame upon self-reﬂection”; fourth, the possession of “shame before
others”; ﬁfth, the possession of learning; sixth, the possession of charity;
and seventh, the possession of insight. (2) What is the sevenfold item
to be practiced? It means the seven auxiliary disciplines of enlightenment:
ﬁrst, a bhikṣu practices the discipline of mindfulness on the basis of nondesire and quiescence, distancing [himself from worldly matters]. In

58b

8

Sutra 11: The Gradual Increase of Doctrines by One

like manner, he practices the discipline of discernment of the psychophysical elements; third, he practices the discipline of effort; fourth, he
practices the discipline of delight; ﬁfth, he practices the discipline of
freedom from bodily and mental disturbance; sixth, he practices the discipline of the practice of concentration; and seventh, he practices the
discipline of mental equanimity on the basis of nondesire and quiescence,
distancing [himself from worldly matters]. (3) What is the sevenfold
item to be comprehensively understood? It means the seven places where
consciousness abides: when sentient beings are in possession of different
bodies and different ideations, these are humans and heavenly beings.
This is the initial abode of consciousness. Second, when sentient beings
possess individual bodies but one and the same ideation, this is the time
when the god Brahmā was initially born in Ābhāsvara Heaven, where
communication is transmitted by light instead of sound. This is the
second abode of consciousness. Third, when sentient beings possess one
and the same body but different ideations, this is Ābhāsvara Heaven.
This is the third abode of consciousness. Fourth, when sentient beings
possess one and the same body and ideation, this is Śubhakṛtsna Heaven.
This is the fourth abode of consciousness. Fifth, when sentient beings
reside in the sphere of inﬁnite space, this is the ﬁfth abode of consciousness. Sixth, when sentient beings reside in the sphere of inﬁnite consciousness, this is the sixth abode of consciousness. Seventh, when sentient beings reside in the sphere of nothingness or nonutility, this is the
seventh abode of consciousness. (4) What is the sevenfold item to be
relinquished? It means the seven kinds of deﬁlement: craving for sexual
desire, craving for existence, wrong view, self-conceit, craving for malice,
ignorance, and doubt. (5) What is the sevenfold item to be directly experienced by oneself. It means the seven kinds of power to exhaust the
inﬂuence of deﬁlement: ﬁrst, a bhikṣu who has terminated the inﬂuence
of deﬁlement sees all the elements of existence as suffering, having originated from causal concatenation, which can be brought to cessation as
they really are. He sees desire as a ﬁery pit, also as a weapon, like a
knife or sword. Though he knows the arising of desire and sees it, he is
not attached to it nor does he abide in it. He engages in thorough introspection into the causal chain in the order of cessation as well as in the

9

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

order of origination, and thus understands the origin of desire and its
cessation as it really is. The bhikṣu who has thus terminated the inﬂuence
of deﬁlement through the practice of introspection is free from the inﬂuence of the worldly vices of avarice and stinginess, and evil and bad
psychophysical elements do not arise in his existence. He practices the
four disciplines of applying mental awareness, and hence he is engaged
with many items to be practiced and carried out. He is also engaged in
cultivating ﬁve spiritual faculties and correlative forces and practicing
the seven auxiliary disciplines of enlightenment, as well as the eightfold
noble path of cessation.
Again there is the eightfold doctrinal item that is very useful for religious salvation, the eightfold doctrinal item that should be practiced,
the eightfold doctrinal item that should be comprehensively understood,
the eightfold doctrinal item that should be relinquished, and the eightfold
doctrinal item that should be directly experienced by oneself. (1) What
is the eightfold item that is very useful for religious salvation? It means
the eight kinds of causal factors that enable one to acquire knowledge
when the practice of austerity has not been fully perfected, and to broaden
and strengthen that knowledge when the practice of austerity has been
perfected. What are these eight items? Here, when a bhikṣu abides in
reliance on the World-honored One, or abides in reliance on his teaching
elder or a practitioner of austerity who is endowed with knowledge, he
becomes aware of shame upon self-reﬂection and shame before his
teacher, and cherishes a sense of adoration and reverence toward the
teacher. This is the ﬁrst kind of causal factor that enables a bhikṣu to
acquire knowledge when the practice of austerity has not been fully perfected and to broaden and strengthen that knowledge when the practice
of austerity has been perfected. Second, a bhikṣu abides in reliance to
the World-honored One and closely questions him whenever possible,
saying, “What is the meaning of this doctrine, sir?” “What is intended,
sir?” At that moment, any honorable senior monk should explain the
profound meaning of the doctrine referred to for the sake of the junior
monk. This is the second kind of causal factor. Third, having thus listened
to the meaning of the doctrine, the junior bhikṣu becomes settled in body
and mind. This is the third causal factor. Fourth, having thus become

10

Sutra 11: The Gradual Increase of Doctrines by One

settled in body and mind, the junior bhikṣu does not engage in nonreligious and idle speech, but when he joins his colleagues he either speaks
about the doctrine or invites others to talk about it; otherwise, he does
not forsake the discipline of noble silence. This is the fourth causal factor.
Fifth, he attends many discourses for learning, broadens his knowledge,
and upholds it without forgetting it. He intuits the depth of the various
doctrines, the various degrees of good, higher, middle, and lower, the
truth of meanings and essences, and, endowed with the practice of austerity, he abides ﬁrmly, his mind unswayed when reviewing what he has
learned. This is the ﬁfth causal factor. Sixth, engaged in the practice of
terminating evil but increasing good without slackening, a bhikṣu strives
hard, sustains the doctrine, and does not forsake it. This is the sixth
causal factor. Seventh, he comes to acquire the insight into origin and
cessation, knows the goal of saintly realization, and thus reaches the end
of suffering. This is the seventh causal factor. Eighth, he analytically
intuits the origination and cessation of the ﬁve aggregates of existence,
specifying that “This is the aggregate of material form, its causal context,
and its cessation. This is the aggregate of feeling, that of ideation, that
of dispositional forces, that of consciousness, the causal context of consciousness, and the cessation of it.” This is the eighth causal factor that
enables a bhikṣu to acquire knowledge when the practice of austerity
has not been fully perfected and to broaden and strengthen that knowledge
when the practice of austerity has been perfected. (2) What is the eightfold
item to be practiced? It means the eightfold noble path: right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right
mindfulness, and right concentration. (3) What is the eightfold item to
be comprehensively understood? It means the eight criteria of the secular
world: gain and loss, infamy and fame, praise and blame, and suffering
and happiness. (4) What is the eightfold item to be relinquished? It means
the eight kinds of wrong conduct (i.e., conduct counter to the eightfold
noble path): wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action,
wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, and wrong concentration. (5) What is the eightfold item to be directly experienced by oneself? It means the eight kinds of liberation: ﬁrst, the liberation realized
when one, with an ideation of internal form, perceives external forms;

11

58c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

second, the liberation realized when, without any ideation of internal
form, he perceives external forms; third, the liberation realized when he
has thus terminated all deﬁlements; fourth, the liberation realized when,
having transcended all ideations of form and annihilated sensory reaction,
he abides in the ﬁrst formless state of concentration, the sphere of inﬁnite
space; ﬁfth, the liberation realized when, having transcended the sphere
of inﬁnite space, he abides in the sphere of inﬁnite consciousness; sixth,
the liberation realized when, having transcended the previous sphere,
he abides in the sphere of nothingness or nonutility; seventh, the liberation
realized when, having transcending the previous sphere, he abides in
the sphere of neither ideation nor nonideation; and eighth, the liberation
realized when, having transcending this sphere, he abides in the ﬁnal
state of cessation, having transcended the senses and ideation, which is
equivalent to the third saintly state of anāgāmin.
Again there is the ninefold doctrinal item that is very useful for religious salvation, the ninefold doctrinal item that should be practiced, the
ninefold doctrinal item that should be comprehensively understood, the
ninefold doctrinal item that should be relinquished, and the ninefold
doctrinal item that should be directly experienced by oneself. (1) What
is the ninefold item that is very useful for religious salvation? It means
the nine qualities for which to strive: moral purity in upholding the precepts, purity of mind, purity of views, the purity of overcoming doubt,
the purity of analytical excellence, knowing the right path from wrong
ones, the purity of knowing the method of reaching the goal, the purity
of the absence of desire, and the purity of deliverance. (2) What is the
ninefold item to be practiced? It means the nine roots of proper mental
attention: delight, devotion, joy, well-adjusted happiness, concentration,
absolute knowledge, the eradication of deﬁlement, equanimity, the
absence of desire, and liberation. (3) What is the ninefold item to be
comprehensively understood? It means the nine places of sentient beings.
First, when sentient beings are in possession of different bodies and different ideations, these are humans and heavenly beings. This is the initial
abode of sentient beings. Second, when sentient beings possess different
bodies but one and the same ideation, this is the time when the god
Brahmā was initially born in Ābhāsvara Heaven, where communication

12

Sutra 11: The Gradual Increase of Doctrines by One

is transmitted by light instead of sound. This is the second abode of sentient beings. Third, when sentient beings possess one and the same body
but different ideations, this is Ābhāsvara Heaven. This is the third abode
of sentient beings. Fourth, when sentient beings possess one and the
same body and ideation, this is Śubhakṛtsna Heaven. This is the fourth
abode of sentient beings. Fifth, when sentient beings reside in the sphere
of neither ideation nor external awareness, this is Āsaṃjñika Heaven.
This is the ﬁfth abode of sentient beings. Sixth, when sentient beings
reside in the sphere of inﬁnite space, this is the sixth abode of sentient
beings. Seventh, when sentient beings reside in the sphere of inﬁnite consciousness, this is the seventh abode of sentient beings. Eighth, when
sentient beings reside in the sphere of nothingness or nonutility, this is
the eighth abode of sentient beings. Ninth, when sentient beings reside
in the sphere of neither ideation nor nonideation, this is the ninth abode
of sentient beings. (4) What is the ninefold item to be relinquished? It
means the nine roots of craving: ﬁrst there is craving; second, because
of craving there arises the act of seeking; third, because of seeking there
arises a gain; fourth, because of gain there arises a thought of its utility;
ﬁfth, because of the thought of utility there arises desire; sixth, because
of desire there arises strong attachment; seventh, because of attachment
there arises an act of grasping; eighth, because of grasping there arises
an act of parsimony; and ninth, because of parsimony there arises an act
of guarding. (5) What is the ninefold item to be directly experienced by
oneself? It means the nine successive stages of the process of cessation:
ﬁrst, when a bhikṣu enters the ﬁrst meditative absorption there ceases to
be the sound of auditory faculty; second, when he enters the second meditative absorption there ceases to be mental activity of thinking and deliberation; third, when he enters the third meditative absorption there ceases
to be the awareness of delight; fourth, when he enters the fourth meditative
absorption there cease to be the signs of inhalation or exhalation; ﬁfth,
when he enters the sphere of inﬁnite space, the initial formless state of
concentration, there ceases to be the ideation of external form; sixth,
when he enters the sphere of inﬁnite consciousness there ceases to be the
ideation of empty space; seventh, when he enters the sphere of nothingness
or nonutility there ceases to be the ideation of consciousness; eighth,

13

59a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

when he enters the sphere of neither ideation nor nonideation, there
ceases to be the ideation of nonutility or nothingness; ninth, when he
enters the ﬁnal state of cessation, having transcended the senses and
ideation, which is equivalent to third saintly state of anāgāmin, there
ceases to be both ideation and sensation.
Again there is the tenfold doctrinal item that is very useful for religious
salvation, the tenfold doctrinal item that should be practiced, the tenfold
doctrinal item that should be comprehensively understood, the tenfold
doctrinal item that should be relinquished, and the tenfold doctrinal item
that should be directly experienced by oneself. (1) What is the tenfold
item that is very useful for religious salvation? It means the ten kinds
of refuge for religious salvation. Fiirst, a bhikṣu is endowed with two
hundred and ﬁfty disciplines, as well as possessing digniﬁed deportment,
and, being afraid of committing even a minute offense, he trains in all
of the disciplines with meticulous evenness, having no detrimental imbalance. Second, he is befriended by good associates. Third, a bhikṣu uses
words appropriately, neither in excess nor insufﬁciently, and he is able
to understand the meanings beyond words. Fourth, he willingly seeks
out opportunities to listen to discourses on the Dharma and freely shares
whatever doctrine he has received to others, without hesitation. Fifth, a
bhikṣu visits the places of various practitioners of austerity and openhandedly offers his assistance to them, accomplishing whatever is difﬁcult
to accomplish, and also teaching others how to do the same. Sixth, he
attends as many discourses as possible to acquire knowledge and retains
whatever he has learned in memory, without forgetting anything. Seventh,
he exerts himself to eradicate unfavorable mental obstacles and promote
favorable mental states. Eighth, a self-motivated bhikṣu always focuses
his mind with vigilant mindfulness on essentially good conduct, as if
he is visualizing it right before his eyes. Ninth, he realizes transcendent
insight and knowledge, intuitively perceives the origination and cessation
of the psychophysical elements, and, on the basis of the disciplines
upheld by wise and saintly disciples, he eradicates the root of all suffering.
Tenth, he is content with quiet seclusion, engages in mental contemplation, and never wastes time in worldly pastimes during sessions of meditation. (2) What is the tenfold item to be practiced? It means the ten

14

Sutra 11: The Gradual Increase of Doctrines by One

right practices: right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness (samyak-smṛti), right concentration, right wisdom, and right liberation. (3) What is the tenfold item
to be comprehensively understood? It means the ten bases of cognition,
namely the ﬁve sense faculties and their respective objects: the visual
organ, the eye; the auditory organ, the ear; the olfactory organ, the nose;
the gustatory organ, the tongue; the tactile organ, the body; and the visual
object of form, the auditory object of sound, the olfactory object of smell,
the gustatory object of taste, and the tactile object of touch. (4) What is
the tenfold item to be relinquished? It means the ten kinds of wrong
paths: wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong
livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness (mithyā-smṛti or mithyāvāyāma), wrong concentration, wrong deliverance, and wrong knowledge. (5) What is the tenfold item to be directly experienced by oneself?
It means the ten norms of the arhat who does not require further training:
right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood,
right effort, right mindfulness, right concentration, right wisdom, and
right liberation.
O bhikṣus, the foregoing is called the teaching of the ten ﬁvefold doctrines, which I have now completed for you. From the time I realized
the status of a tathāgata I have continued to accomplish whatever should
be done for the beneﬁt of my disciples, and I have completed it. I have
instructed you with friendly love and in a gentle manner. You should
respectfully receive the teaching I have given and carry out what has
been taught by me. O bhikṣus, you should abide in a quiet, secluded
place such as an empty spot under a tree, make effort to practice meditation, and refrain from slackening. If you do not work hard now toward
your religious goal, what use is there in regretting it later on? I wish for
you to make effort to uphold the foregoing teaching.

At that time, having listened to the Buddha’s exhortation, the bhikṣus
were delighted and carried out what was taught by the Buddha.
[End of Sutra 11: The Gradual Increase of Doctrines by One]

15

59b

Sutra 12

Doctrines in Groups
of Three
Thus have I heard. At one time, the Buddha sojourned at the monastery built
by Anāthapiṇḍika in the Jetavana Forest accompanied by one thousand two
hundred and ﬁfty bhikṣus. At that time, the World-honored One said to the
bhikṣus:

I shall exhort on the subject of the subtle [supreme] Dharma. Whatever
I explain to you is endowed with meaning and pure and genuine essence,
and it is well balanced in respect to the practice of austerity. This is called
the “teaching comprised of three groups of doctrine.” You should listen
attentively and contemplate and remember what I explain to you. The
following is the teaching.

The bhikṣus were then attentive and ready to listen. The Buddha said to
the bhikṣus:

The threefold doctrinal collection is comprised of three groups of doctrinal
items. The ﬁrst group of doctrinal items deﬁne the path that leads to an
evil life course, the second group of doctrinal items deﬁne the path that
leads to a good life course, and the third group of doctrinal items deﬁne
the path that leads to nirvana. What is a singular item that leads to an
evil life course? It is merciless malice toward others, which directs a
person toward an evil life course. What is a singular item that leads to
a good life course? It is merciful compassion toward other sentient beings,
which directs a person toward a good life course. What is a singular item
that directs a person to the goal of nirvana? It is the practice of mental
awareness of one’s inner and outer physical senses with strenuous effort.
This directs a person toward nirvana.
Again, there is a double doctrinal item that leads to an evil life course,
a second double doctrinal item that leads to a good life course, and a

17

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

third double doctrinal item that leads to nirvana. What are the two doctrinal items that lead to an evil life course? One is the transgression of
precepts and associating with the wicked, and another is breaking away
from right views. What are the two doctrinal items that lead to a good
life course? One is adherence to the precepts and the other is adherence
to right views. What are the two doctrinal items that lead to nirvana?
One is the practice of calming the mind and the other is the practice of
analytical introspection.
Again, a triple doctrine leads to an evil life course, a second triple
doctrine leads to a good life course, and a third triple doctrine leads to
nirvana. What are the three doctrinal items that lead to an evil life course?
They are the three kinds of morally unfavorable roots: greed, hatred,
and delusion. What are the three doctrinal items that lead to a good life
course? They are the three kinds of morally good roots: the absence of
greed, hatred, and delusion. What are the three doctrinal items that lead
to nirvana? They are the practice of the threefold concentration: concentration on the emptiness of the self and things attributed to it; concentration on signlessness or the nondifferentiation of things; and concentration on a non-purposeful or goal-free state of existence.
Again, a fourfold doctrine leads to an evil life course, a second fourfold
doctrine leads to a good life course, and a third fourfold doctrine leads
to nirvana. What are the four doctrinal items that lead to an evil life
course? They are ﬁrst, uttering words of amorous passion; second, uttering
hateful words; third, uttering frightening words; and fourth, uttering
delusory words. What are the four doctrinal items that lead to a good
life course? They are: ﬁrst, words uttered in the absence of amorous passion; second, words uttered in the absence of hatred; third, words uttered
in the absence of fearfulness, and fourth, words uttered in the absence
of delusion. What are the fourfold doctrinal items that lead to nirvana?
They are the four applications of mental awareness in the following:
ﬁrst, the inner and outer physical senses; second, sensation or feeling;
third, the mind or intellect; and fourth, the psychophysical elements
(aggregates).
Again, a ﬁvefold doctrine leads to an evil life course, a second ﬁvefold
doctrine leads to a good life course, and a third ﬁvefold doctrine leads

59c

18

Sutra 12: Doctrines in Groups of Three

to nirvana. What are the ﬁve doctrinal items that lead to an evil life
course? They consist of violation of the ﬁve precepts, i.e., taking life,
taking what is not given, sexual misconduct, speaking falsehoods, and
states of indolence arising from [the use of] intoxicants. What are the
ﬁve doctrinal items that lead to a good life course? They consist of strict
adherence to the ﬁve precepts: abstinence from taking life, from taking
what is not given, from sexual misconduct, from speaking falsehoods,
and from states of indolence arising from [the use of] intoxicants. What
are the ﬁve doctrinal items that lead to nirvana? They are the ﬁve kinds
of spiritual faculties: faith, effort, mindfulness, concentration, and insight.
Again, a sixfold doctrine leads to an evil life course, a second sixfold
doctrine leads to a good life course, and a third sixfold doctrine leads
to nirvana. What are the six doctrinal items that lead to an evil life course?
They are six kinds of disrespect: toward the Buddha, Dharma, and
Sangha; toward the precepts; toward concentration; and toward one’s
parents. What are those six doctrinal items that lead to a good life course?
They are six kinds of respect: toward the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha;
toward the precepts; toward concentration; and toward one’s parents.
What are those six doctrinal items that lead to nirvana? They are the six
objects of mindfulness or recollection: being mindful of the Buddha,
Dharma, and Sangha; being mindful of the precepts; being mindful of
charity; and being mindful of divinity.
Again, a sevenfold doctrine leads to an evil life course, a second sevenfold doctrine leads to a good life course, and a third sevenfold doctrine
leads to nirvana. What are the seven doctrinal items that lead to an evil
life course? They are seven evil actions: taking life; taking what is not
given; sexual misconduct; false speech; duplicitous speech; harsh speech;
and frivolous sycophancy. What are those seven doctrinal items that lead
to a good life course? They are seven good actions: abstinence from
taking life, abstinence from taking what is not given, abstinence from
sexual misconduct, abstinence from false speech, abstinence from duplicitous speech, abstinence from harsh speech; and abstinence from frivolous
sycophancy. What are the seven doctrinal items that lead to nirvana?
They are seven auxiliary disciplines of enlightenment. First, a bhikṣu
practices the discipline of mindfulness on the basis of nondesire and

19

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

quiescence, distancing [himself from worldly matters]. In like manner,
second, he practices the discipline of discernment of the psychophysical
elements; third, he practices the discipline of effort; fourth, he practices
the discipline of delight; ﬁfth, he practices the discipline of freedom
from bodily and mental disturbance; sixth, he practices the discipline
of the practice of concentration; and seventh, he practices the discipline
of the mind of equanimity on the basis of nondesire and quiescence, distancing [himself from worldly matters].
Again, an eightfold doctrine leads to an evil life course, a second
eightfold doctrine leads to a good life course, and a third eightfold
doctrine leads to nirvana. What are the eight doctrinal items that lead to
an evil life course? They are eight kinds of wrong conduct (i.e., counter
to the eightfold noble path): wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech,
wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, and
wrong concentration. What are the eight doctrinal items that lead to a
good life course? They are the eight criteria of the secular world: gain
and loss; infamy and fame; praise and blame; and suffering and happiness.
What are those eight doctrinal items that lead to nirvana? They are the
eightfold noble path: right view, right thought, right speech, right action,
right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration.
Again, a ninefold doctrine leads to an evil life course, a second ninefold doctrine leads to a good life course, and a third ninefold doctrine
leads to nirvana. What are the nine doctrinal items that lead to an evil
life course? They are the nine kinds of hatred. First a person hates someone, thinking “He abused me in the past.” Second, he hates someone,
thinking “He is abusing me now.” Third, he hates someone, thinking
“He will surely abuse me in the future.” Fourth, a person hates someone,
thinking “He abused someone I love.” Fifth, he hates someone, thinking
“He is abusing someone I love now.” Seventh, he hates someone, thinking
“He will surely abuse someone I love in the future.” Seventh, a person
hates someone, thinking “He associated with someone I hate.” Eighth,
he hates someone, thinking “He is now associating with someone I hate.”
Ninth, a person hates someone, thinking “He will associate with someone
I hate [in the future].”

60a

20

Sutra 12: Doctrines in Groups of Three

What are the nine doctrinal items that lead to a good life course?
They are the nine kinds of subduing hatred. First, a person subdues his
hatred for someone, thinking “This person abused me in the past, but
what beneﬁt is there in my holding a grudge against him? I have already
subdued my hatred.” Second, he thinks “I am now subduing my hatred.”
Third, he thinks “I will subdue my hatred in the future.” Fourth, a person
subdues his hatred for someone, thinking “This person abused someone
I love, but what beneﬁt is there in my holding a grudge against him? I
have already subdued my hatred.” Fifth, he thinks “I am now subduing
my hatred.” Sixth, he thinks “I will surely subdue my hatred in the
future.” Seventh, a person subdues his hatred for someone, thinking
“Though this person befriended someone I hate, what beneﬁt is there in
my holding a grudge against him? I have already subdued my hatred.”
Eighth, he thinks “I am now subduing my hatred.” Ninth, he thinks “I
will subdue my hatred in the future.”
What are the nine doctrinal items that lead to nirvana? They are the
nine roots of proper mental attention: delight, devotion, joy, happiness,
concentration, absolute knowledge, the eradication [of deﬁlement] and
the maintenance of equanimity, absence of desire, and liberation.
Again, a tenfold doctrine leads to an evil life course, a second tenfold
doctrine leads to a good life course, and a third tenfold doctrine leads
to nirvana. What are the ten doctrinal items that lead to an evil life course?
They are the ten kinds of wrongful deeds: taking life, taking what is not
given, sexual misconduct, speaking falsehoods, duplicitous speech, harsh
speech, ﬂattery, covetousnes, malicious intent, and wrong views. What
are the ten doctrinal items that lead to a good life course? They are the
ten kinds of good deeds: not taking life, not taking what is not given,
not engaging in sexual misconduct, not speaking falsehoods, not enaging
in duplicitous speech, not engaging in harsh speech, not engaging in
ﬂattery, not being covetous, not having malicious intent, and not holding
wrong views. What are the ten doctrinal items that lead to nirvana? They
are the ten direct paths: right view, right thought, right speech, right
action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right concentration,
right liberation, and right wisdom.

21

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

O bhikṣus, you should be able to reach nirvana through the practice
of these ten doctrinal disciplines. These are called the sublime right doctrines in groups of three. From the time I realized the status of a tathāgata
I have continued to accomplish and complete that which should be done
for the beneﬁt of my disciples. Concerned with your destinies, I have
continued to teach you the [doctrinal] scriptures and the [practical] path.
You should be concerned about your destinies. You should always stay
in a secluded place, such as under a tree, and never slacken in the practice
of contemplation. If you do not work hard toward your religious goals
now, what use is there in having regrets later on?

Having listened to the Buddha’s exhortation, the bhikṣus were delighted
and carried out what was taught by the Buddha.
[End of Sutra 12: Doctrines in Groups of Three]

22

Sutra 13

Greater Causality

(Dīgha Nikāya 13: Mahā-nidāna Suttanta)
Thus have I heard. At one time, the Buddha was staying in the country of
Kuru at the residence of Kammāsadhamma, accompanied by one thousand
two-hundred ﬁfty bhikṣus. At that time, Ānanda, while sitting in a secluded
place, thought to himself:
How marvelous it is! The insight that is imbedded in the doctrine of twelvelimbed causality (pratītyasamutpāda) is so profound that I cannot fathom
it. [In contrast,] my insight, accomplished in applying mental awareness
to the function of intellect, is but a [simple] event before my eyes. What
is that which is considered profound [and which I cannot see]?

Thereupon, leaving his secluded room, Ānanda came to the place of the
World-honored One and, after honoring him by bowing his forehead to the
Buddha’s feet, took his seat on one side and said to the World-honored One:
A while ago, when I was practicing meditation in my secluded room,
an idea struck me: How profound must be the insight of the twelvelimbed causality! And, how difﬁcult it is to fathom it! [In comparison,]
my insight, accomplished in the application of mental awareness to the
function of intellect, is simply a [minor] phenomenon seen before me.
What is that insight which is so profound [that I cannot see it], sir?

At that moment, the World-honored One replied to Ānanda:

You should not give up, Ānanda. The insight of the twelve-limbed causality is very profound and difﬁcult to understand. O Ānanda, this twelvelimbed causality is difﬁcult to see and difﬁcult to know. If anyone,
whether he is an evil god, the god Brahmā, śramaṇas, or brāhmaṇas,
has not seen this causality before trying to fathom, investigate, and

23

60b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

analyze its meaning, he will be equally confused and unable to see what
this causality is. O Ānanda, I shall now explain it to you.
There is a causal condition for the fact of old age and death. Should
someone ask you, “What is the causal condition of old age and death?”
you should reply, “Birth is the condition of old age and death.” If he
asks again, “What is this causal condition of the fact of birth?”, you
should reply, “The will-to-becoming is the condition of birth.” If he
asks, “What is the condition of this will-to-becoming?”, you should
reply, “The act of grasping is the condition for the will-to-becoming.”
If he then asks, “What is the causal condition of the act of grasping?”,
you should reply, “Thirstlike craving is the condition for the act of grasping.” If he asks again, “What is the causal condition of thirstlike craving?”,
you should reply, “Sensation or feeling is the condition for thirstlike
craving.” If he asks again, “What is the causal condition of sensation?”,
you should reply, “Sense contact is the condition of sensation.” If he
then asks, “What is the causal condition of sense contact?”, you should
reply, “The sixfold sense operation is the condition of sense contact.”
If he asks again, “What is the causal condition of the sixfold sense operation?”, you should reply, “A mental and physical process is the condition
of sixfold sense operation.” If he asks again, “What is the causal condition
of this mental and physical process?”, you should reply, “Consciousness
is the condition of the mental and physical process.” If he then asks,
“What is the causal condition of consciousness?”, you should reply, “A
group of dispositional forces is the condition of consciousness.” If he
then asks, “What is the causal condition of the dispositional forces?”,
you should reply, “The state of ignorance is the condition of the dispositional forces.”
O Ānanda, in this manner, depending on ignorance (avidyā), there
arises dispositional forces. Depending on dispositional forces (saṃskāra),
there arises consciousness. Depending on consciousness (vijñāna), there
arises a mental and physical process. Depending on the mental and physical process (nāmarūpa), there arises the sixfold sense operation. Depending on the sixfold sense operation (āyatana), there arises sense contact
[with an object]. Depending on sense contact (sparśa), there arises sensation (sense perception). Depending on sensation (vedanā), there arises

24

Sutra 13: Greater Causality

thirstlike craving. Depending on craving (ṭṛṣṇā), there arises an act of
grasping. Depending on grasping (upādāna), there arises the will-tobecoming. Depending on the will-to-becoming (bhava), there arises birth.
Depending on birth (jāti), there arises the process of old age, sickness,
death, sorrow, lamentation, suffering, and agony. This aggregate [of old
age and death] (jāramaraṇa), which is suffering in itself, arises on the
basis of birth. This is called the causal aggregate of suffering.

The Buddha said to Ānanda:

What does it mean to say that depending on the condition of birth, there
arises the effect of old age and death? If every sentient being were prevented from being born, how could old age and death arise in anyone?

Ānanda replied, “Old age and death would not be able to arise, sir.”
The Buddha continued:

As you say, O Ānanda, because of this causality, we know that the fact
of old age and death arises depending on birth, and that depending on
birth, there arises old age and death. The meaning of causal dependence
that I intend to explain can be found here.

Again, the Buddha said to Ānanda:

What does it mean to say that depending on the will-to-becoming, there
arises birth? If every sentient being were prevented from being driven
by the will-to-becoming toward the realm of desire (kāmadhātu), toward
the realm of form (rūpadhātu), or toward the formless realm (ārūpyadhātu), how could birth arise in anyone?

Ānanda replied, “Birth would not be able to arise, sir.”
The Buddha continued:

As you say, O Ānanda, because of this causality, we know that birth
arises depending on will-to-becoming, and that depending on the willto-becoming there arises birth. The meaning of “causal dependence”
that I intend to explain can be found here.

Again the Buddha said to Ānanda:

25

60c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

What does it mean to say that depending on an act of grasping, there
arises the will-to-becoming? If every sentient being were prevented from
grasping desires, taking wrong views as true, taking wrong disciplines
as true, or taking the existence of a self as true, how could the will-tobecoming arise in anyone?

Ānanda replied, “The will-to-becoming would not be able to arise, sir.”
The Buddha continued:

As you say, O Ānanda, because of this causality, we know that will-tobecoming arises depending on grasping, and that depending on grasping
there arises will-to-becoming. The meaning of causal dependence that
I intend to explain can be found here.

Again, the Buddha said to Ānanda:

What does it mean to say that depending on thirstlike craving, there
arises an act of grasping? If every sentient being were prevented from
being driven by a thirstlike craving toward desire, toward becoming, or
toward non-becoming, how could grasping arise in anyone?

Ānanda replied, “Grasping would not be able to arise, sir.”
The Buddha continued:

As you say, O Ānanda, because of this causality, we know that grasping
arises depending on thirstlike craving, and that depending on thirstlike
craving there arises grasping. The meaning of causal dependence that I
intend to explain can be found here.

Again, the Buddha said to Ānanda:

What does it mean to say that depending on sensation, there arises thirstlike craving? If every sentient being were prevented from experiencing
pleasure, pain, or neither pleasure nor pain, how could thirstlike craving
arise in anyone?

Ānanda replied, “Thirstlike craving would not be able to arise, sir.”
The Buddha continued:

26

Sutra 13: Greater Causality

As you say, O Ānanda, because of this causality, we know that thirstlike
craving arises depending on sensation, and that depending on sensation
there arises thirstlike craving. The meaning that I intend to explain can
be found here.
O Ānanda, you should know that from the cause of thirstlike craving
there arises an act of pursuit; from the cause of pursuit there arises an
object of pursuit or acquisition; from the cause of acquisition there
arises a value of utility; from the cause of utility there arises desire; from
the cause of desire there arises attachment; from the cause of attachment
there arises greed; from the cause of greed there arises an act of guarding;
from the cause of guarding there arises an act of defending. O Ānanda,
from the cause of the act of defense there arise armed conﬂicts and legal
disputes that create innumerable evils. The meaning of causal dependence
that I intend to explain can be found here.
O Ānanda, what does this mean? If every sentient being were dissuaded from the act of defending, how could armed conﬂicts and legal
disputes arise, producing innumerable evils?”

Ānanda replied, “These evils would not be able to arise, sir.”
The Buddha continued:

As you say, O Ānanda, because of this causality, we know that armed
conﬂicts and legal disputes arise from the cause of defending, and that
depending on the act of defending there are armed conﬂicts and legal
disputes. O Ānanda, the meaning of causal dependence that I intend to
explain can be found here.

Again, the Buddha said to Ānanda:

What does it mean to say that from the cause of guarding there arises
an act of defending? If every sentient being were dissuaded from the act
of guarding, how could an act of defending arise?

Ānanda replied, “Acts of defense would not be able to arise, sir.”
The Buddha continued:

As you say, O Ānanda, because of this causality, we know that an act
of defense arises from the cause of guarding, and that depending on the

27

61a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

act of guarding, there is the act of defending. O Ānanda, the meaning
of causal dependence that I intend to explain can be found here.

Again, the Buddha said to Ānanda:

What does it mean to say that from the cause of greed, there arises an
act of guarding? If every sentient being were persuaded from being
affected by greed, how could an act of guarding arise?”

Ānanda replied, “Acts of guarding would not be able to arise, sir.”
The Buddha continued:
As you say, O Ānanda, because of this causality, we know that an act
of guarding arises from the cause of greed, and that depending on greed
there is the act of guarding. O Ānanda, the meaning of causal dependence
that I intend to explain can be found here.
O Ānanda, what does it mean to say that from the cause of attachment
there arises greed? If every sentient being were prevented from becoming
attached [to anything], how could greed arise in anyone?

Ānanda replied, “Greed would not be able to arise, sir.”
The Buddha continued:

As you say, O Ānanda, because of this causality, we know that greed
arises from the cause of attachment, and that depending on attachment
there is greed. O Ānanda, the meaning of causal dependence that I intend
to explain can be found here.
O Ānanda, what does it mean to say that from the cause of desire
there arises attachment? If every sentient being were prevented from
desire [for anything], how could attachment arise in anyone?

Ānanda replied, “Attachment would not be able to arise, sir.”
The Buddha continued:

As you say, O Ānanda, because of this causality, we know that attachment
arises from the cause of desire, and that depending on desire there is
attachment. O Ānanda, the meaning of causal dependence that I intend
to explain can be found here.

28

Sutra 13: Greater Causality

O Ānanda, what does it mean to say that from the cause of utility
there arises desire? If every sentient being were prevented from ﬁnding
utility [in anything], how could desire arise in anyone?

Ānanda replied, “Desire would not be able to arise, sir.”
The Buddha continued:

As you say, O Ānanda, because of this causality, we know that desire
arises from the cause of utility, and that depending on utility there is
desire. O Ānanda, the meaning of causal dependence that I intend to
explain can be found here.
O Ānanda, what does it mean to say that from the cause of acquisition
there arises utility? If every sentient being were prevented from making
acquisitions, how could utility arise in anyone?

Ānanda replied, “Utility would not be able to arise, sir.”
The Buddha continued:

As you say, O Ānanda, because of this causality, we know that utility
arises from the cause of acquisition, and that depending on acquisition
there is utility. O Ānanda, the meaning of causal dependence that I intend
to explain can be found here.
O Ānanda, what does it mean to say that from the cause of an act of
pursuit there arises acquisition? If every sentient being were prevented
from the pursuit of anything, how could acquisition arise in anyone?

Ānanda replied, “Acquisition would not be able to arise, sir.”
The Buddha continued:

As you say, O Ānanda, because of this causality, we know that acquisition
arises from the cause of the act of pursuit, and that depending on the act
of pursuit there is acquisition. O Ānanda, the meaning of causal dependence that I intend to explain can be found here.
O Ānanda, what does it mean to say that from the cause of thirstlike
craving there arises an act of pursuit? If every sentient being were prevented from the pursuit of anything, how could thirstlike craving arise
in anyone?

29

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

Ānanda replied, “Thirstlike craving would not be able to arise, sir.”
The Buddha continued:

As you say, O Ānanda, because of this causality, we know that the act
of pursuit arises from the cause of thirstlike craving, and that depending
on thirstlike craving there is the act of pursuit. O Ānanda, the meaning
of causal dependence that I intend to explain can be found here.

Again the Buddha said to Ānanda:

From the cause of thirstlike craving there arises an act of pursuit, and
so on, up to the arising of guarding and defending. From the cause of
sensation a similar causal series can be established; that is, from the
cause of sensation there arises an act of pursuit, and so on, up to the act
of guarding and defending.

The Buddha said to Ānanda:

What does it mean to say that depending on sense contact there arises
sensation? O Ānanda, if there was neither visual faculty, nor visual form,
nor visual perception, how could contact arise?”

61b

Ānanda replied:, “There would be no contact, sir.”
[The Buddha continued:]
If there is neither sound nor auditory sensation, neither odor nor olfactory
sensation, neither taste nor gustatory sensation, neither the physical body
nor tactile sensation, neither intellect nor mental impression, how could there
be sense contact?
[Ānanda replied,] “There would be no contact, sir.”
The Buddha continued, “O Ānanda, if every sentient being were prevented
from experiencing sense contact, how could sensation arise?”
[Ānanda replied,] “There would be no sensation, sir.”
[The Buddha continued:]

As you say, O Ānanda, because of this causality, we know that sensation
arises from sense contact, and that depending on sense contact there is
sensation. O Ānanda, the meaning of causal dependence that I intend to
explain can be found here.

30

Sutra 13: Greater Causality

The Buddha said to Ānanda:

O Ānanda, what does it mean to say that depending on the mental and
physical process16 there arises sense contact? If every sentient being
were prevented from having the mental and physical process, how could
there be mental contact?

[Ānanda replied,] “There would be no mental contact, sir.”
[The Buddha continued,] “If every sentient being was prevented from
having a physical body and sense organs, how could bodily contact arise?”
[Ānanda replied,] “There would be no bodily contact, sir.”
[The Buddha continued,] “O Ānanda, if there was no mental and physical
process, how could any contact arise?”
[Ānanda replied:] “There would be no contact, sir.”
[The Buddha continued:]
O Ānanda, because of this causality, I know that sense contact arises
from the cause of a mental and physical process, and that depending on
a mental and physical process there arises sense contact. The meaning
of causal dependence that I intend to explain can be found here.
O Ānanda, what does it mean to say that depending on consciousness
there arises the mental and physical process? If consciousness does not
enter into the mother’s womb, could a mental and physical process arise?

[Ānanda replied,] “No, sir.”
[The Buddha continued,] “If consciousness enters the womb and does not
come out of it, could a mental and physical process arise?”
[Ānanda replied,] “A mental and physical process would not be able to
arise, sir.”
[The Buddha continued,] “If consciousness comes out of the womb and
the fetus dies, could a mental and physical process be increased?”
[Ānanda replied,] “No, sir.”
[The Buddha continued,] O Ānanda, if there is no consciousness, could
a mental and physical process arise?”
[Ānanda replied,] “No, sir.”
[The Buddha continued:]

31

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

O Ānanda, because of this causality, I know that a mental and physical
process arises from the cause of consciousness, and that depending on
consciousness there arises a mental and physical process. The meaning
of causal dependence that I intend to explain can be found here.
O Ānanda, what does it mean to say that depending on a mental and
physical process there arises consciousness? If consciousness does not
stay with the mental and physical process, there is no abode of consciousness. If there is no abode of consciousness, how could birth, old
age, death, sorrow, lamentation, suffering, and agony arise?

[Ānanda replied,] “None of these things could arise, sir.”
[The Buddha continued,] “O Ānanda, if there is no mental and physical
process, how could consciousness arise?”
[Ānanda replied,] “Consciousness could not arise, sir.”
[The Buddha continued:]

O Ānanda, because of this causality, I know that consciousness arises
from the cause of the mental and physical process, and that depending
on the mental and physical process there arises consciousness. The meaning of causal dependence that I intend to explain can be found here.
O Ānanda, therefore, the mental and physical process depends on consciousness and consciousness depends on the mental and physical process;
the mental and physical process depends on the sixfold sense operation
and the sixfold sense operation depends on sense contact; sense contact
depends on sensation and sensation depends on thirstlike craving; thirstlike craving depends on grasping and grasping depends on the will-tobecoming; the will-to-becoming depends on birth and birth depends on
old age, death, sorrow, lamentation, suffering, and agony.
O Ānanda, [as to the causal relation between the mental and physical
process and consciousness and the subsequent series,] the causal chains
have been equally addressed, equally answered, equally delimited,
equally explained, equally intuited, and regarded as an [individual] sentient being.
O Ānanda, bhikṣus should acquire this principle of causality; this
transcendent insight, freed from the evil inﬂuence of deﬁlements by
intuiting it as it really is, thereby liberates the mind from desire.

32

Sutra 13: Greater Causality

O Ānanda, the kind of bhikṣu who thus realizes liberation should be
called one who has realized liberation through analytical insight. These
emancipated bhikṣus know how the Tathāgata is existentially limited
(i.e., does not exist after death), how he is not limited (i.e., exists after
death), how he is both limited and unlimited, and how he is neither
limited nor unlimited. How do they know this? O Ānanda, [the causality
of the mental and physical process and consciousness, together with the
subsequent series,] have been equally addressed, equally answered,
equally delimited, equally explained, equally intuited, and regarded as
an [individual] sentient being. Having thus known the nature of sentient
beings thoroughly, those bhikṣus who have realized liberation through
transcendent insight, freed from the evil inﬂuence of deﬁlements, though
neither seeing nor knowing in an ordinary sense, are yet able to see and
know the nature of the Tathāgata as it really is.
O Ānanda, whoever speculates about the self invariably upholds the
view that it exists, and they then regard the mental and physical aggregates
together with sensation as an individual self. Some say, “Sensation is
not the self, but the self is sensation.” Others say, “Sensation is not the
self, and the self is not sensation either, but the element of sensation as
a whole is the self.” Others say, “Sensation is neither the self, nor is the
self sensation, nor do the elements of sensation constitute the self either,
but thirstlike craving alone is the self.”
O Ānanda, if someone, referring to the self, asserts that sensation is
the self, you should say to them, “The Tathāgata distinguishes three
kinds of sensation; namely, pleasure, pain, and neither pleasure nor pain.
When one feels a pleasurable sensation, there is neither a sensation of
pain nor that of neither pleasure nor pain. When one feels pain, there is
neither a sensation of pleasure nor that of neither pleasure nor pain.
When one feels a sensation of neither pain nor pleasure, there is neither
a sensation of pain nor a pleasurable sensation. O Ānanda, this is because
a pleasurable object, with which the sense faculty has come into contact,
produces a pleasurable sensation [only]. When a sense contact that produces a pleasurable sensation ceases, the sensation also simultaneously
ceases to be. O Ānanda, a painful object, with which a sense faculty has
come into contact, produces a painful sensation [only]. When a sense

33

61c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

contact that produces a painful sensation ceases, the sensation also simultaneously ceases to be. A sense object that is neither painful nor pleasurable, with which a sense faculty has come into contact, produces a
sensation of neither pain nor pleasure [only]. If the sense contact that
produces a sensation of neither pain nor pleasure ceases, the sensation
also simultaneously ceases to be.
O Ānanda, this is comparable to obtaining ﬁre by friction. If someone
rubs a piece of wood against another piece of wood, creating friction,
ﬁre can be obtained; if he keeps the two pieces of wood apart, however,
there is no possibility of creating ﬁre. Likewise, sensation arises from
the contact between an object and its corresponding sense faculty. A
pleasurable sensation arises from contact with an object, but if this
contact ceases to be, the sensation also simultaneously ceases. A painful
sensation arises from contact with an object, but if this contact ceases,
the sensation also simultaneously ceases to be. A neutral sensation of
neither pleasure nor pain arises from contact with an object, but if this
contact ceases, the sensation also simultaneously ceases to be.
O Ānanda, these three kinds of sensation are thus conditioned [by
sense contact] and are impermanent. These kinds of sensation arise
through the causality of dependent origination (pratītyasamutpāda).
Whatever arises through dependent origination is subject to decay, is
mutable, and undergoes change. This causality is not the existence of
the self, nor is the self the existence of this causality. One should see
this matter as it really is, through right knowledge.
O Ānanda, one who thinks that the self exists regards sensation as
the self. Such a person is wrong. O Ānanda, suppose someone who
believes in the existence of the self asserts, “Sensation is not the self,
but the self is sensation.” You should say to him, “The Tathāgata distinguishes three kinds of sensations: pleasure, pain, and neither pleasure
nor pain. If pleasurable sensation is the self, then when the pleasurable
sensation passes there would come to be two selves. This is wrong. If a
painful sensation is the self, then when the pain subsides there would
come to be two selves. This is also wrong. If a sensation of neither pleasure nor pain is the self, then when this neutral sensation passes there
would come to be two selves. This is wrong.”

34

Sutra 13: Greater Causality

O Ānanda, if one who sees the existence of the self asserts, “Sensation
is not the self, but the self is sensation,” that person is wrong. O Ānanda,
one who speculates about the existence of the self upholds the following
theory: “Sensation is neither the self, nor is the self sensation, but the
elements of sensation constitute the self.” You should say to him, “There
is no sensation whatsoever. How can you say that there are elements of
sensation? Are you identiﬁable with elements of sensation?’ He will
surely reply, “No, I cannot be identiﬁed with these elements.” Therefore,
Ānanda, one who speculates about the existence of the self, saying,
“Sensation is neither the self, nor is the self sensation, but the elements
of sensation constitute the self”—that person is incorrect.
O Ānanda, one who speculates upon the existence of the self asserts,
“Sensation is neither the self, nor is the self sensation, nor are the contents
of sensation the self, but thirstlike craving is the self.” You should say
to him, “There is no sensation at all. How can thirstlike craving exist?
Are you identiﬁable with this thirstlike craving?’ He will surely reply,
“No, I cannot be identiﬁed with it.” Therefore, Ānanda, one who speculates upon the existence of the self, asserting, “Sensation is not the self,
nor is the self sensation, nor are the elements of sensation the self, but
the thirstlike craving alone is the self”—that person is incorrect.
O Ānanda, [as to the causal relation between the mental and physical
process and consciousness, and the subsequent series,] the causal linkages
have been equally addressed, equally answered, equally delimited, equally
explained, equally intuited, and regarded as an [individual] sentient
being. O Ānanda, those bhikṣus, having thus known the nature of human
existence thoroughly as it really is, are liberated from the mind of desire
by acquiring transcendent insight, thereby freed from the evil inﬂuence
of deﬁlements. They are called ones who have realized liberation through
analytical insight. The bhikṣus who have realized liberation know the
existence of the self, the nonexistence of the self, both the existence and
nonexistence of the self, as well as neither the existence nor nonexistence
of the self. How is this so? O Ānanda, [regarding the causality of dependent origination,] the causal linkages have been equally addressed, equally
answered, equally delimited, equally explained, equally intuited, and
regarded as an [individual] sentient being. Having thus known the nature

35

62a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

of human existence thoroughly, those bhikṣus realize liberation through
the attainment of transcendent insight, freed from the evil inﬂuence of
deﬁlements. Though neither seeing nor knowing in an ordinary sense,
they are able to see and know the aforementioned fourfold knowledge.

The Buddha said to Ānanda:

Among those who speculate about the existence of the self, it has been
equally established that some identify certain [nonsentient] material elements with a “self”; others identify unlimited material elements with a
“self”; further, others identify a small portion of the mental or sentient
elements (i.e., the four remaining mental aggregates) with a “self”; while
yet others identify unlimited mental elements with a “self.” O Ānanda,
those who identify a part of the material elements with the self are convinced that their view alone is good, and all other views are wrong.
Those who identify unlimited material elements with the self are also
convinced that their view alone is good, and all the other views are
wrong. Those who identify limited mental elements with the self are
convinced that their view alone is good, and all other views are wrong.
Those who identify unlimited mental elements with the self are convinced
that their view is good, and all other views are wrong.

The Buddha said to Ānanda:

Some śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas assert that the seven abodes of consciousness and the two higher abodes are a safe haven, a place of release,
of protection, like a house, guiding lights, wisdom, a refuge, free from
falsity and deﬁlement. What are these seven? The ﬁrst is when sentient
beings possess different bodies and different ideations. These are humans
and heavenly beings. This is the initial abode of consciousness. Some
śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas assert, “This is the place of safe haven, of
release, of protection, a house, a light, wisdom, a refuge, free from falsity
and deﬁlement.” O Ānanda, if a bhikṣu knows this initial abode of consciousness, its causal origin derived from the totality of causes and conditions, its cessation, their pleasure and pain, and the way of transcending it,
he sees things as they really are. O Ānanda, such a bhikṣu would say, “I
have seen that the aggregates are not the self, nor is the self the aggregates.

62b

36

Sutra 13: Greater Causality

I have seen the aggregates as they really are.” [Second,] when sentient
beings possess individual bodies but one and the same ideation, this is
the time when the god Brahmā was initially born in Ābhāsvara Heaven,
where communication is transmitted by light instead of sound. [Third,]
when sentient beings possess one and the same body but different
ideations, this is Ābhāsvara Heaven. [Fourth,] when sentient beings possess one and the same body and ideation, this is Śubhakṛtsna Heaven.
Fifth is when sentient beings abide in the sphere of inﬁnite space; sixth
is when sentient beings abide in the sphere of inﬁnite consciousness;
and seventh is when sentient beings abide in the sphere of nothingness
or nonutility. These are the seven abodes of consciousness. Some śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas assert that these are places of safe haven where
consciousness may abide, a place of release, of protection, a house, a
guiding light, wisdom, a refuge, free from falsity and deﬁlement. O
Ānanda, if, however, a bhikṣu knows these abodes of consciousness,
their causal origin derived from the totality of causes and conditions,
their cessation, their pleasure and pain, and the way of transcending
them, he sees things as they really are. Such a bhikṣu would say, “I have
seen that these aggregates are not the self, nor is the self these aggregates.
I have seen the aggregates as they really are.” This is the nature of the
seven abodes of consciousness.
What are the two bases of consciousness? They are the abodes of
sentient beings who abide in the sphere of nonideation and in the sphere
of neither ideation nor nonideation. Some śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas
assert that these are places of safe haven where consciousness may abide;
abodes to be sought and protected, houses, guiding lights, wisdom,
refuges, free from falsity and deﬁlement. O Ānanda, if a bhikṣu knows
these abodes of consciousness, their causal origin derived from the
totality of causes and conditions, their cessation, their pleasure and pain,
and the way of transcending them, he sees things as they really are. Such
a bhikṣu would say, “I have seen that these aggregates are not the self,
nor is the self these aggregates. I have seen things as they really are.”
This is the nature of the two bases of consciousness.
O Ānanda, again, there are eight kinds of deliverance. What are these
eight? When one, with an ideation of form within, perceives external

37

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

forms, this is the ﬁrst deliverance. When without any form or internal
ideation one perceives external forms, this is the second deliverance.
When one has thus terminated all deﬁlements, this is the third deliverance.
When, having transcended all form ideations and annihilated sensory
reaction, one abides in the ﬁrst formless state of concentration, this is
the fourth deliverance. Having transcended the realm of inﬁnite space,
one abides in the realm of inﬁnite consciousness; this is the ﬁfth deliverance. Having transcended the previous realm, one abides in the realm
of nothingness or nonutility; this is the sixth deliverance. Having transcended the previous realm, one abides in the realm of neither ideation
nor nonideation; this is the seventh deliverance. Having transcended
this realm, one abides in the ﬁnal state of cessation that transcends the
senses and ideation; this is the eighth deliverance.
O Ānanda, bhikṣus should be able to freely traverse from one liberated
state to another in due order as well as in reverse order. Such a bhikṣu
can realize these stages of liberation simultaneously.

At that time, Ānanda, having listened to the Buddha’s exhortation, was
delighted, respectfully received the teaching, and carried out what was taught
by the Buddha.
[End of Sutra 13: Greater Causality]

38

Sutra 14

Indra’s Questions
on Causality

(Dīgha Nikāya 21: Sakka-pañha Suttanta)
Thus have I heard. At one time, the Buddha was staying in Magadha at Indra’s
Śāla Tree Cave on Mount Vediyaka, north of the village of Āmra. At that time,
Śakra, lord of the gods, motivated by subtle good intent, wished to see the
Buddha, thinking, “I would like to go to see the World-honored One.” Having
heard that their lord, motivated by subtle good intent, was ready to visit the
Buddha, the Trāyastriṃśa gods then came to speak to the god Indra, saying:
Very good, indeed. O Lord Śakra, motivated by subtle good intent, you
are ready to see the Tathāgata. We wish also to visit the World-honored
One in your company, sir.”

The god Indra at once spoke to Pañcasikha, the gandharva god, “I am
ready to visit the World-honored One. You should accompany me. The Trāyastriṃśa gods too shall come along with me.” All delightedly replied, “Yes, sir.”
Thereupon, Pañcasikha played a string instrument made of lapis lazuli to
offer music before Śakra while standing among the other gods. Then Śakra,
lord of the gods, the Trāyastriṃśa gods as well as Pañcasikha, suddenly disappeared from the assembly hall and arrived at Mount Vediya of Magadha as
quickly as the time it takes for a wrestler to bend his arm and straighten it.
At that time, the World-honored One was engaged in ﬁery concentration,
illumining all of Mount Vediya in a similar ﬁery color. Then, seeing the ﬁery
slopes, the countrymen said to each other, “The reason that this mountain is
brightly illumined in ﬁery color must be found in the power of the Tathāgata
and the gods.”
Thereupon, Śakra said to Pañcaśikha:
The Tathāgata, who has extinguished all deﬁlements, is difﬁcult to see,
because he frequently descends to this remote, secluded place and spends
39

62c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

his hours in silence, uttering no words, accompanied in the silence only
by wild birds and animals. Many great deities reside in this mountain,
accompanying the World-honored One. May you play your instrument
before the World-honored One to entertain him. I shall come later on
accompanying the other gods.

Pañcaśikha replied, “Yes, sir.” At once he visited the place by himself as
instructed and played his instrument in a spot near the World-honored One,
accompanying it with a song:
O my dear Bhadrā, you should venerate your father.
Your father is very handsome.
When you were born to him,
I was in love with your mother, Lakṣmī.
Originally, caused by a minor event,
In my mind arose higher aspiration,
Evolving to become greater and more intense.
As a result, I frequently made offerings to the arhats,
Engaged myself in practicing four kinds of meditation
Along with the sons of the Śākyas,
Always enjoying a quiet residence,
As though my mind sought the nectar [of religious salvation].
While I concentrated myself in practice,
Śākyamuni also gave rise within himself the aspiration
To pursue the path of realizing supreme enlightenment.
He still proceeds upon that career path even now,
While I seek that woman,
Wishing to make love without fail.
My mind has been entrapped in attachment,
Unable to abandon my passion toward her.
Though wishing to abandon it,
I have not been able to leave,
Just like an elephant languishing in chains.
I am like one who meets a cool wind when hot,
Who obtains cool springwater when thirsty,
Who realizes nirvana;

63a

40

Sutra 14: Indra’s Questions on Causality

I am like water that extinguishes ﬁre,
An ill person who is visited by a good doctor,
A starving person who obtains delicious food and
Is gratiﬁed by consuming it to his heart’s content,
An arhat who abides in a state of realization, and
An elephant that, though still in chains, yet resists.
Like such an elephant,
I suddenly dash here and there, hardly controllable;
Unrestrained, I cannot stop by myself;
Just as an elephant pressed by heat plunges into a cool pond,
Its surface totally covered with various ﬂowers,
Thereby cooling its entire body.
Whatever offering I have made before and will make later on
Should be offered to the arhats.
Whatever I obtain due to rewarding fortune
Should be given to them.
If you die, I shall die together [with you].
[If I] survive after [your demise], I will commit suicide.
Without you, I certainly cannot live.
May the lord of the Trāyastriṃśa gods, O Śakra,
Grant me my wish.
I shall praise you with due propriety.
May you extend your sympathetic understanding to my request.

At that time, the World-honored One came out of the state of concentration
and said to Pañcaśikha:
Very good, O Pañcaśikha, you have praised the Tathāgata with your
voice of purity, accompanying it by playing the stringed instrument made
of lapis lazuli. The instrumental sound and your voice, neither too long
nor too short, well harmonized over a melancholy tune, is able to move
human hearts. Your performance on the instrument seems to express
various meanings, not only explaining the bondage of desire and praising
the practice of austerity, but also promoting the life of the śramaṇa and
the goal of nirvana.

41

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

At that moment, Pañcaśikha said to the Buddha:

I recall, sir, that once in the olden days, when the World-honored One
had accomplished the path of the Buddha under the nyagrodha tree of
Ajapāla near the Nairañjanā River in Uruvela, the son of Indra’s charioteer, Sikhaddi by name, and the daughter of the gandharva god got
together to seek sexual gratiﬁcation. At that time, having conﬁrmed that
their minds were inclining toward this, I composed verses at once and,
by way of playing a tune, I explained to them the bondage of desire,
commended the practice of austerity, and exhorted the life of the śramaṇa
as well as nirvana. Then, having listened to my song, that heavenly
nymph raised her eyes toward me and said with a smile, “O dear Pañcaśikha, I have not yet seen the Tathāgata but I have heard of the words
of praise spoken by those gods assembled in the Sudharma Hall of
Trāyastriṃśa Heaven, saying, “He has such-and-such virtues,” “He has
such-and-such powers,” [and so on]. You have always upheld your faith
in the Tathāgata and have been closely associated with him. Now I wish
to become acquainted with the Tathāgata along with you, sir.” O Worldhonored One, at that time I gave my promise to her, but ever since I have
not had an opportunity to speak to her again, sir.

Then Śakra, lord of the gods, thought to himself, “Pañcasikha has already
entertained the Tathāgata. I now should think of him [and communicate].”
Śakra, lord of the gods, thus thought of the gandharva god.
This thought then appeared in Pañcaśikha’s mind, “Now, Śakra, lord of the
gods, has sent a message to me.” At once, picking up the string instrument
made of lapis lazuli, Pañcaśikha returned to the place of the god Indra. Indra
said to him:
May you go to see the World-honored One as my proxy, representing
the Trāyastriṃśa gods, and after greeting him with a bow say these words
of enquiry about his well-being: “Is His Holiness at ease with his rising
and sitting, does he feel strong in his walking?”

Thus instructed, Pañcaśikha returned to the World-honored One and,
having honored the Buddha by bowing his forehead to the Buddha’s feet, he
withdrew to one side and said to the World-honored One:

42

Sutra 14: Indra’s Questions on Causality

Śakra, lord of the gods, lord of Trāyastriṃśa Heaven and all the gods
therein, sent me to the World-honored One with words of enquiry regarding your well-being: “Is His Holiness at ease in his rising and sitting,
does he feel strong in his walking?”

The World-honored One replied:

May you, the god Indra, and all the Trāyastriṃśa gods equally enjoy
increased longevity, a pleasurable life, and good health. For the gods of
those other heavens and humans, as well as those sentient beings, the
asuras, have been indulged with longevity, comfortable living, and the
absence of illness.

At that moment, Śakra, lord of the gods, again thought to himself, “We
should see and pay our respects to the World-honored One.” Accompanied
by the Trāyastriṃśa gods, he immediately went to the place of the Buddha
and all of the gods, having honored the Buddha by bowing their foreheads
to the Buddha’s feet, withdrew to one side.
Thereupon the god Indra said to the Buddha, “This is strange. I feel that
I am sitting far away from the World-honored One, and I should take my
seat at a closer spot.”
The Buddha said to the god Indra, “Though the assembly of your gods is
quite large, come closer toward me and take your seat.”
At that moment, the Śāla Tree Cave automatically increased in size so as
to provide abundant space for all the Trāyastriṃśa gods. Thereupon, the god
Indra and the Trāyastriṃśa gods, as well as Pañcaśikha, all honored the Buddha
by bowing their foreheads to the Buddha’s feet and withdrew to take their seats
on one side.
Śakra, lord of the gods, said to the Buddha:

At one time, the World-honored One was at the house of a lay brāhmaṇa
householder in Śrāvastī. At that time, the World-honored One had entered
into the ﬁery mental concentration. I was then traveling on a minor errand,
in a treasure chariot equipped with thousand-spoked wheels, and as I was
passing through the air on the way to visit the guardian god Virūḍhaka,
I happened to see a heavenly maiden, her hands held together in reverence,
standing before the World-honored One. I approached her and said:

43

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

When the World-honored One comes out from his concentration,
may you greet him by announcing my name and enquire about his
well-being: “Is His Holiness at ease in his rising and sitting, does he
feel strong in his walking?”

I was uncertain whether [the heavenly maiden] really conveyed my greeting
to Your Holiness. O World-honored One, do you recall the occasion, sir?

The Buddha replied:

Yes, indeed, I recall it. She announced your name and greeted me in
your very voice. When I came out of the concentration, I could still hear
the sound of your chariot [fading away].

The god Indra said to the Buddha:

Once upon a time, due to of some minor business, I happened to be
together with the Trāyastriṃśa gods, who were assembled at the Sudharma Hall, when the senior gods all commended me with the following
words: “If the Tathāgata should arise in this world, he will promote our
well-being while causing the advantage of the asuras, the adversarial
demigods, to diminish.” Now I myself see Your Holiness, thus knowing
and directly conﬁrming that the Tathāgata, Arhat, has indeed appeared
in this world, promoting the well-being of the gods while causing the
advantage of the asuras to diminish.
There was a Śākya daughter, Gopikā by name, who practiced the discipline of pure and genuine austerity under the World-honored One, and
who, after her body had dissolved and her life had ended, was born in
Trāyastriṃśa Heaven as my son, [ Gopaka]. All the Trāyastriṃśa gods
praised him, “Gopaka, son of our lord, is in possession of great merit and
the power of inﬂuence.” There were also three bhikṣus who had once practiced austerity under the World-honored One. After their bodies dissolved
and their lives ended, they were born among lowly gods such as gandharvas.
They come every day to serve me and play music at my mealtimes, day
and evening. Having seen them, Gopaka teased them in these verses:

63c

You are the Buddha’s disciples.
Once when I was in a lay household,

44

Sutra 14: Indra’s Questions on Causality

I used to offer you alms and robes, and
Venerated you with respect and reverence.
Whatever name you had at that time,
Having received the Buddha’s teaching,
You failed to investigate into the doctrines
Taught by the master of supreme insight.
In my previous life,
I venerated you and was intent
In listening to the teachings of the Buddha, and
Thus was born in this Trāyastriṃśa Heaven as the son of the god Indra.
Can’t you see that in my previous life I was a woman,
But because of my merit
I am now the son of the god Indra?
In your previous life,
Both of you together practiced austerity,
Yet you have now fallen to a lower position,
Thus serving us at mealtimes.
Because of the wrong deeds you once did,
You are now receiving such an unfavorable reward,
Placing yourselves as servants to us at mealtimes.
You were born in an impure locality
Unable to avoid others’ teasing.
Having listened to my teasing,
You should be weary of your position.
From now on, exert yourselves and
Never take a position in service to others.
O you two, exert yourselves in your practice,
Contemplate the teaching of the Tathāgata,
Forsake whatever you feel as attachment,
Understand the result of desire and impure conduct:
Insofar as you are bound by desire,
Your conduct cannot be really true
But is of the deceptive human world.
Just as an elephant breaks its reins,
One should go beyond Trāyastriṃśa Heaven.

45

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

Through heroic endeavor
One should go beyond Trāyastriṃśa Heaven,
While Śakra and the heavenly gods
Assemble at the Sudharma Hall,
Thereby causing Śakra to sigh in wonder and
The Trāyastriṃśa gods to acknowledge his superior power.
Indeed, the son of the Śākya
[Actually] accomplished this heroic feat,
Going beyond Trāyastriṃśa Heaven.

64a

(Here in the Chinese text, Indra continues his narrative in verse:)
Wearying of the bondage caused by desire,
Gopaka thus completed his exhortation
[Referring again to that exemplary hero,] saying,
“The Buddha appeared in the country of Magadha,
Known to all as Śākyamuni.”
Those three bhikṣus, though disappointed at the time,
Regained their practice of mindfulness later on.
One of the three became a gandharva god,
While the other two,
Having realized the truth of the noble path,
Transcended Trāyastriṃśa Heaven.
The disciples did not doubt
Whatever doctrine the World-honored One taught.
Of those three bhikṣus,
Who all listened to the Buddha’s teaching,
Two excelled in practice more than the other one.
Having realized their own excellent accomplishment,
These two have just been born in Ābhāsvara Heaven.
Having witnessed this event,
I come to present myself at the place of the Buddha.

Lord Indra said to the Buddha, “May Your Reverence spare a moment to
address my doubts?”
The Buddha replied, “Let me know your questions. I shall answer accordingly.”
46

Sutra 14: Indra’s Questions on Causality

At that time, the god Indra said to the Buddha:

What kinds of moral and spiritual deﬁlements cause the gods, humans,
gandharvas, and asuras, as well as all other sentient beings, respectively
fettered, to thus hate each other and carry on armed conﬂict?

The Buddha replied to Śakra:

The fetter of hatred invariably arises from greed and jealousy. These
two forces of motivation thus drive sentient beings toward armed conﬂict.

The god Indra then said to the Buddha:

It is indeed true, O World-honored One, that because of the force of
greed and jealousy, gods, humans, gandharvas, and asuras, as well as
all other sentient beings, are driven to battle each other with weapons.
Having listened to the Buddha’s answer, the net of my doubt is now
totally removed; I am no longer in doubt about it, sir. But I still do not
understand from what original cause greed and jealousy arise—what
are the direct cause, the indirect cause, and the respective ultimate factors?
What is it that when present makes these forces operative, and when
absent renders these forces inoperative?

The Buddha replied to Śakra, lord of the gods:

Greed and jealousy arise due to the existence of things that we hold dear
and things that are not held dear by us. These two are the direct causes,
the indirect causes, and the ultimate factors. When these factors are present, greed and jealousy arise; in their absence, greed and jealousy do
not arise.

Śakra, lord of the gods, then further said to the Buddha:

This is indeed true, sir. Greed and jealousy arise, invariably caused by
things that we hold dear and things that are not held dear by us. These
two are the direct causes, the indirect causes, and the ultimate factors.
When these factors are present, greed and jealousy arise; when these
are absent, greed and jealousy do not arise. Having listened to the
Buddha’s answer, the net of my doubt is now totally removed; I am no

47

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

longer in doubt about this, sir. But what gives rise to the things that are
dear to us and those that are not dear to us, from what direct cause, from
what indirect cause, and from what ultimate factor? What is it that, when
present, invites their arising, while when absent prevents their arising?

64b

The Buddha replied to Śakra, lord of the gods:

Things that are we hold dear and things that are not dear to us arise from
our desires, from desires as direct causes, desires as indirect causes, and
desires as ultimate factors. When desires are present, greed and jealousy
arise; when desires are absent, greed and jealousy do not arise.

Śakra, lord of the gods, said to the Buddha:

This is indeed true, sir. Things that are held dear by us and things that
we do not hold dear invariably arise because of desires. They arise from
desires as direct causes, as indirect causes, and as ultimate factors. When
desires are present, things dear to us and things not dear to us arise;
when desires are absent, neither arises. Having listened to the teaching
of the Buddha, the net of my doubt is now totally removed; I am no
longer in doubt about this, sir. But from what do desires arise, from what
direct cause, from what indirect cause, and from what ultimate factors?
What is it that when present gives rise to desire, but when absent does
not give rise to desire?

The Buddha replied to Śakra, lord of the gods:

Things that we hold dear (i.e., cravings) arise from thoughts as direct
causes, thoughts as indirect causes, and thoughts as ultimate factors.
When thoughts are present, desires arise; when thoughts are absent,
desires do not arise.

At that time, Śakra, lord of the gods, said to the Buddha:

This is indeed true, sir. Desires invariably arise from the cause of thoughts.
They arise from thoughts as direct causes, as indirect causes, and as ultimate factors. When thoughts are present, desires arise, while when they
are absent, desires do not arise. Having listened to the teaching of the
Buddha, the net of my doubt is now totally removed; I am no longer in

48

Sutra 14: Indra’s Questions on Causality

doubt about this, sir. But I still do not understand what thoughts arise
from, from what direct cause, from what indirect cause, and from what
ultimate factor? What is it that, when present, gives rise to thoughts, but
when absent does not give rise to thoughts?

The Buddha replied to Śakra, lord of the gods:

Thoughts arise from mental calculation based on obsessive conceptions,
as direct cause, as indirect cause, and as ultimate factor. When mental
calculation based on obsessive conceptions is present, thoughts arise;
when it is absent, thoughts do not arise.

At that time, Śakra, lord of the gods, said to the Buddha:

This is indeed true, sir. Thoughts invariably arise from mental calculation
based on obsessive conceptions. Thoughts arise from mental calculation
based on obsessive conception and ideations as direct cause, as indirect
cause, and as ultimate factor. When mental calculation based on obsessive
conceptions is present, thoughts arise, but when it is absent thoughts do
not arise. But I still do not understand from what this mental calculation
based on obsessive conceptions arises, from what direct cause, from
what indirect cause, and from what ultimate factor? What is it that, when
present, gives rise to mental calculation based on obsessive conceptions,
but when absent does not give rise to such mental calculation?

The Buddha replied to Śakra, lord of the gods:

Whenever thoughts arise, they are caused by mental calculation based
on obsessive conceptions as direct cause, as indirect cause, and as ultimate
factor. When this is present, thoughts arise; when absent, thoughts do
not arise. O Śakra, lord of the gods, if there is no mental calculation
based on obsessive conceptions, there would be no thought. If there is
no thought, there would be no desire. If there is no desire, none of the
things that are held dear by oneself as well as things that are not held
dear would arise. If there is neither of these two, neither greed nor
jealousy would arise. If there is no jealousy or greed, neither armed conﬂict among sentient beings, nor the will to injure and murder each other,
would arise. O Śakra, lord of the gods, all this is ultimately based on

49

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

obsessive conceptions as direct cause, obsessive conceptions as indirect
cause, and obsessive conceptions as ultimate factor. From this ultimate
factor, then, thoughts arise; from thoughts desires arise; from desires
there arise things that one holds dear and things that are not held dear;
from these two, there arise greed and jealousy; because of greed and
jealousy, all sentient beings are driven to injure and murder each other.

Śakra, lord of the gods, said to the Buddha:

This is indeed true, O World-honored One. Because of obsessive conceptions, thoughts arise. Thoughts arise with obsessive conceptions as
direct cause, as indirect cause, and as ultimate factor. In the presence of
obsessive conceptions arises thought, while in their absence there is no
arising of thought. If there is no obsessive conceptions as ultimate factor,
no thought arises; if there is no thought, no desire arises; if there is no
desire, none of things that are held dear by oneself or those things that
are not held dear will arise; if there are neither of these two, neither
greed nor jealousy will arise; if there is neither greed nor jealousy, no
sentient being will be driven to injure or murder another. Having listened
to the teaching of the Buddha, the net of my doubt has now been totally
removed and I am no more in doubt about this, sir.

Śakra then said to the Buddha:

For the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, has or has not the proper path that
will help them terminate mental calculation based on obsessive conceptions been set out, sir?

64c

The Buddha replied to Śakra, lord of the gods:

Neither śramaṇas nor brāhmaṇas have been given a proper method by
which to totally eradicate obsessive conceptions. Why is this? O Śakra,
lord of the gods, there are many compartmentalized areas in this world.
Sentient beings are ﬁrmly attached to their own compartmentalized areas,
defending them formidably, and thus they are unable to relinquish them.
They claim that theirs are real while all others are unreal. Because of this,
O Śakra, lord of the gods, all the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas have no proper
method by which to totally eradicate obsessive conceptualization.

50

Sutra 14: Indra’s Questions on Causality

At that time, Śakra, lord of the gods, spoke to the Buddha:

This is indeed true, sir. There are many compartmentalized areas in this
world. Sentient beings are ﬁrmly attached to their own compartmentalized
areas, defending them formidably, and they are unable to relinquish
them. They claim that theirs are real while all others are unreal. Because
of this, O Śakra, lord of the gods, all the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas have
no proper method by which to totally eradicate obsessive conceptions.
Having listened to the explanation of the Buddha, the net of my doubt
has now been removed; I am no longer in doubt about this, sir.

Śakra, lord of the gods, said to the Buddha, “Do the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas have some sort of method by which to partially eradicate mental calculation based on obsessive conceptions?”
The Buddha replied to Śakra, lord of the gods:
There are three types of obsessive conceptions: verbal, mental, and
actions. Some speech injures oneself, others, and both oneself and others.
Forsaking through concentration the obsessive conceptions that are
merely attendant to the object (purpose) of speech, one will not injure
oneself, others, or both oneself and others. Bhikṣus, with a sense of the
appropriate time, concentrate their minds toward the course of the referential object of speech without conceptual disruption. Some thought
injures oneself, others, and both oneself and others.

At that time, Śakra, lord of the gods, said, “I have no doubt about what I
have heard from the Buddha.”
Again, he said to the Buddha, “How many forms of ﬁrm, noble equanimity
are there?”
The Buddha said to Śakra, lord of the gods:
There are three kinds of equanimity. First, the equanimity that pleases
the body; second, that which distresses the body; and third, that which
is neutral to the body. O Śakra, lord of the gods, the equanimity that
pleases the body injures oneself, others, and both oneself and others.
Forsaking this pleasure, one remains with that which is being pleased,
thereby not injuring himself, others, or both himself and others. Bhikṣus,
with a sense of the appropriate [time], concentrate on it and do not forget.

51

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

This is regarded to receive the higher ordination in conformity with the
Vinaya disciplines. O Śakra, lord of the gods, distressing one’s body
injures oneself, injures others, and injures both. Forsaking this bodily
distress, one remains with that which is distressed, not injuring himself,
others, or both himself and others. Bhikṣus with a sense of the appropriate
[time], concentrate on it and do not forget. This is regarded to receive
the higher ordination in conformity with the Vinaya disciplines. Again,
O Śakra, lord of the gods, being neutral to one’s body injures oneself,
others, and both oneself and others. Forsaking the neutrality of the body,
one remains with what is forsaken, not injuring himself, others, and both
himself and others. Bhikṣus, with a sense of the appropriate [time], concentrate on it and do not forget. This is regarded to receive the higher
ordination in conformity with the Vinaya disciplines.

65a

At that time, Śakra, lord of the gods, said, “I have no doubt about what I
have heard from the Buddha.”
Śakra, lord of the gods, then said to the Buddha, “How many rules of discipline for the sense faculties are there with which the wise and holy are
endowed, sir?”
The Buddha replied to Śakra, lord of the gods:

As for the visual faculty and the object of form, I distinguish two kinds:
one that should be known by a bhikṣu and another should not be known.
In like manner, I differentiate two kinds of perceptions for the auditory
faculty and its object, the olfactory faculty and its object, the gustatory
faculty and its object, the tactile faculty and its object, and the mental
faculty and its object: namely, one that should be known and another
that should not to be known.

At that time, Śakra, lord of the gods, said to the Buddha:

O World-honored One, I can already guess the answers based upon the
Tathāgata’s initial explanation, even before a detailed exposition is given,
sir. When the eyes see an object of form, I differentiate between two
kinds of perception: one that should be known and another that should
not be known. Likewise, I differentiate between two kinds of perception

52

Sutra 14: Indra’s Questions on Causality

of the ears and sound, the nose and smell, the tongue and taste, the body
and touch, and the intellect and the psychophysical elements.
O World-honored One, when I recognize in visual perception favorable
elements decreasing and unfavorable elements increasing, I say that I
should not associate with that perception. O World-honored One, when
I recognize in visual perception favorable elements increasing and unfavorable elements decreasing, I should associate with that perception. In
like manner, when the ears, nose, body, and manas cognate sound, smell,
touch, and the elements, if I recognize favorable elements increasing
and unfavorable elements decreasing, I say that I should associate with
that perception.

The Buddha said to Śakra, lord of the gods, “Very good! This is known
as the dual rules of discipline to which the wise and holy should adhere.”
Śakra, lord of the gods, said to the Buddha, “I have no doubt about what
I have heard from the Buddha.” He continued:
To which of the following titles is a bhikṣu entitled? First, ultimate perfection; second, ultimate practice of austerity; third, ultimate state of
comfort and happiness; and fourth, ultimate ﬁnal nirvana ?

The Buddha replied to Śakra, lord of the gods:

When one has brought cessation to the body that is distressed because
of desire, he or she is entitled to be named by these four terms: one who
has accomplished the ultimate perfection, ultimate practice of austerity,
ultimate comfortable happiness, and ﬁnal nirvana.

Śakra, lord of the gods, said to the Buddha:

This question, with which I have had problems and about which I have
held many doubts for a long time, has now been resolved through the
Tathāgata’s clariﬁcation, sir.

The Buddha said to Śakra, lord of the gods, “In the past, did you once
visit śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas and question them about this?”
Śakra, lord of the gods, replied to the Buddha:

53

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

Yes, sir. I recall that in the past I once visited śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas
and questioned them about this. On another occasion, I recall that we
assembled at the Sudharma Hall and I discussed with the Trāyastriṃśa
gods as to whether or not the Tathāgata had appeared in this world, but
despite our search we were unable to conﬁrm his appearance. We returned
to our respective palaces and engaged in pastimes gratifying the ﬁve
senses. O World-honored One, later on I also saw various great deities
who were engaged in gratifying the ﬁve senses, reaching the ends of
their lives. At this, O World-honored One, I was terriﬁed, my hair standing
on end.
At the same time, I also observed śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas residing
in secluded places, having renounced domestic life and desires. So I
approached them and enquired, “What is called the ultimate?” When I
asked the meaning of this, they could not reply. They did not know the
answer, but in turn asked me, “Who are you?” I answered, “I am Śakra,
lord of the gods, Indra.” They then asked me, “Who are you? What Śakra
is that?” I then replied, “I am the lord of the gods, Śakra. Having a question in my mind, I came to ask you about it.” I then explained what I
understood of the doctrines of the Śākya. After they had listened to my
exhortation, they became my disciples. I am now a disciple of the Buddha.
Having realized the saintly state of stream-winner, provided that I do
not fall into lower realms, after seven rebirths in the world of humans I
am destined to realize the result of the path. May I request Your Holiness,
O World-honored One, to prophesy the saintly state of once-returner on
my behalf and explain the meaning of this term.

65b

Śakra, lord of the gods, then composed verses:

Because of that deﬁled thought,
I cherished doubts.
Throughout the night, together with the gods,
While searching for the Tathāgata,
I saw a number of bhikṣus
Who had renounced domestic life in their secluded places.
As they spoke of the World-honored One,
I went to see them with respectful greetings and,

54

Sutra 14: Indra’s Questions on Causality

With a bow, asked them:
“I have deliberately come to visit you.
What is the ultimate perfection?”
After this question, I then asked them
Whether they had the proper method
By which to realize ultimate cessation,
But they could not answer my question.
Today, O Unsurpassed Honorable One,
Whom I have long sought after,
I have been examining my conduct and
My mind has been engaged in right contemplation.
Your Holiness has understood the conduct of my mind and
My practice for a long period of time;
May I request the Pure-eyed One to note this.
I pay my homage to the Highest among Humans,
The Unsurpassed One in the three worlds,
Thereby to sever the relation of indebtedness and attachment.
Now I venerate the Most Honorable One like the sun.

The Buddha said to Śakra, lord of the gods, “Do you recall the time when
you acquired blissful joy and memorable happiness?”
Śakra, lord of the gods, replied:

Yes, sir. There was such a time. O World-honored One, I recall the blissful
joy and memorable happiness that I acquired in the past. O Worldhonored One, I once battled the asuras and won victory; when the asuras
withdrew I then returned with joy and delight. Considering this blissful
joy and memorable happiness, I realize now that those feelings of joy
and happiness were devoid of reality, in that they arose from the basic
deﬁlement upon which armed conﬂict, dispute, and controversy rest.
However, the joy and happiness that I have now acquired in relation to
the Buddha is not the kind of blissful joy and memorable happiness that
was acquired through armed conﬂict and disputes.

The Buddha said to Śakra, lord of the gods, “Now, having acquired [new]
blissful joy and memorable happiness, what result do expect to ﬁnd in them?”

55

65c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

Śakra, lord of the gods, then said to the Buddha, “I have sought after ﬁve
kinds of meritorious results in the state of blissful joy and memorable happiness. What are the ﬁve?”
At once, he composed explanatory verses:
When later on my life ends and
I forsake my longevity in the heavens,
I will enter a mother’s womb
That is free from illness and is pleasing to me.
The Buddha inculcates the right, true path
By which to convert those who have not yet been liberated.
Within the Dharma of the perfectly enlightened,
I shall practice the discipline of austerity,
Steadfast transcendent knowledge, and
Directly perceive the noble truths.
Realizing the original place from which things arise,
Realizing deliverance in the eternity therein,
With effort for practice,
I will acquire the knowledge
Of the nature of things as they really are.
Even if I fail to obtain the direct experience of the path,
The merit therefrom is superior to rebirth among the gods.
All the gods, from the superior heaven and Akaniṣṭha Heaven
(highest in the realm of form),
Down to the last body of incarnation,
Will be born in that place.
Now I have been reborn there with
A heavenly body, pure and genuine,
I see through my pure vision
That my longevity has also increased.

Having completed these verses, Śakra, lord of the gods, said to the Buddha,
“I wish to acquire these ﬁve rewards with blissful joy and memorable happiness, sir.”
At that time, Śakra, lords of gods, said to the Trāyastriṃśa gods:

56

Sutra 14: Indra’s Questions on Causality

Is it not a good idea that we conduct the rite of veneration and observance
for the sake of the god Brahmā in the guise of a youth, resident of the
higher heaven above us, while now in front of the Buddha?

No sooner had he ﬁnished speaking than there suddenly appeared the god
Brahmā in the guise of a youth, ﬂoating in mid-air over the Trāyastriṃśa
gods. He recited the following verse to Śakra, lord of the gods:
The pure and genuine practice,
Carried out by the lord of the gods,
Beneﬁts many sentient beings.
May the lord of the gods visiting Magadha
Thoroughly ask about the meaning of Tathāgata.

Then, upon completing the verse, the god Brahmā in the guise of a youth
suddenly disappeared.
At that time, Śakra, lord of the gods, arose from his seat and, having honored the World-honored One [by bowing his forehead to the Buddha’s] feet,
circumambulated him three times and left the place. The Trāyastriṃśa gods
and Pañcaśikha also honored the Buddha [by bowing to his] feet and departed.
Then Śakra, the lord of the gods, who was by then a little farther ahead,
looked back and said to Pañcaśikha:
It was very good that you played the instrument before the Buddha to
entertain him, and that thereafter I arrived, together with the gods. I have
now come to know you and I shall promote you to fatherly status, the
highest among the gandharvas, and arrange for the daughter of the lord
of the gandharvas, Bhadrā, to become your wife.

When the World-honored One had completed this teaching, the eighty-four
thousand heavenly beings all acquired genuine insight into the nature of the
Dharma free from deﬁlement. Then Śakra, Indra, lord of the gods, the Trāyastriṃśa gods, as well as Pañcaśikha, having listened to the Buddha’s exhortation,
all rejoiced and respectfully carried out what was taught by the Buddha.
[End of Sutra 14: Indra’s Questions on Causality]

57

66a

Sutra 15

The Episode at Anupiya

(Dīgha Nikāya 24: Pāṭika Suttanta)
Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying in the Mallan country
at Anupiya, accompanied by one thousand two hundred and ﬁfty bhikṣus. At
that time, the World-honored One, donning his saṃghāṭī robe and with his
almsbowl in hand, entered the town of Anupiya for almsround. The Worldhonored One then thought to himself:

It seems too early to go for almsround. Now, I may visit the pleasure
grove of the brāhmaṇa wanderer Bhārgava. O bhikṣus, let us wait there
till the proper time comes and then go for almsround.

The World-honored One then proceeded to that grove. At that time, having
seen the Buddha approaching his place from a distance, the brāhmaṇa Bhārgava immediately stood up to welcome the Buddha and, after exchanging
greetings, said to the Buddha:

Welcome, Gautama. You have not seen us here for some time. Now,
what purpose has prompted you to come in this way, sir? Please take a
seat here.

The World-honored One then sat down as invited, while Bhārgava also
took his seat on one side. The brāhmaṇa then said to the World-honored One:
Last evening the bhikṣu Sunakṣatra, the son of a Licchavi clansman, visited me here and said to me, “Teacher, I am no longer practicing austerity
in the place of the Buddha. It is because he has rejected me.” Though I
listened to what he said, no sooner did I see Gautama walking by than
I greeted you with welcome. I certainly did not accept his words, sir.

The Buddha replied to Bhārgava:

59

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

I am sure and I know that you did not believe what Sunakṣatra said to
you. Sometime ago, when I was staying at the Sudharma Hall near the
Markaṭa Pond in Vaiśālī, this man Sunakṣatra came to see me and directly
asked me, “The Tathāgata has rejected me. I cannot practice austerity
with the Tathāgata.”
I then said to him, “Why do you say that you will not practice austerity
with me, and that I have rejected you?”
Sunakṣatra replied, “It is because the Tathāgata has not shown me
his supernormal power, sir.”
I then asked him, “Have I ever asked you, ‘If you practice austerity
within my religion, I will show you my supernormal power’? Have you
ever asked me, ‘If the Tathāgata will show me a miracle of supernormal
power [ﬁrst], then I will practice austerity’?
Sunakṣatra then responded, “[I have asked] neither [of these questions
of you], sir, World-honored One.”
I said to Sunakṣatra, “In my dialogue with you I neither asked you
‘If you practice austerity in my religion, I will show you my supernormal
power’ nor did you say to me, ‘If Your Holiness shows a miracle of
supernormal power I will practice austerity.’ O Sunakṣatra, what do you
think? According to your thought, have I been able to show you my
supernormal power as Tathāgata? Or have I not? Has the doctrine of salvation I laid out [for my disciples] been able to help them to end suffering
exhaustively as an essential method of deliverance?”
Sunakṣatra replied, “As the World-honored One says, I have neither
said that the Tathāgata has not been able to show his supernormal power,
nor have I said that the doctrine of salvation the Tathāgata laid out as
the essential method of deliverance has not been able to help his disciples
to realize their goal of ending suffering exhaustively, sir.”
[I then said to him,] “Therefore, O Sunakṣatra, if you practice austerity
by following the doctrine of my religion, you will be able to realize
supernormal power; I did not say that you could not realize it. As it is
the essential method of deliverance from suffering, I say that you will
be able to realize deliverance, and I did not say that you could not realize
it. What do you seek in this religious doctrine anyway?”

66b

60

Sutra 15: The Episode at Anupiya

Sunakṣatra said, “World-honored One, you have not taught me as frequently as occasions permit. The World-honored One knows everything
about the beginning of things17 but is unwilling to teach me about it, sir.”
I replied, “O Sunakṣatra, have I ever said to you ‘If you practice austerity according to the doctrine of my religion as I have laid it out, I will
teach you the beginning of things’?18 Have you ever said to me, ‘If the
World-honored One teaches me the beginning of things, I will practice
austerity under the guidance of [your] religion’?”
Sunakṣatra replied, “[I have not asked either of these questions], sir.”
I continued, “Therefore, O Sunakṣatra, I neither invited you initially
with such a statement, nor did you reply to me with such a [condition]
in your response. Why do you now say to me [what is contrary to the
truth]? O Sunakṣatra, what do you think? According to your thought, has
the Tathāgata been able to teach you the knowledge about the beginning
of things? Or has he not? Has the doctrine of salvation I laid out as the
essential method of deliverance been able to end suffering exhaustively?”
Sunakṣatra replied, “I have neither said that the Tathāgata has not
been able to teach me the beginning of things, nor have I said that the
doctrine of salvation taught by the World-honored One as the essential
method of deliverance could not help us end suffering exhaustively, sir.”
I then said to Sunakṣatra, “As you said in your reply, if I can teach
you the beginning of things, then the doctrine of salvation that I taught
you as the essential method of deliverance can also end suffering exhaustively. What do you wish to seek in my religion?”
I then said to Sunakṣatra, “Previously, in the land of Vṛji, in Vaiśālī,
you praised the Tathāgata (Buddha), the Dharma, and the Sangha in
innumerable ways, just as someone praises the eight qualities of the pure
and cool ponds, namely (1) coolness, (2) lightness of gravity, (3)
resilience, (4) clarity, (5) sweetness, (6) purity, (7) pleasing to drink, and
(8) suitable for physical health, in order to give rise to a pleasant and
delightful feeling in people’s hearts. You also praised the Tathāgata, the
Dharma, and the Sangha in the land of Vṛji, in Vaiśālī, like this, and
thereby caused many people to become happier with faith [in the Three
Treasures]. Sunakṣatra, you should know that if you disavow the practice

61

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

of the path now, the people in the society may spread critical comments
about your character, saying, ‘Though the bhikṣu Sunakṣatra has many
good friends and is closely associated with the World-honored One as
his disciple, he cannot continue the practice of austerity till the end of
his life and therefore disavowed his adherence to the precepts and returned
to the ordinary world to live an ignoble life.’ O brāhmaṇa, you should
know that despite my advice, he did not follow my admonition, disavowed the precepts, and returned to secular society.”
O brāhmaṇa, at another time, when I was staying at the Sudharma
Hall near the Markaṭa Pond in Vaiśālī, a Nirgrantha (Jain) practitioner,
Kandaramasuka by name, was staying in area. He was revered with
respect, renowned afar, had many friends, and received extensive material
support. The bhikṣu Sunakṣatra, in his saṃghāṭī robe and with his almsbowl in hand, entered the city of Vaiśālī for almsround, proceeded in
due order, and reached the abode of the Nirgrantha practitioner. At that
time, Sunakṣatra questioned the Nirgrantha teacher about some philosophical matter of profound meaning. Since, however, [the Nirgrantha
practitioner] could not reply to the question, he eventually became angry.
Sunakṣatra thought to himself, “Because I have irritated this person,
will my action result in suffering and agony for a long period of time?”
O brāhmaṇa, you should know that, after his almsround, carrying
his saṃghāṭī robe and almsbowl, the bhikṣu Sunakṣatra then came to
my place and, after honoring me by bowing his forehead to my feet,
took his seat on one side. He did not, however, report the incident to
me. Therefore, I said to him, “O foolish man, how can you claim that
you are a disciple of the Śākya master (lit., “son of the Śākya”)?”
Sunakṣatra then replied to me, “World-honored One, why do you call
me a fool? And why can’t I claim that I am a disciple of the World-honored One, sir?”
I told him, “Foolish man, you once visited the Nirgrantha teacher
and asked him about a philosophical question of profound meaning.
Since, however, he could not answer the question, he eventually became
angry. At that moment, you thought to yourself, ‘Since I have now
insulted this person, will my action result in suffering and agony for a
long period of time?’ Did you not think this to yourself?”

66c

62

Sutra 15: The Episode at Anupiya

Sunakṣatra replied, “He was supposed to be an arhat. For some reason
[that I do not know], he became angry, sir.”
I replied to Sunakṣatra, “Foolish man, your thought ‘For some reason
he became angry’ is itself absurd, because an arhat by deﬁnition is free
from agitation and anger. You should be able to discern by yourself if
[someone] is an arhat and adheres to the seven kinds of ascetic practice
for a long time: (1) not to wear garments until the end of one’s life, (2)
not to sustain oneself by ingesting intoxicating drinks or meat, nor to
eat rice and rice gruel, (3) not to commit sexual misconduct (i.e., to
remain celibate), (4) not to go beyond the four stone shrines located in
Vaiśālī, the Udena shrine in the east, (5) the Gautamaka shrine in the
south, (6) the Bahuputraka shrine in the west, and (7) the Saptāmra shrine
in the north. Yet he has now left all of these sites and no longer attends
to them. Having vowed to keep these rules, however, the Nirgrantha
ascetic committed all these four offenses later on and then died outside
the city of Vaiśālī. Like a wild jackal, suffering from an unsightly skin
disease, emaciated with illness, ﬁnally dies among the cemetery mounds,
that Nirgrantha ascetic who vowed to follow the ascetic norms and yet
broke all of them is just like such an animal. Originally he vowed to
himself that he would not wear clothing until the dissolution of his body
at death, yet later on he wore clothing. Originally he vowed that he would
not drink intoxicating liquors, eat meat, or partake of rice and rice gruel
until the dissolution of his body at death, yet he later broke all of these
ascetic rules. Originally he vowed to not commit sexual intercourse, yet
later he broke [this rule as well]. Originally he vowed to not abandon
the four shrines, the Udena shrine in the east, the Gotamaka shrine in
the south, the Bahuputra shrine in the west, and the Saptambaka in the
north, and yet he left all of these sites and no longer attends to them.
That practitioner has broken these seven vows by himself and is already
dead among the cemetery mounds outside the city of Vaiśālī.”
I said to Sunakṣatra, “Foolish man, you do not believe my words.
You should go there and just see what has happened with your own
eyes.”

The Buddha said to the brāhmaṇa:

63

67a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

The bhikṣu Sunakṣatra, wearing the saṃghāṭī robe and with his almsbowl
in hand, then entered the city for almsround, and having completed it
he left the city and saw that the Nirgrantha ascetic had ended his life
among the cemetery mounds. After seeing this, he came to see me and,
having honored me by bowing his forehead to my feet, he sat down on
one side but he did not mention anything about it to me.
O brāhmaṇa, you should know that I then said to Sunakṣatra, “What
do you think, O Sunakṣatra? Wasn’t the fate of the Nirgrantha practitioner
exactly as I had predicted?” He replied, “Yes, sir. It was exactly as predicted by the words of the World-honored One.” O brāhmaṇa, you should
know that, despite having given Sunakṣatra an opportunity to witness
my supernormal power, he still said, “The World-honored One has not
shown me his supernormal power.”
Again, another time when I was staying in the Mallan country in the
town of Śuklabhūmi,19 a market town of the people of Bumu, a Nirgrantha
ascetic, the kṣatriya Kaura by name, was also residing in that area. He
was revered with respect, renowned afar, had many friends, and received
extensive material support. [One morning], wearing the saṃghāṭī robe
and with almsbowl in hand, I entered the town for almsround, accompanied by Sunakṣatra, who was behind me. Sunakṣatra saw the Nirgrantha
ascetic Kaura lying face down on a pile of cow dung, licking up distiller’s
grain. O brāhmaṇa, you should know that, having seen the ascetic in
such a state, the bhikṣu Sunakṣatra thought to himself, “Though there
are many arhats in human society, I see that no one among those who
are on the course toward that highest goal surpasses this practitioner.
This is a Nirgrantha ascetic and his path of practice excels all other paths.
Why? Because the kṣatriya Kaura subjects himself to this kind of ascetic
practice, removing and discarding his self-pride by crouching over a
pile of cow dung and licking up distiller’s grains.”
At that moment, O brāhmaṇa, I turned to the right and, looking behind,
said to Sunakṣatra, “You are a fool. How can you claim to be a disciple
of the Śākya teacher?”
Sunakṣatra replied, “World-honored One, why does Your Holiness
call me a fool, sir? And why does Your Holiness ask me, ‘How can you
call yourself a disciple of the Śākya teacher?’”

64

Sutra 15: The Episode at Anupiya

I said to Sunakṣatra, “You are a fool because, having seen this Nirgrantha ascetic Kaura crouched over a pile of cow dung and licking up
distiller’s grain, you thought to yourself, ‘Among those who have become
arhats and those who are yet on the course toward that goal, this kṣatriya
Kaura is the most honorable. Why? Because the kṣatriya Kaura subjects
himself to this kind of ascetic practice, removing and discarding his selfpride by crouching over a pile of cow dung and licking up distiller’s
grains.’ Didn’t you think this thought?”
He replied, “Yes, sir. I really thought so, sir.”
Sunakṣatra then said, “World-honored One, why should jealousy arise
from the state of arhat?”
I said to the fool, “I do not experience jealousy regarding the state
of arhat. Why do you ask how jealousy can arise in the state of arhatship?
You are a fool for believing that the kṣatriya Kaura is a real arhat. On
the contrary, this man will die after seven days because of his swollen
belly, and his corpse will arise among the hungry ghosts and experience
the perpetual suffering of hunger. After his death his corpse will be tied
up in [a pile of] bīraṇa grass and dragged away to be left among the
cemetery mounds. If you do not believe what I say, you should go speak
to that man.”
Sunakṣatra then went to the kṣatriya Kaura and said to him, “The
śramaṇa Gautama has predicted that you will die after seven days from
an illness, with a swollen belly; your corpse will arise among the hungry
ghosts and will experience the perpetual suffering of hunger. After your
death your corpse will be tied up in [a pile of] bīraṇa grass and dragged
away to be left among the cemetery mounds.” Sunakṣatra then said to
the ascetic, “Why don’t you reduce your consumption of food so that
his prediction will not come about?”
O brāhmaṇa, you should know that Kaura the kṣatriya died after
seven days because of his swollen belly, his corpse arose among the
hungry ghosts, and after his death his corpse was tied up in [a pile of]
bīraṇa grass and dragged away to be left among the cemetery mounds.
At that time, counting the number of days on his ﬁngers, Sunakṣatra
reached precisely the seventh day from the date [of the man’s death]
predicted by Buddha. Sunakṣatra then visited the community of those

65

67b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

naked ascetics and, having arrived there, he questioned them, saying,
“Dear holy men, where is the kṣatriya Kaura now?” They replied, “He
is dead.” [Sunakṣatra] then asked them, “How did he die?” They replied,
“Because of a swollen belly.” He then asked, “How was his corpse treated
in the funeral rite?’ They replied, “It was tied up in a pile of bīraṇa grass
and dragged away to be left among the cemetery mounds.”
O brāhmaṇa, having heard this, Sunakṣatra immediately went to the
cemetery. Before he arrived there, the corpse had shifted its knees and
legs to crouch down again. Sunakṣatra then went to the corpse and asked
it, “Kaura the kṣatriya, are you dead?” The corpse replied, “I am already
dead.” He questioned again, “From what illness did you die?” The corpse
replied, “Gautama predicted that I would die in seven days because of
a swollen belly. Just as he predicted, after seven days my belly became
swollen and I died.” Sunakṣatra asked again, “Where have you been
reborn?” The corpse replied, “Gautama predicted that I would be born
among the hungry ghosts of the corpses. Today I have been reborn among
the corpses of the hungry ghosts.” Sunakṣatra questioned it again, “How
was your corpse treated at the funeral?” The corpse replied, “According
to Gautama’s prediction, the corpse would be tied up in a pile of bīraṇa
grass then dragged away and left among the cemetery mounds. Exactly
as predicted, my corpse was tied up in a pile of bīraṇa grass and dragged
away to be left among the cemetery mounds.” The corpse then said to
Sunakṣatra, “Though you became a bhikṣu by renouncing domestic life,
you will not be able to realize any good effect. Even though the śramaṇa
Gautama predicted all these things, you still don’t believe his words.”
Having thus spoken, the corpse fell ﬂat, laying itself down.
O brāhmaṇa, the bhikṣu Sunakṣatra then came to see me and, having
honored me by bowing his forehead to my feet, he took his seat on one
side, but he did not tell me what he had experienced that day. I said to
him, “My prediction about the kṣatriya Kaura was correct, wasn’t it?’
He replied, “Yes, indeed, it was exactly as predicted by the Worldhonored One, sir.” O brāhmaṇa, I had already shown him my supernormal power like this several times, yet Sunakṣatra still insists that I have
not shown him my supernormal power.

67c

Again the Buddha said to the brāhmaṇa:
66

Sutra 15: The Episode at Anupiya

On another occasion, when I was staying at the Sudharma Hall near the
Markaṭa Pond, a brāhmaṇa ascetic, Pāṭikāputra (“Son of Pāṭikā”) by
name, resided in the area. He was respected, renowned afar, had many
friends, and received extensive material support. He announced to the
crowds of citizens in Vaiśālī: “Just as the śramaṇa Gautama praises his
knowledge, I too can also assert that I have great knowledge. Just as the
śramaṇa Gautama claims that he has supernormal power, I too can say
that I have such power. Again, just as the śramaṇa Gautama has truly
realized the path of transcendence, I too can claim that I have realized
such a path. I can demonstrate miracles through [similar] supernormal
powers as those shown by him. If the śramaṇa shows a single miracle,
I shall demonstrate two. If he shows two, I shall demonstrate four. If he
shows eight, I shall demonstrate sixteen. If he shows sixteen, I shall
demonstrate thirty-two. If he shows thirty-two, I shall demonstrate sixtyfour. Whatever number of miracles the śramaṇa Gautama shows, I shall
double that number without exception for my demonstration.”
O brāhmaṇa, the bhikṣu Sunakṣatra, wearing the saṃghāṭī robe and
with his almsbowl in hand, then entered the city and saw the brāhmaṇa
ascetic speaking to the crowd of citizens in Vaiśālī, declaring, “Just as
the śramaṇa Gautama praises his knowledge I too can also assert that I
have great knowledge. Just as the śramaṇa Gautama claims that he has
supernormal power, I too can say that I have such power. Again, just as
the śramaṇa Gautama has truly realized the path of transcendence, I too
can claim that I have realized such a path. I can demonstrate miracles
through [similar] supernormal powers as those shown by him. If the śramaṇa shows a single miracle, I shall demonstrate two. If he shows four,
I shall demonstrate eight. And so on—whatever number of miracles the
śramaṇa Gautama shows, I shall double that number without exception
for my demonstration.”
Having completed his almsround, the bhikṣu Sunakṣatra then came
to see me and, after honoring me by bowing his forehead to my feet, he
took his seat on one side and said to me, “This morning, wearing the
saṃghāṭī robe and with my almsbowl in hand, I entered the city and happened to hear what the brāhmaṇa ascetic Pāṭikāputra was saying to the
crowd of the citizens: “Just as the śramaṇa Gautama praises his knowledge

67

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

I too can also assert that I have great knowledge. Just as the śramaṇa
Gautama claims that he has supernormal power, I too can say that I have
such power. Again, just as the śramaṇa Gautama has truly realized the
path of transcendence, I too can claim that I have realized such a path. I
can demonstrate miracles through [similar] supernormal powers as those
shown by him. If the śramaṇa shows a single miracle, I shall demonstrate
two, and so on. Whatever number of miracles the śramaṇa Gautama
shows, I shall double that number without exception for my demonstration.” Sunakṣatra thus reported to me the ascetic’s claim in detail.
I then responded to Sunakṣatra, “Pāṭikāputra cannot come to meet
me here without renouncing his words, his view, and his self-conceit
before the crowd of the citizens. Should he, thinking in the same way
and without renouncing his words, his view, or his self-conceit, come
to the śramaṇa Gautama, his mind will be split asunder into seven pieces.
It is impossible for him to come here without renouncing his words, his
view, and his self-conceit.” Sunakṣatra then said to me, “World-honored
One, please be cautious. O Tathāgata, take heed in uttering these words.”

68a

The Buddha said to Sunakṣatra:

Why do you say, “World-honored One, please be cautious. O Tathāgata,
take heed in uttering these words?”
Sunakṣatra replied, “That ascetic Pāṭikāputra has great authority and
power. He might appear here through the power of transﬁguration and
disprove the words of the World-honored One.”
I said to Sunakṣatra, “Has there been any occasion on which the words
of the Tathāgata were contrary to whatever is spoken?”
Sunakṣatra replied, “No, sir.”
Again I said to Sunakṣatra, “Having admitted this, why then do you
say, ‘World-honored One, be cautious. O Tathāgata, take heed in uttering
these words’?”
Sunakṣatra replied, “World-honored One, you should go see the
ascetic Pāṭikāputra yourself and listen to the words of the gods who
come to talk to you, sir.”
I [promptly] replied, “I also know it by myself as well as from the
words of the gods. [For instance], the general Ajita of Vaiśālī, after the

68

Sutra 15: The Episode at Anupiya

dissolution of his body at the end of his life, was born in Trāyastriṃśa
Heaven. He came to see me, saying, ‘The brāhmaṇa Pāṭikāputra does
not know shame despite the fact that he breaks the precepts, tells lies,
and makes false accusations among the crowd of people in Vaiśālī, such
as “The general Ajita was born among the dead hungry ghosts after the
dissolution of his body at the end of his life.” On the contrary, I was
reborn in Trāyastriṃśa Heaven after my death, sir.’
Thus, I know Pāṭikāputra by myself and also from the god who came
to tell me about his fraudulence. I then said to the foolish man Sunakṣatra,
“If you do not believe my words, I may have to ask you go to Vaiśālī
and make an announcement that after tomorrow’s meal I shall come to
meet Pāṭikāputra.”

The Buddha said to the brāhmaṇa:

Sunakṣatra, after passing the night, wearing the saṃghāṭī robe and with
his almsbowl in hand, entered the city for almsround. He then spoke in
detail to the crowd of brāhmaṇas, śramaṇas, and brāhmaṇa ascetics in
the city of Vaiśālī, “The brāhmaṇa ascetic Pāṭikāputra said to the crowd
of people, ‘Just as the śramaṇa Gautama praises his knowledge, I too
can also assert that I have great knowledge. Just as the śramaṇa Gautama
has a great power of inﬂuence, so do I also possess a great power of inﬂuence. Just as the śramaṇa Gautama claims that he has supernormal power,
I too can say that I have such power. Again, just as the śramaṇa Gautama
has truly realized the path of transcendence, I too can claim that I have
realized such a path. I can demonstrate miracles through [similar] supernormal powers as those shown by him. If the śramaṇa shows a single
miracle, I shall demonstrate two. If he shows two, I shall demonstrate
four, and so on—whatever number of miracles the śramaṇa Gautama
shows, I shall double that number without exception for my demonstration.’ Now the śramaṇa Gautama wishes to come to meet Pāṭikāputra.
All of you in this crowd should visit the place of Pāṭikāputra.”
At that time, the brāhmaṇa Pāṭikāputra was walking on a road. Having
found him, Sunakṣatra hurried to reach him and said to him, “You have
spoken to the crowd of Vaiśālī citizens with the following words, ‘Just
as the śramaṇa Gautama has a great wisdom, I too have a great wisdom’

69

68b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

and so on. And ‘Whatever number of miracles the śramaṇa shows
through his supernormal power, I will demonstrate double that amount.’
Having heard your claim, Gautama is now coming to your residence.
You should go home and meet him there.”
[Pāṭikāputra] replied, repeating his words, “Certainly, I am returning.
Certainly, I am returning.” Though he said this, he was thoroughly frightened, with his hair all standing on end. He returned to his tinduka tree
forest and, sitting on a charpoy, he was worried and confused.

The Buddha continued, speaking to the brāhmaṇa:

After the day’s meal, I visited Pāṭikāputra’s home accompanied by many
śramaṇas, brāhmaṇas, ascetics, and lay devotees of the Licchavi clanspeople, and took a seat. There was a brāhmaṇa ascetic, Śara by name,
among those present, to whom they instructed, “Go into the forest and
tell Pāṭikāputra, ‘Now, many Licchavi śramaṇas, brāhmaṇas, ascetics,
and lay devotees have assembled at your residence. They have agreed
in admitting that you, Son of Pāṭikā, have made these claims to the
crowds of citizens, “Just as the śramaṇa Gautama has great insight, I
too have great knowledge,” and so on. And “Whatever number of miracles the śramaṇa shows through his supernormal power, I will demonstrate double that amount.” Now, therefore, the śramaṇa Gautama has
come to your forest. You should go meet him.’”
Thereupon, having been thus instructed by the people’s request, Śara
went into the tinduka tree forest and said to the ascetic Pāṭikāputra, “All
the Licchavi śramaṇas, brāhmaṇas, ascetics, and lay devotees have
assembled in the forest at your abode. They agreed in consensus that
you, Son of Pāṭikā, have made claims to the crowds of citizens, ‘Just as
the śramaṇa Gautama has great insight, I too have great knowledge,’
and so on, up to saying, ‘Whatever number of miracles the śramaṇa
shows through his supernormal power, I will demonstrate double that
amount.’ Now the śramaṇa Gautama has come to your forest. You should
go there and meet him.”
At that moment, Pāṭikāputra replied to Śara, “I am coming, I am coming.” Having replied, he restlessly turned his body right and left on the
charpoy. His foot then became hooked and entangled in the ropes of the

70

Sutra 15: The Episode at Anupiya

charpoy, so that he could not get his foot free fromit, let alone walk to
meet the World-honored One.
Śara then said to Pāṭikāputra, “Having no knowledge, you say only
empty words: ‘I am coming. I am coming.’ But you are unable to extricate
yourself from the charpoy. How can you walk to the place where the
assembly is waiting?” Having thus reprimanded Pāṭikāputra, the brāhmaṇa ascetic Śara returned alone to the assembly, reporting, “I have
gone to speak to Pāṭikāputra, delivering your message. He only replied,
‘I am coming, I am coming,’ but he restlessly tossed around on the charpoy and his foot became entangled in the rope, and he cannot extricate
himself from it. Since he cannot extricate himself from the charpoy, how
can he walk to this place and meet us?”
At that moment there was a certain Licchavi minister sitting among
the assembly. He stood up and, having rearranged his robes to expose
his right shoulder, he knelt with both palms joined together and said to
the assembly, “Honored members of this assembly, please wait awhile.
I shall now go and get that person to return with me.”

The Buddha continued speaking to the brāhmaṇa:

At that time, I said to that particular Licchavi minister, “That ascetic,
Pāṭikāputra, speaks such words, upholds such a view, and insists on such
self-conceit. There is no sense in forcing him to meet me. Even if you
try to bind him with leather ropes to a group of oxen and drag him away
to the extent of crushing his body, he would not come here by renouncing
his words, his view, and his self-conceit. If you cannot believe my words,
you may go see that person yourself.”
The Licchavi minister then went to Pāṭikāputra and said to him, “All
the Licchavi śramaṇas, brāhmaṇas, ascetics, and lay devotees have
assembled in the forest at your abode. They agreed in consensus that
[you] have made claims before the crowds of citizens, saying, ‘Just as
the śramaṇa Gautama has great knowledge, I too have great knowledge,’
and so forth. And ‘Whatever number of miracles the śramaṇa shows
through his supernormal power, I will demonstrate double that amount.’
Now the śramaṇa Gautama has come to your forest. You should return
there.”

71

68c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

At that moment, Pāṭikāputra replied to the Licchavi minister, “I am
coming. I am coming.” Having replied thus, he restlessly turned his
body right and left on the charpoy and his foot became hooked and entangled in the rope, so that he could not extricate his foot from the charpoy,
let alone walk to meet the World-honored One.
The Licchavi minister then said to Pāṭikāputra, “Having no knowledge,
you only say empty words, ‘I am coming.’ You are unable to extricate
yourself from this charpoy. How can you go to the place where the
assembly of people are waiting?”
The minister then said to the ascetic, “Many wise people acquire new
insights through analogy. Once in the immemorial past, a lion, king of
all animals, lived in a deep forest. When the lion went out in the morning,
it looked around all the four directions, promptly roared vigorously three
times, and then toured through the ﬁelds to choose a kind of ﬂesh for
his food. O Pāṭikāputra, as soon as that lion, having ﬁnished his meal,
returned to its forest, a wild jackal, which had followed after the lion,
ate the leftover carrion and thus, ﬁlled with vigor, it claimed “What beast
is this lion, no greater than I? I can now keep an entire forest under my
control; I come out of the cave in early morning, look around in all the
directions, promptly roar three times, then tour through the jungle to
choose my favorite ﬂesh and feed on it.”
The next morning the jackal came out of its cave and promptly roared
three times before stepping out for touring. While it wished to roar like
a lion, it turned out to be only the howling of a jackal. Your case is just
like that of the jackal. Despite the fact that you are indebted to the
Buddha’s gracious inﬂuence, on account of which you sustain your life
in the world and receive people’s material support, you are now trying
to compete with the Tathāgata.”
Thereupon, the minister reprimanded Pāṭikāputra by composing the
following verses:

69a

A wild jackal claims to be a lion and
Praises himself as the king of animals.
Despite wishing to make a lion’s roar,
The animal makes only the howling of a jackal.

72

Sutra 15: The Episode at Anupiya

Abiding alone in an empty forest,
It claims to be the king of animals.
Despite wishing to make a lion’s roar,
The animal makes only the howling of a jackal.
Squatting on the ground,
The animal seeks the burrows of ﬁeld mice,
Cutting through the mounds, it searches for the carcass.
Despite wishing to make a lion’s roar,
The animal makes only the howling of a jackal.

The Licchavi minister said to Pāṭikāputra, “You too, are like that jackal,
indebted to the Buddha’s gracious inﬂuence, you have subsisted in the
world and enjoyed receiving material support. Yet you try to compete
with the Tathāgata.”
The minister then reprimanded Pāṭikāputra further by means of four
other analogies, and then returned to the assembly, reporting, “Delivering
the message of this assembly, I urged Pāṭikāputra to come to this assembly. Even though he replied, ‘I am coming, I am coming,’ he restlessly
turned his body right and left on the charpoy and his foot then became
hooked and entangled within the rope so that he could not extricate his
foot from that couch, let alone walk to meet the World-honored One.”

At that moment, the World-honored One said to the Licchavi minister:

As I told you before, it is senseless even if you wish to urge this man to
come along with you to this place to meet us. Even if you try to bind
him with leather ropes to a group of oxen and drag him away to the
extent of crushing his body, he would not agree to come here by renouncing his words, his view, and his self-conceit. O brāhmaṇa, I then gave
the assembly my exhortation on the Dharma, encouraging them, beneﬁtting them, and delighting them. Upon making the lion’s roar three
times, my body ascended into midair and returned to my original abode.

The Buddha said to the brāhmaṇa:

A śramaṇa or a brāhmaṇa asserts that the gods Brahmā and Īśvara created
this world entirely. I asked him a question, “Was the world as a whole

73

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

created by Brahmā and Īśvara?” He could not answer and counterquestioned me, “O Gautama, what do you think about that?” I replied,
“It may be answered that when this world was initially destroyed, those
sentient beings who had survived in Ābhāsvara Heaven reached the end
of their life spans and the end of their dispositional forces, and were
subsequently born in the Brahmā heaven of [vast] emptiness. They, however, gave rise to craving and attachment in themselves and wished for
other sentient beings to be born there. The other sentient beings, upon
reaching the end of their life spans and of the end of their dispositional
forces, were again born in that heaven. Those sentient beings then thought
to themselves, ‘I am now the god Brahmā, having arisen suddenly without
cause. For there is no creator of my being, while I can reach each and
every destiny of all meanings without exception, and acquire total freedom in all thousands of worlds. I am able to act as cause [for all things]
and transﬁgure myself into any and all forms. I am the primordial and
most subtle being, becoming father and mother of humankind. I was
initially alone without a companion when I ﬁrst came here, but because
of my power all the sentient beings have been multiplied. I am the creator
of these sentient beings.’
“The other sentient beings then followed suit, asserting, ‘He was the
god Brahmā, having arisen suddenly without cause. For there was no
creator of his being, while he could reach every destiny as to all meanings
without exception, endowed with total freedom in all thousands of worlds.
He could act as cause [of all things] and transﬁgure himself into any and
all forms. He is the primordial and most subtle being, becoming father
and mother of humankind. Because of his initial being, all of us come
to being. This great god Brahmā created all of us.’
“These sentient beings then reached the end of their lives and were
born into this world according to the creator’s will, gradually grew up,
then shaved their hair and beards, donned the three robes, renounced
domestic life, and accomplished the path of religion. They enter the
mental concentration and recollect the origin of their being through the
mind of concentration, and utter the following words: ‘This great Brahmā
arose suddenly without cause. Created by no one, he can reach, without
exception, each and every destiny of different meanings and acquire

69b

74

Sutra 15: The Episode at Anupiya

total freedom in all thousands of worlds. He can act as cause for anything
and transﬁgure himself into any and all forms. He is the primordial and
most subtle being, father and mother of humankind. That great Brahmā
is permanent, does not change; but we, created by that deity, are subject
to the law of impermanence and cannot abide forever. We are those that
are in incessant change.’”
O brāhmaṇa, my answer was like that. On the basis of my assistance,
each of those śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas said, “Brahmā and Iśvara created
this world.” O brāhmaṇa, in fact the origin of this world is beyond the
power of the god Brahmā; only the Buddha knows it absolutely. The
Buddha alone can go beyond the creation of the world and know what
is beyond. Though he knows this he is not attached to it, but knows creation as it really is in terms of suffering, causal concatenation, cessation,
and the essential path of transcending both satisfaction and dissatisfaction.
Having seen this world and its creation through the insight of the universal
equality [of the psychophysical elements], he thereby realizes liberation
with no residual inﬂuence of deﬁlement. Such is called the Tathāgata.

The Buddha said to the brāhmaṇa:

A śramaṇa or a brāhmaṇa says, “Pleasure and being corrupted by pleasure
is the beginning of the human being.” I said to him, “Why do you say that
pleasure and corruption by pleasure is the beginning of the human being?”
He, however, could not answer and counterquestioned me, “What do you
think about that?” I replied, “It may be answered that when those sentient
beings in Ābhāsvara Heaven were delighted with pleasure and corrupted
by pleasure, and at the end of their life spans they came to be born in this
world, gradually grew up, shaved their hair and beards, donned the three
robes, renounced family life, and accomplished the path of religion. They
entered the mental concentration and recollected their origins through the
power of mental concentration, saying, “While those sentient beings do
not like pleasure and are not corrupted by pleasure, abiding always in that
original place unchanged, we humans are fond of pleasure and play and
thus subject to the law of impermanence and change.”
O brāhmaṇa, my answer would be like that. For this reason, the śramaṇa or the brāhmaṇa regards pleasure and play as the beginning of

75

69c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

the human being. In this manner, only the Buddha knows the beginning
absolutely, and also by going beyond the beginning of humankind, he
knows what is beyond. Though he knows this, he is not attached to it
but sees it as it really is, in terms of suffering, causal concatenation, cessation, and the essential method of transcending both satisfaction and
dissatisfaction. Having seen the beginning of humankind through the
insight of the universal equality [of the psychophysical elements], he
thereby realizes liberation without any residual inﬂuence of deﬁlement.
Such is called the Tathāgata.

The Buddha [again] said to the brāhmaṇa:

A śramaṇa or a brāhmaṇa may say, “Someone who is mentally
debauched (i.e., having a corrupted mind) by pleasure is the beginning
of the human being.” I questioned him, “Do you really regard a mind
corrupted by pleasure to be the beginning of the human being?” He could
not answer, and counterquestioned, “O Gautama, what do you think
about it, sir?” I then said to him, “Some sentient beings, while watching
each other intimately, become corrupted. When they died they came to
be born in this world, gradually grew up, shaved their hair and beards,
donned the three robes, renounced domestic life, and accomplished the
path of religion. Entering mental concentration, they know their origins
through the power of mental concentration and say, “Those sentient
beings did not see each other and hence their minds were not corrupted,
so they were permanent and unchanged. We used to see each other and
so our minds were corrupted, and thus we became impermanent and
subject to change.”
O brāhmaṇa, it is like that. For this reason, the śramaṇa or the brāhmaṇa regard mental corruption as the beginning of the human being. In
this way, the Buddha alone knows it absolutely and also goes beyond
the beginning of the human being and knows what is beyond. Though
he knows this he is not attached to it but sees it as it really is, in terms
of suffering, causal concatenation, cessation, and the essential method
of transcending both satisfaction and dissatisfaction. Having seen the
beginning of the human being through the insight of the universal equality

76

Sutra 15: The Episode at Anupiya

[of the psychophysical elements], he thereby realizes liberation without
any residual inﬂuence of deﬁlement. Such is called the Tathāgata.

The Buddha [again] said to the brāhmaṇa:

A śramaṇa or a brāhmaṇa says, “I came to be born without a cause.” I
said to him, “You really assert that you were born without any cause?”
He could not answer, and counterquestioned me. I answered, “Some sentient beings who have neither thought nor knowledge, when they give
rise to thought they subsequently die and come to be born in this world,
gradually grow up, shave their hair [and beards], renounce domestic life,
don the three robes, and at once enter mental concentration, cognizing
their origins through the power of the mental concentration. They say, “I
was nonexistent but now, suddenly, [I] exist. This world is essentially
nonexistent but is now existent. This is real and the rest is false.”
O brāhmaṇa, it is like this. For this reason, the śramaṇa or brāhmaṇa
regards our existence as causeless. The Buddha alone knows it absolutely
and also goes beyond the beginning of the human being and knows what
is beyond. Though he knows this, he is not attached to it but sees it as
it really is, in terms of suffering, causal concatenation, cessation, and
the essential method of transcending both satisfaction and dissatisfaction.
Having seen the beginning of humankind through the insight of the universal equality [of the psychophysical elements], he thereby realizes liberation without any residual inﬂuence of deﬁlement. Such is called the
Tathāgata.

The Buddha [again] said to the brāhmaṇa:

My theory is like the following, which some śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas
secretly criticized, saying, “Those self-claimed disciples of the śramaṇa
Gautama enter liberation on the basis of purity and genuineness and thus
accomplish the act of puriﬁcation [of the deﬁlements]. They know purity
and genuineness, but they do not know the universal purity of human
spirituality.” I do not support this theory that my disciples enter liberation
on the basis of purity, accomplishing the act of puriﬁcation through genuine practice, and they know purity and genuineness but do not know

77

70a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

the universal purity of human spirituality. O brāhmaṇa, I myself assert
that my disciples enter liberation on the basis of purity and genuineness,
accomplishing puriﬁcation [of the deﬁlements], and thus know the state
of universal purity [as to human spirituality].

At that time, the brāhmaṇa said to the Buddha:

They spoke slanderous words against the śramaṇa Gautama to no good
beneﬁt, saying, “The śramaṇa (i.e., the Buddha) himself admitted, ‘My
disciples enter liberation on the basis of purity and genuineness and thus
accomplish the act of puriﬁcation [of the deﬁlements]. They know purity
and genuineness but they do not know the universal purity of human
spirituality.’” Contrary to this slanderous statement, the World-honored
One has not made such a statement. The World-honored One has himself
asserted that his disciples enter liberation on the basis of purity and genuineness, accomplishing puriﬁcation [of the deﬁlements], and thus know
the state of universal purity [as to human spirituality].

The brāhmaṇa again said to the World-honored One:

I wish also to enter liberation on the basis of purity and genuineness so
that I can accomplish the act of puriﬁcation of all deﬁlements and know
the state of universal purity, sir.

The Buddha replied:

If you wish to realize that goal it will be exceedingly difﬁcult, because
you hold a different (i.e., wrong) view, a different principle of perseverance, and a different set of practices. Based on any other view than the
right one, it is extremely difﬁcult to enter the liberation of purity and
genuineness. Only if you continue to uphold goodwill and friendly association with the Buddha without hiatus will you be able to secure the
comfortable state of happiness for a long time to come.

At that time, having listened to the Buddha’s exhortation, the brāhmaṇa
Bhārgava was delighted and respectfully received the teaching and carried
out what was taught by the Buddha.
[End of Sutra 15: The Episode at Anupiya]

78

Sutra 16

Kalyāṇa-jātika

(Dīgha Nikāya 31: Siṅgālovāda Suttanta)
Thus have I heard. At one time, the Buddha was sojourning on Vulture Peak
in the city of Rājagṛha, together with one thousand two hundred and ﬁfty
disciples. At that time, at the appropriate time, the World-honored One,
wearing the saṃghāṭī robe and with his almsbowl in hand, entered the city
and proceeded for almsround. There was a son of a wealthy family in Rājagṛha,
Kalyāṇa-jātika20 by name. Early in the morning he went out of the city, reached
the park grove, made an excursion there, and then, after bathing in water and
moistening his entire body, he bowed toward all directions: east, west, south,
north, above, and below, completing the same veneration without exception.
At that time, the World-honored One happened to be in the grove that
belonged to Kalyāṇa-jātika, the son of the wealthy family, and having seen
him carry out his morning rite, [the Buddha] said to Kalyāṇa-jātika:
Why have you gone out of the city in the early morning, bathed to moisten
your body in this grove, and conducted the rite of bowing toward all
directions?

Kalyāṇa-jātika replied to the Buddha:

When my father died, he left his advice to me as his will: “If you wish
to carry out a certain rite, you should make your veneration toward the
directions of east, west, south, north, above and below.” I have been
faithfully upholding my father’s instruction, sir. Thus, after bathing, joining palms respectfully, I venerate all the directions, without exception,
in the order of the east, south, west, north as well as above and below.

The World-honored One said to Kalyāṇa-jātika:

O son of the wealthy family, your rite of veneration has only directional
links. Though I do not deny the meaningfulness of your rite, I say that
79

70b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

there is a similar, yet distinct in meaning, form of the rite belonging to
the wise and saintly in my religious practice.

Kalyāṇa-jātika said to the Buddha, “May the World-honored One please
teach me the veneration of the six directions that is practiced by the wise and
saintly.”
The Buddha replied to the son of the wealthy family, “Listen attentively,
you should retain and consider well the following. I shall give you an account
of the practice.”
Kalyāṇa-jātika replied, “Yes, sir. My wish [for you to teach me the rite]
is realized.”
The Buddha continued:

If a wealthy person, or a son [or daughter] of a wealthy family knows
what the four kinds of action deﬁlement (karma-kleśa) are and does not
commit any of the four bases of evil action, and also if he knows what
the six kinds of detrimental action against prosperity and wealth are,
and does not commit any of the six detrimental actions, O Kalyāṇajātika, such is called the “six directional rites of veneration” to be practiced
by the wise and saintly. If your life in this world is good you are bound
to acquire good rewards. What you have undertaken as your [livelihood]
in this life will also be your undertaking in the next life. In the present
life, if you acquire a single reward as commended by the knowledgeable,
then at your death you will be reborn in a good place in the heavens.
O Kalyāṇa-jātika, you should know that the four kinds of deﬁled
actions are (1) taking life (killing), (2) taking what is not given (stealing),
(3) committing sexual impropriety, and (4) engaging in false speech.
What are the four bases of evil action? They are (1) desire, (2) anger,
(3) fear, and (4) delusion. If a wealthy person or the son [or daughter]
of a wealthy family should commit an offense of [any of] these evil
actions, that action will inevitably lead to the loss or exhaustion of their
wealth and prosperity.

Having thus exhorted, the Buddha repeated it in verse:

If one is hampered by four kinds of bases of evil conduct,
Namely, desire, anger, fear, and delusion,

80

Sutra 16: Kalyāṇa-jātika

His fame and popularity will decline every day
Just as the waning moon proceeds toward its total extinction.

The Buddha again said to Kalyāṇa-jātika:

If a wealthy person or the son [or daughter] of a wealthy family does
not commit any offense in these bases of evil action, there will be increase
and development of their wealth and prosperity.

Again the World-honored One composed a verse:

If one does not commit any offense
Of the deﬁlements of desire, anger, fear, and delusion,
His fame grows and increases every day
Just as the waxing moon proceeds toward its round perfection.

The Buddha said to Kalyāṇa-jātika:

The six kinds of detrimental action against prosperity and wealth are
(1) ingesting intoxicants, (2) gambling, (3) wasting one’s wealth, (4)
enchantment by music and dance, (5) associating with bad characters,
and (6) being indolent and idle. These are the six detrimental actions to
prosperity and wealth. O Kalyāṇa-jātika, if a wealthy person or the son
[or daughter] of a wealthy family understands what the four deﬁled
actions are, refrains from committing an offense of any of the four bases
of evil action, and also knows these six detrimental actions to wealth
and prosperity, he will become free from the four bases of evil action
and will venerate all six directions. If your life in this world is good,
you are bound to acquire good rewards. What you have undertaken as
your [livelihood] in this life will also be your undertaking in the next
life. In the present life, if you acquire a single reward as commended by
the knowledgeable, at your death you will be reborn in a good place in
the heavens.
O Kalyāṇa-jātika, you should know that drinking intoxicants results
in six kinds of loss: (1) loss of wealth, (2) becoming prone to illness,
(3) being drawn into ﬁghts and disputes, (4) having a bad reputation
that spreads, (5) being unable to control outbursts of anger and rage,
and (6) the diminishing of wisdom each day. O Kalyāṇa-jātika, if a

81

70c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

wealthy person or the son [or daughter] of a wealthy family continues
to ingest intoxicants without stopping, his family business will lose
productivity each day.
O Kalyāṇa-jātika, playing dice in gambling results in six kinds of
loss: (1) exhausting one’s wealth each day, (2) if succesful in gambling,
creating enmity, (3) being reprimanded by the wise, (4) others will not
believe or respect those who gamble, (5) being avoided by and alienated
from the people of society, (6) giving rise to a mentality that inclines
toward [committing] theft. O Kalyāṇa-jātika, these are called the six
kinds of loss resulting from gambling. If a wealthy person or the son [or
daughter] of a wealthy family continues to engage in gambling, his
family business will lose productivity each day.
Dissipation results in six kinds of loss: (1) one does not protect himself,
(2) one does not protect his wealth and property, (3) one does not protect
his descendants, (4) he is always fearful and frightens others, (5) he
becomes entangled in the evil psychophysical elements, resulting in suffering, and (6) he easily and willingly succumbs to delusion. These are
called the six kinds of dissipation. If a wealthy person or the son [or
daughter] of a wealthy family should continue to dissipate, his family
business will lose productivity each day.
O Kalyāṇa-jātika, enchantment by music and dancing results in six
kinds of loss: one seeks for (1) songs, (2) dances, (3) string instruments,
(4) hand-played instruments, (5) drums and percussive instruments, and
(6) telling stories. These are called the six kinds of loss caused by music
and dance. If a wealthy person or the son [or daughter] of a wealthy
family should continue to be enchanted by the entertainment of music
and dance, his family business will lose its productivity each day.
Association with bad characters also results in six kinds of loss: (1)
contriving deception, (2) preferring secret meetings, (3) inducing others
to engage with bad groups, (4) cheating others for one’s own proﬁt, (5)
pursuing after undue wealth and proﬁt, and (6) taking delight in exposing
others’ faults. These are called the six kinds of loss caused by association
with bad characters. If a wealthy man or a son of a wealthy family should
continue to associate himself with bad characters, his family business
will lose productivity each day.

82

Sutra 16: Kalyāṇa-jātika

Indolence results in six kinds of loss: (1) no effort in work because
of having wealth and an easy life, (2) no effort in work because of poverty,
(3) no motivation for effort because of cold weather, (4) no effort because
of hot weather, (5) no effort because of the early morning, and (6) no
effort because of the late afternoon. These are called the six kinds of
loss caused by indolence. If a wealthy person or the son [or daughter]
of a wealthy family should continue to be indolent, his family business
will lose productivity each day.

Having thus exhorted, the Buddha again composed the following verses:
Beguiled by intoxicating liquors,
One will be surrounded by drinking companions.
Having accumulated wealth through right means,
One will distribute it until it is exhausted.
Drinking liquor, one loses discipline,
Always delighting in song and dance.
Visiting others’ houses in the daytime,
One falls and is trapped in a pit.
Swayed by bad characters,
One cannot reform his conduct,
Slandering mendicant wanderers,
Holding wrong views that will be laughed at in the world,
Impure action is what people shun.
Judging people based only on their good or bad external appearance,
Arguing about nothing but gambling,
Keeping company with bad characters,
None of whom would urge one to forsake gambling,
Impure action is what people shun.
Beguiled by intoxicating liquors,
Forgetting to measure the degree of one’s poverty,
Slighting the weight of one’s wealth,
Accustomed to a degree of extravagance,
Thus one destroys his household and
Surmounts it with troubles and disaster.
Associating with a gambling party,

83

71a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

Combined with the habit of drinking,
One ends up together with others at a brothel,
Accustomed to vulgar and lowly behavior,
His life goes down like a waning moon proceeding to extinction.
Doing evil things, seeing evil things,
One commits evil actions alongside with bad characters,
He gains nothing from beginning to an end,
In this world as well as in the next.
Indulging in sleep during the day,
Waking late in the night with unwholesome expectations,
Being alone in the darkness, with no good friend,
He is unable to keep up his household.
Though he recognizes the things to be done in the morning or
in the evening,
Yet he leaves them undone,
When it is cold or hot, he neither begins nor completes
The tasks he needs to do, idly postponing them,
Thus throwing away an opportunity for success.
Without taking account of cold or heat,
If he strives to do things in the morning or in the evening,
There would be nothing that cannot be accomplished,
Nor would there be any worry, having thus realized the goal.

The Buddha said to Kalyāṇa-jātika:

There are four kinds of enemies who appear to be one’s close friends.
You should recognize their behavior. What are these four? They are (1)
one who seeks a better shelter out of greed, (2) one who ﬂatters with
appealing words, (3) one who acts with deceptive obedience, and (4)
one who is a bad character.

[Again] the Buddha said to Kalyāṇa-jātika:

There are four types of seeking shelter out of greed. What are these four?
They are (1) initially giving but later on stealing, (2) giving a little but
demanding much more in return, (3) following the stronger out of fear,

84

Sutra 16: Kalyāṇa-jātika

and (4) being a companion [to someone] in the hope of gaining something. These are the four types of seekers of shelter, through which an
enemy seeks association.
[Again] the Buddha said to Kalyāṇa-jātika:

There are four kinds of ﬂattery with appealing words. What are these
four? They are (1) agreeing with an associate as to good and bad with
no discrimination, (2) abandoning an associate when there is difﬁculty
and trouble, (3) secretly hindering an associate from taking an alternative
good course, and (4) refusing to rescue an associate experiencing a crisis.
These are the four types of ﬂattery through which an enemy seeks association. There are four kinds of deceptive obedience [in words but not
in action]. What are these four? They are (1) deception in the beginning,
(2) deception later on, (3) deception when witnessing against [someone],
and (4) punishing [someone] for the slightest fault. These are the four
types of deceptive obedience through which an enemy seeks association.
There are four kinds of bad characters [with whom one may associate].
What are these four? They are (1) someone with whom one is acquainted
when drinking, (2) someone with whom one is acquainted when gambling, (3) someone with whom one is acquainted when procuring prostitutes, and (4) someone with whom one is acquainted when indulging
in entertaining songs and dances. These are the four types of bad characters with whom one may seek association.

Having thus exhorted, the World-honored One again composed verses:
Those bad characters who seek out a better shelter from one,
Speak ﬂattering words for the same reason,
Behave with deceptive obedience likewise, and
Become acquainted in questionable circumstances.
One cannot rely on them.
The wise should recognize them always and
Distance themselves from them,
Just as when avoiding taking a dangerous shortcut on a long journey.

The Buddha said to Kalyāṇa-jātika:

85

71b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

There are four kinds of true friends with whom you should associate,
who are beneﬁcial and provide relief and protection. What are these
four? They are (1) one who urges restraint in cases of wrongdoing, (2)
who is merciful and sympathetic, (3) who gives beneﬁt to others, and
(4) one who shares both the happiness and misery of others. These are
true friends who assist by calling for restraint in cases of wrongdoing
and beneﬁt others variously, and who offer relief and protection. One
should always associate with these kind of friends.
O Kalyāṇa-jātika, there are four kinds of association with those who
provide beneﬁt, relief, and protection. What are these four? They are (1)
one who restrains others from committing wrongdoing, (2) one who
shows the norm of honesty, (3) one who has mercy and is sympathetic,
and (4) one who teaches the path to rebirth in the heavens. Such a friend
is one who restrains others from wrongdoing, beneﬁts others, and provides
relief and protection. Again next, there are four kinds of merciful sympathy: (1) rejoicing with others who receive beneﬁt, (2) being concerned
about their wrongdoing, (3) praising their virtues, and (4) restraining
those who are eager to expose others’ wrongdoing. These are the four
types of merciful sympathy, which are beneﬁcial and provide relief and
protection. There are four kinds of beneﬁts. What are these four? They
are (1) assisting one in self-restraint, (2) guarding against someone expending and losing their wealth, (3) providing support for someone so that
they may be free from fear, and (4) giving mutual warning and advising
others privately. These are the four types of providing beneﬁt, relief, and
protection. There are four types of sharing others’ happiness and misery.
What are these four? They are (1) giving unsparingly of one’s own life
and body for others, (2) giving unsparingly of one’s own wealth for others,
(3) removing any source of fear for others, and (4) offering mutual warning
and advice for others privately. These are the four types of sharing happiness and misery that provide beneﬁt, relief, and protection.

Having thus exhorted, the World-honored One composed the following
verses:
Restraining wrongdoing prevents close association with bad
characters,

86

Sutra 16: Kalyāṇa-jātika

With merciful sympathy, there is true association with others,
Whoever is beneﬁcial to others increases that association,
Simultaneously establishing an association among equals.
This kind of friendly association should be promoted,
It is such associations in which the wise abide,
The friendly association that is incomparable,
Yet is comparable to a merciful mother accompanying her child.
If one wishes to have such associations,
He [or she] should seek a friend who is spiritually well established,
Through whose association one acquires precepts,
Just as if the light of a ﬂame illuminates him.

71c

The Buddha said to Kalyāṇa-jātika:

You should know the six directions. What are these six? One’s father
and mother are in the eastern direction, one’s teacher and elder are in
the southern direction, one’s wife and children are in the western direction,
one’s close friends are in the northern direction, one’s servants are in
the downward direction, and one’s religious guides (śramaṇa or brāhmaṇa) are in the upward direction.
O Kalyāṇa-jātika, as a child of one’s parents, you should be ﬁlial to
them in terms of ﬁve norms. What are these ﬁve? They are (1) to support
one’s parents so that they are free from privation, (2) to conﬁde in them
whatever one wishes to do, (3) to be obedient to them in whatever they
do [that is right], without opposing them, (4) to not go against their right
livelihood, and (5) to continue the same livelihood of one’s parents without cessation. O Kalyāṇa-jātika, one should be ﬁlial to one’s parents in
terms of these ﬁve norms. Parents also should intimately respect their
children in terms of ﬁve norms. What are these ﬁve? They are (1) to
restrain their son [or daughter], not permitting them to engage in wrong
conduct, (2) to show what is good by direct instruction, (3) to have their
love permeate their child’s bones and marrow, (4) to seek a good spouse
for them, and (5) to provide their child with whatever is needed at times.
O Kalyāṇa-jātika, if a son [or daughter] is obedient and respectfully
carries out parental instructions, he will be secure, without any fear or
anxiety.

87

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

O Kalyāṇa-jātika, a disciple should respect his teacher in terms of
ﬁve norms. What are these ﬁve? They are (1) providing him with necessary material support, (2) serving him with respect and reverence, (3)
honoring him as above one’s position, (4) respectfully accepting his
instruction without failing, and (5) listening to his teaching and upholding
it. O Kalyāṇa-jātika, being a disciple, one should respect his teacher
according to these norms. A teacher should guide his disciple with respect
in terms of ﬁve norms. What are these ﬁve? They are (1) cultivating his
student according to the Dharma, (2) teaching what he has not yet heard,
(3) enabling him to understand the meaning of what he has heard, (4)
showing him meritorious friends, and (5) giving him all of one’s knowledge without sparing. O Kalyāṇa-jātika, if a disciple is obedient and
respectfully carrys out his teacher’s instructions, he will be secure,
without any fear or anxiety.
O Kalyāṇa-jātika, a husband should respect his wife in terms of ﬁve
norms. What are these ﬁve? They are (1) maintaining mutual respect
with one’s wife, (2) maintaing a proper attitude [toward one’s wife], (3)
accompanying her during times of changing clothes and dining, (4) waiting for her preparations for an outing, and (5) entrusting her with household matters. O Kalyāṇa-jātika, a husband should attend his wife respectfully as [outlined] above, and the wife, too, should respect her husband
in terms of ﬁve norms. What are these ﬁve? They are (1) waking up
before her husband, (2) staying behind him, (3) speaking harmoniously,
(4) following him respectfully, and (5) consulting him before deciding
things. O Kalyāṇa-jātika, if a husband treats his wife with respect as
mentioned above, he will be secure, without any fear or anxiety.
O Kalyāṇa-jātika, a person should be respectful toward his relations
in terms of ﬁve norms. What are these ﬁve? They are (1) offering gifts,
(2) giving good advice, (3) sharing beneﬁt, (4) acquiring proﬁt equally,
and (5) not deceiving them. O Kalyāṇa-jātika, these are the ﬁve norms
through which one should be respectful toward one’s relations. One’s
relations, too, should be respectful toward a member of their family in
terms of ﬁve norms. What are these norms? They are (1) guarding
[against] undisciplined conduct, (2) guarding [against] the wasteful loss
of wealth, (3) protecting one who is in fear because of danger, (4) giving

72a

88

Sutra 16: Kalyāṇa-jātika

mutual warning and consultation privately, (5) praising others always.
O Kalyāṇa-jātika, if a member of one’s family respectfully acts toward
his relatives in the manner [outlined] above, he will be secure, without
any fear or anxiety.
O Kalyāṇa-jātika, a master should supervise his servants in terms of
ﬁve norms. What are these ﬁve? They are (1) assigning work according
to their capabilities, (2) providing them with food and drink at proper
times, (3) rewarding them for their work at times, (4) giving medicine
when they become ill, and (5) giving them days off from work. These
are the ﬁve ways for supervising one’s servants. Servant workers should
serve their master in terms of ﬁve norms. What are these ﬁve? They are
(1) waking up early in the morning, (2) working with careful attention,
(3) neither transferring one’s work nor taking work in exchange with
another worker, (4) following a certain order in conducting their duties,
and (5) praising the name of their master. These are the ways a master
should treat his workers. If he treats his workers like this, he will be
secure, without any fear or anxiety.
O Kalyāṇa-jātika, a lay devotee should serve śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas
[according to ﬁve norms]. What are these ﬁve? They are (1) practicing
charity through physical work, (2) practicing charity in one’s verbal
expression, (3) practicing charity through mental alertness, (4) dedicating
things at times, and (5) not closing one’s house gate [to others]. O
Kalyāṇa-jātika, just as lay devotees should serve śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas through the foregoing ﬁve norms, the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas
should teach and guide lay devotees in terms of six norms. What are
these six? They are (1) helping them refrain from wrongdoing, (2) showing them what is good, (3) guiding them to cultivate good mentality, (4)
having them learn [by listening to] the teaching, (5) if they have heard
teachings, helping them understand its meaning well, and (6) revealing
the way to heaven for them. O Kalyāṇa-jātika, if a lay devotee serves
the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas in these ways, he [or she] will be secure,
without any fear or anxiety.

Having thus completed his exhortation, the World-honored One again
composed the following verses:

89

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

Father and mother are placed in the eastern direction,
Teachers are in the southern direction,
Wife and children are in the western direction,
Relations are in the northern direction,
Servants are in the downward direction,
Śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas are in the upward direction.
If a son [or daughter] of a wealthy families venerate all the
directions and
Respectfully follow the rite of veneration in regularity,
They will realize heaven upon their deaths.
Gracious charity and sympathetic talk can
Provide people with much gain and advantage,
Sharing beneﬁt together with others,
Equalizing gains between oneself and others,
Letting one’s possessions be open and accessible to others,
These are the four norms, like the wheels [of a cart],
That bear the heavy burden and responsibility.
If there were none of these norms in the world,
There would be no ﬁlial piety whatsoever.
These are the four norms chosen by the wise in this world,
Practicing these norms, one may obtain a great result and
His [good] name will spread to far-distant regions.
Setting up a couch for sittting, placing food and drink before it,
Providing whatever is at hand,
Thereby one’s [good] name spreads to far-distant regions.
Excluding none of the older relations,
Showing good beneﬁt in perfect harmony
Toward both one’s seniors and the juniors,
One obtains good fame and reputation.
One should ﬁrst learn skills and arts, and
Then afterward he will succeed in business transactions,
When one is well established in his business,
He should defend his concerns.
In expending wealth, he should not be extravagant.
When choosing the head [of the workers],

72b

90

Sutra 16: Kalyāṇa-jātika

Whoever is deceptive and resistant should not to be recommended,
The accumulation of wealth will rise from a small quantity,
Just as a swarm of bees gathers nectar from ﬂowers.
Wealth is increased every day, having no loss in the end.
First, one should know the proper degree of satisfaction with food;
Second, there should not be any slacking in the practice;
Third, some resources should be set aside
For times of emergency;
Fourth, cultivated land should be put for mercantile transaction,
Marshland should be converted to be pastureland;
Fifth, one should build a commemorative tower and shrine (i.e., a stupa),
Sixth, monastic dwellings should be built.
The laity should commit themselves to the six venerations,
Carrying them out in due order without losing time.
If one practices the discipline in this manner,
The household will not be lost to dissipation,
One’s wealth will increase everyday, just as does the great ocean,
Into which all the rivers on earth ﬂow.

At that time, Kalyāṇa-jātika said to the World-honored One:

It is wonderful, World-honored One. The teaching surpasses my original
wish, and it surpasses my father’s teaching. It enables the defeated to
look up again with hope, it enables a closed heart to open again, and it
enables the deluded to be awakened, just as candlelight illuminates a
dark room and thus one’s eyes are able to perceive again. The exhortation
of the Tathāgata is also like this. In many ways it has illuminated the
darkness of ignorance and revealed the pure white Dharma. Why is this
so? Because the Buddha is the Tathāgata, Arhat, Perfectly Enlightened
One he is able to illustrate the truth and is the guide of the world. Now
I shall take refuge in the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha.
O World-honored One, may I now be permitted to become a lay devotee in the right Dharma. From today onward until the end of my life, I
vow not to commit taking life, nor theft, nor engage in sexual misconduct,
nor speak falsehoods, nor ingest intoxicants, sir.

91

72c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

Having listened to the Buddha’s exhortation, Kalyāṇa-jātika respectfully
received the teaching and carried out what was taught by the Buddha.
[End of Sutra 16: Kalyāṇa-jātika]

92

Sutra 17

Purity

(Dīgha Nikāya 29: Pāsādika Suttanta)
Thus have I heard. At one time, the Buddha was staying in a grove that
belonged to a layman in the country of Kapilavastu, accompanied by one
thousand two hundred and ﬁfty disciples. At that time, a śrāmaṇera (novice),
Cunda by name, who had completed that year’s summer retreat in the country
of Pāvā, carrying his robes and almsbowl, had just arrived at the grove. Upon
reaching the place where Ānanda stayed, Cunda honored Ānanda by bowing
his forehead to his feet, then stood to one side and said to him:

Master Jñātiputra of the Nirgrantha followers has just passed away in
the city of Pāvā. Within a short time, the Nirgrantha disciples have already
divided into two groups. Each of these two factions looks for its own
advantage and the fault of the other, mutually disdaining and accusing
each other as to whose doctrinal insights are right. They argue with each
other, asserting, “We know this well, whereas you do not. The discipline
we practice is real and true, whereas you follow the practice of a wrong
view. In your argument you ﬁrst state what [logically] should be placed
later [as a conclusion] and assert what should be placed ﬁrst [as precedent]
afterward. Thus, you uphold no logical rule in upside-down confusion.
What we practice is the ultimate, while what you assert is wrong. You
should question us if you have any doubt about it at all.”
O Venerable Elder Ānanda, listening to the arguments of those lay
followers, supporters of the Nirgrantha movement, of that country, I
have already become weary of the disputes, sir.

Ānanda said to the śrāmaṇera Cunda:

We have something important of which I wish to inform the World-honored
One. I shall now accompany you and report this matter to His Holiness.

93

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

If the World-honored One instructs us about anything related to this matter, we will respectfully receive it as a lesson for our practice.

Having heard Ānanda’s words, the śrāmaṇera Cunda immediately went
to visit the World-honored One and, after honoring the Buddha by bowing
his forehaed to the Buddha’s feet, he stood to one side. Thereupon, Ānanda
said to the World-honored One:

This śrāmaṇera Cunda, having completed the summer retreat in the
country of Pāvā, carrying his robes and almsbowl, has just arrived here,
sir. Upon reaching my place and honoring me by bowing his forehead
to my feet, he said to me, “The teacher of the Nirgrantha followers has
just passed away in the city of Pāvā. Within a short time, the Nirgrantha
followers have already divided into two groups. Each of these two factions looks for its own advantage and the faults of the other, mutually
disdaining and accusing each other as to whose doctrinal insights are
right. They argue with each other, saying, “We know this well, whereas
you do not. The discipline we practice is real and true, whereas you
follow the practice of a wrong view. In your argument you ﬁrst state
what [logically] should be placed later [as conclusion] and assert what
should be placed ﬁrst [as precedent] afterward. Thus, you uphold no
logical rule in upside-down confusion. What we practice is the ultimate,
while what you assert is wrong. You should question us if you have any
doubt about it at all.”
Listening to the arguments of those lay followers, supporters of the
Nirgrantha movement, of that country, Cunda has already become weary
of the disputes, sir.

73a

The World-honored One said to the śrāmaṇera Cunda:

What you have observed [in Pāvā] seems likely to be what is going on.
O Cunda, the wrong doctrine they follow is not something worthy of
being heard. It is not the doctrine imparted by the Perfectly Enlightened
One. It is like a dilapidated commemorative tower (stupa) whose color
cannot be easily changed. Although those followers have a teacher, they
all uphold wrong views. Although they have a doctrine, it does not carry
ultimate truth. Hence, such a doctrine is not worthy of being heard or

94

Sutra 17: Purity

adopting, nor is it a doctrine that would be able to help [anyone] as an
essential method of liberation. Any doctrine, other than the teaching
imparted by the Perfectly Enlightened One, cannot be altered, just as
the color of a dilapidated tower can be modiﬁed. Some of the disciples,
however, do not follow that doctrine but, forsaking wrong views, they
[try to] follow the practice of the right [doctrine]. O Cunda, suppose
someone were to then say to them, “Dear practitioners, the doctrine of
your master is right. You should carry out the practice within this doctrine.
Why do you abandon it?” If they believed these words, then both disciples
would be lost from the [true] path, incurring immeasurable sin. Why is
this so? It is because that doctrine does not carry ultimate truth.
O Cunda, when a master does not advocate a wrong view and his
doctrine bears ultimate truth, then it is worthy of hearing and adopting
and it is able to help anyone as an essential method of liberation. It is
[like] the doctrine imparted by the Perfectly Enlightened One and, like
the color of a newly built commemorative tower, it can easily be modiﬁed.
Some of those disciples, however, are unable to follow the practice of
this [true] doctrine, nor are they able to realize the result of that doctrine,
but instead they advocate wrong views by forsaking the path that is open
to everyone universally. Suppose someone were to say to those disciples,
“Dear practitioners, your master’s doctrine is right and you should follow
the practice of that doctrine. Why do you abandon it by advocating a
wrong view?” If the disciples believe these words, then they will all see
the real truth of that doctrine and acquire immeasurable merit. Why is
this so? It is because the doctrine carries ultimate truth.

The Buddha said to Cunda:

[On the other hand] even when disciples have a master who advocates
a wrong view and if the doctrine they follow does not carry ultimate
truth, it is neither worthy of hearing or adopting, nor does it help anyone
as an essential method of liberation. Thus, whatever doctrine other than
that which is imparted by the Perfectly Enlightened One cannot be easily
modiﬁed, like the color of a dilapidated commemorative tower. While
these disciples are equipped with the truth of the doctrine and follow
the practice prescribed therein, they advocate various wrong views. O

95

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

Cunda, suppose someone were to say to them, “The doctrine of your
master is right and the practice in which you are engaged is good. The
strife [and discord] in which you are now engaged will surely enable
you to realize the path of enlightenment and the result of nirvana in the
present life.” If these disciples believe these words and accept the practice,
then all will be lost from the path, incurring immeasurable sin. Why is
this so? It is because that doctrine does not carry ultimate truth.
O Cunda, if the master does not advocate a wrong view then the doctrine he imparts must carry ultimate truth, and that doctrine is worthy
of hearing and adopting and is able to help anyone as an essential method
of liberation. It is like the teaching of the Perfectly Enlightened One.
For instance, it is like a newly built commemorative tower whose color
can be easily be modiﬁed. Further, the disciples realize the truth of the
doctrines and while following the practices prescribed therein, they give
rise to right views within themselves. Suppose someone then says to
them, “The doctrine of your master is right and the practice in which
you are engaged is good. The strife [and discord] you are now engaging
in will surely enable you to realize the path of enlightenment and the
result of nirvana in the present life.” If those disciples believe these
words and accept the practice, they would all have the right view, acquiring immeasurable merit. Why is this so? It is because the doctrine is of
the nature of ultimate truth.
O Cunda, there may be a case in which a true guiding teacher, having
appeared in this world, gives rise to anxiety in the hearts of his disciples,
or there may also be a case in which a true guiding teacher, having
appeared in this world, does not give rise to anxiety in the hearts of his
disciples. How could a qualiﬁed guiding teacher, having appeared in
this world, give rise to anxiety in the hearts of his disciples? O Cunda,
when such a master initially appears in the world soon after his realization
of the path, though his doctrine may be well endowed with the purity
of his practice of austerity, he may yet take the course of cessation (i.e.,
passing from the world) before his essential method of realizing ultimate
truth has circulated enough in the world. Consequently his disciples,
who have not yet sufﬁciently mastered the method of practice, are anxious, saying, “Our master initially appeared in this world soon after the

73b

96

Sutra 17: Purity

time of his realization of the path. Though his doctrine is well endowed
with the purity of his practice of austerity, he may yet swiftly take the
course of cessation from this world without sufﬁciently propagating in
the essential method of realizing ultimate truth. Now the master may
swiftly take the course of cessation, leaving us unequipped with the
method of practice.” This is called “the anxiety of the disciples when
their guiding teacher has appeared in this world.”
What is [then] the case of “the non-anxiety of the disciples” when
their guiding teacher has appeared in this world? Suppose a [qualiﬁed]
guiding teacher appears in this world, with a doctrine well endowed with
the purity of the practice of austerity. When the essential method of realizing ultimate truth has been circulated widely in the world, then even
if their master were then to reach the end of his life, his disciples will
already have sufﬁciently mastered the method of practice. This [naturally]
reduces their anxiety and they say, “It has been a long time since our
guiding master initially appeared in this world; since his doctrine was
well endowed with the purity of the practice of austerity, his essential
method of realizing ultimate truth has also been circulated widely in this
world. Even if then he takes the course of cessation, he has already
helped his disciples master the method of realizing ultimate truth.” In
this way, O Cunda, the disciples have no anxiety about whether their
guiding master has appeared in this world.

The Buddha said to Cunda:

There is a set of criteria on the basis of which the practice of austerity
is regarded to be complete. Suppose a [qualiﬁed] guiding master has
appeared in this world only very recently and his name and reputation
have not yet widely circulated in society. This is called the the master’s
“nonfulﬁllment of the criterion of the practice of austerity.” O Cunda,
[suppose] a qualiﬁed guiding master has been in the world for a long
time since he initially undertook renunciation, and his name and reputation have circulated widely in human society. This is called the master’s
“fulﬁllment of the criterion of the practice of austerity.”
O Cunda, [suppose] a [qualiﬁed] guiding master has been in this
world for a long time since he undertook his renunciation, and his name

97

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

and reputation have circulated widely in human society. Many of his
male disciples (bhikṣus), however, have not yet sufﬁciently received his
instruction, nor have they been fully endowed with the practice of austerity, nor have they reached the goal of safety and peace, nor have they
beneﬁted themselves with the merits thereof, nor have they received the
sanction for doctrinal proﬁciency, nor have they been permitted to propagate the doctrine, nor are they yet able to settle religious disputes whenever they arise, as required by the proper rules, nor are they able to
acquire and demonstrate supernormal powers. This is called the master’s
“nonfulﬁllment of the criterion of the practice of austerity.”
O Cunda, [suppose] a qualiﬁed guiding master has been in this world
for a long time since he undertook renunciation. Hence, his name and reputation have been well circulated far widely in human society. Accordingly,
all of his disciples have received his full instruction, and they are sufﬁciently
endowed with the practice of austerity, they have reached the abode of
safety and peace, they have beneﬁted themselves with the merits thereof,
they have been granted the sanction for doctrinal proﬁciency, they are permitted to propagate the doctrine, and they are capable of settling religious
disputes whenever they arise, as required by proper rules, and they can
demonstrate their acquisition of supernormal powers. This is called the
master’s “fulﬁllment of the criterion of the practice of austerity.”
O Cunda, [suppose] a [qualiﬁed] guiding master has been in this
world for a long time since he undertook renunciation, and his name
and reputation have circulated far widely in human society. Many of his
female disciples (bhikṣuṇīs), however, have not sufﬁciently received his
instruction, nor have they fully been endowed with the practice of austerity, nor have they reached the abode of safety and peace, nor have
they beneﬁted themselves with the merits thereof, nor have they received
the sanction for doctrinal proﬁciency, nor are they permitted to propagate
the doctrine, nor are they yet able to settle religious disputes whenever
they arise, as required by proper rules, nor are they able to acquire and
demonstrate supernormal powers. This is called the master’s “nonfulﬁllment of the criterion of the practice of austerity.”
O Cunda, [suppose] a qualified guiding master has been in this
world for a long time since he undertook renunciation and his name

73c

98

Sutra 17: Purity

and reputation have circulated far widely in human society. Accordingly,
all of his female disciples (bhikṣuṇīs) have received his full instruction,
they are sufﬁciently endowed with the practice of austerity, they have
reached the abode of safety and peace and beneﬁted themselves with the
merits thereof, they have been granted the sanction for doctrinal proﬁciency,
they are permitted to propagate the doctrine, they are capable of settling
religious disputes whenever they arise, as required by proper rules, and
to demonstrate their acquisition of supernormal powers. This is called the
master’s “fulﬁllment of the criterion of the practice of austerity.”
O Cunda, whether a qualiﬁed guiding master has fulﬁlled the criterion
of the practice of austerity can also be determined by reference to his
lay disciples, male and female, as to how widely and efﬁciently they
have accomplished the practice of austerity, and so forth, up to how
widely and efﬁciently they are able to demonstrate their acquisition of
supernormal powers.
O Cunda, [suppose] a [qualiﬁed] guiding master has neither been in
this world, nor are his name and reputation, his material support, or his
detractions known widely in human society. This is called the master’s
“nonfulﬁllment of the criterion of the practice of austerity.” If, however,
a qualiﬁed guiding master has been in this world and is endowed with
name and reputation [that are widely circulated in society], and he
enjoys full material support with no lack and is free from any detraction
against him, he is regarded as having “fulﬁlled the criterion of the practice of austerity.”
Again, suppose that a qualiﬁed guiding master has been in this world
and is endowed with name and reputation [widely circulated in society]
and enjoys full material support with no lack. If, however, his disciples
have not been endowed with their names and reputations or with full
material support, this is also called the master’s “nonfulﬁllment of the
criterion of the practice of austerity.” If a qualiﬁed guiding master has
been in this world and is endowed with name and reputation [widely
circulated in society] and receives full material support with no lack,
and also if the names and reputations of his disciples have [widely circulated in society], they receive full material support with no lack, and
they are free from any detraction against them, this is called the master’s

99

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

“fulﬁllment of the criterion of the practice of austerity.” Whether or not
the qualiﬁed guiding master fulﬁlls the criterion of the practice of austerity
can also be determined by reference to his female disciples in similar terms.
O Cunda, it has been a long time since I undertook my renunciation.
My name and reputation have widely circulated in society. My disciples
have already been given instruction and training; they have reached the
goal of safety and peace (i.e., enlightenment and quiescence) and beneﬁted themselves with merits thereof; they have been granted my sanction
for doctrinal proﬁciency and are permitted to propagate the doctrine;
they are capable of settling religious disputes as they arise, as required
by proper rules, and they are able to demonstrate their acquisition of
supernormal powers. My female disciples as well as both male and
female lay disciples have also equally accomplished similar fulﬁllments
as have my male disciples. O Cunda, in these ways, I have successfully
propagated the practice of austerity far widely in human society, and so
forth, up to my demonstration of acquisition of supernormal powers. O
Cunda, there is no other guiding master in this world who is as greatly
renowned in name and reputation as well as in enjoying material support,
as myself, the Tathāgata, Arhat, Perfectly Enlightened One. O Cunda, I
can ﬁnd no other religious order in this world that has been so fully
renowned in name and reputation and has received such material support
as my order.
O Cunda, if you wish to explain [the success of my religion] (i.e. the
practice of austerity) correctly, you should speak of the fact that “seeing
does not see.” What does it mean to say that seeing does not see? It
means that every [successful] practice of austerity is endowed with
purity, and this is proclaimed and manifested. This is called “seeing does
not see.”

74a

Thereupon, the World-honored One said to the assembly of bhikṣus:

[The philosopher] Udraka Rāmaputra taught his followers the following
theory: “Seeing does not see.” What did he mean by saying this? He
explained it by means of an analogy, for instance, “Seeing a sword, one
perceives its blade but does not perceive the edge of that blade.” O
bhikṣus, the philosopher used that analogy to explain the meaning [of

100

Sutra 17: Purity

“seeing does not see”] in reference to an ordinary person, who is unable
to perceive the edge of the blade. O Cunda, if you wish to describe the
matter correctly, you should refer to the real meaning of the fact that
seeing itself does not see. What does this mean? Every practice of austerity is endowed with purity and is proclaimed and manifested. This is
that which one does not see. O Cunda, the continual [momentary] phenomena of each practice of austerity can be known if one does not let
his attention rest on each ﬂeeting moment. On the other hand, if one
tries to rest one’s attention on each moment, one cannot know the continuous phenomena of the practice of austerity as successful, even though
one is endowed [with its successful continuity]. O Cunda, of all the phenomena of religion, the practice of austerity is the ultimate taste, like
the taste of ghee that is highest among all the milk products.

The World-honored One then said to the bhikṣus:

I have realized the ultimate experience in the following sets of disciplines,
namely, the four kinds of application of mental awareness, the four kinds
of supernormal powers, the four kinds of strenuous effort, the four kinds
of meditative absorption, the ﬁve kinds of spiritual faculties, the ﬁve
kinds of spiritual power, the seven auxiliary disciplines of enlightenment,
and the eightfold noble path. All of you should be in harmonious unity
and not allow disputes to arise, because you have been taught by the
same teacher and also because you are the members of the same order,
just as water and milk [easily mix together and become one]. Within the
Tathāgata’s religion you may realize the state of ultimate well-being
through reliance on oneself, like a candle, and [you will eventually]
realize the goal.
Suppose a bhikṣu gives an exhortation on some doctrine, and someone
[among the audience] objects, “Such-and-such passage explained by
So-and-so is neither correct, nor is the meaning thus rendered right.”
Having faced this kind of charge, the bhikṣu [this challenged] should
not respond either by accepting the charge as right or by rejecting it as
wrong. Rather, he should say to the other bhikṣu, “Dear colleague, what
do you think? My statement is like this, while yours is like that. The
meaning I rendered in my statement is like this, while the meaning you

101

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

rendered in your statement is like that. Which one, do you think, is superior and which is inferior?” The other bhikṣu then may respond, “My
statement is like this, and the meaning rendered is like that, whereas
your statement is like that, and the meaning rendered is like this. Your
statement seems to be superior and the meaning [thus rendered] is also
superior.” Having said this, however, that bhikṣu should say, “Neither
of our statements or of our meanings should be decided as wrong or
right [immediately]. Let us clarify the matter together so as to determine
whether my statement and meaning should be warned against, or receive
reprimand, or be condemned to abandonment.” In this way, all of you
should maintain harmonious unity and not give rise to disputes, because
you have been taught by the same teacher and also because you are
members of the same order [in which you are harmoniously mixed] just
like water and milk. Within the Tathāgata’s religion you may realize the
state of ultimate well-being through reliance on oneself, like a candle,
and [you will eventually] realize the goal.
Suppose a bhikṣu gives an exhortation on some doctrine, and someone
[among the audience] speaks out as follows, “Such-and-such passage
spoken by So-and-so is not correct, although the meaning thus rendered
is right.” Having faced this kind of charge, the former bhikṣu should not
respond either by accepting the charge as right or rejecting it as wrong.
Rather he should say to the bhikṣu [who challenged him], “Dear colleague,
what do you think? My statement is like this, while yours is like that.
Which one, do you think, is right and which is wrong?” The bhikṣu then
may respond, “My statement is like this, while yours is like that. Your
statement seems to be superior.” Having said this, the bhikṣu may continue,
“Neither of our statements should be decided as wrong or right [immediately]. Let us clarify the matter together so as to determine whether my
passage is to be warned against, receive a reprimand, or condemned to
abandonment.” In this way, you should maintain harmonious unity and
not give rise of disputes, because you have been taught by the same
teacher and also because you are the members of the same order [and
mix together harmoniously,] like water and milk. Within the Tathāgata’s
religion you may realize the state of ultimate well-being through reliance
on oneself, like a candle, and [you will eventually] realize the goal.

74b

102

Sutra 17: Purity

Suppose a bhikṣu gives an exhortation on some doctrine, and someone
[among the audience] speaks out as follows, “Although such-and-such
passage explained by So-and-so is correct, the meaning rendered is
wrong.” Having faced this kind of charge, the bhikṣu [thus challenged]
should respond neither by accepting the charge as right nor rejecting it
as wrong. Rather, he should say to the other bhikṣu, “Dear colleague,
what do you think? The meaning rendered [by my statement] is like this,
while yours is like that. Which one is right and which is wrong?” That
bhikṣu may then respond, “The meaning rendered in my statement is
like this, while yours is like that. Your meaning seems to be superior.”
Having said this, the bhikṣu may continue, “Neither of these meanings
should be decided as right or wrong [immediately], however. Let us clarify the matter together so as to determine whether the meaning I rendered
should be warned against, reprimanded, or condemned to abandonment.”
In this way, you should maintain harmonious unity and not give rise to
disputes, because you have been taught by the same teacher and also
because you are the members of the same order, [blending togther are
easily as] water and milk. Within the Tathāgata’s religion you may realize
the state of ultimate well-being through the reliance on oneself, like a
candle, and [you will eventually] realize the goal.
Suppose a bhikṣu gives an exhortation on some doctrine, and someone
[among the audience] speaks out as follows, “Such-and-such passage
explained by So-and-so is correct, and the meaning rendered is also
right.”The bhikṣu, having listened to these words, cannot say anything
is wrong but should instead praise the other bhikṣu, “What you have
said is right.” Because of these reasons, every bhikṣu should have direct
experience with the twelve categories of scriptures and spread these
scriptures widely. The twelve categories are (1) the sacred discourses
in prose (sūtra), (2) the sacred discourses in prose and verse (geya), (3)
the doctrines and destinies of religious fulﬁllment (vyākaraṇa), (4) the
literature in verse (gāthā), (5) the Buddha's solemn and joyous utterances
in prose and verse (udāna), (6) the doctrinal and Vinaya discourses as
to motives and occasions (nidāna), (7) stories of past lives and experiences as a bodhisattva (jātaka), (8) stories of past events (avadāna), (9)
extensive doctrinal studies (vaipulya), (10) descriptions of supernormal

103

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

events and mysteries (adbhutadharma), (11) moral instructions consisting
of heroic stories and moral retributions (itivṛttaka), and (12) detailed
and extensive expositions and interpretations (upadeśa). Every bhikṣu
should uphold his experience well with these [twelve] categories of
scriptures, evaluate their meanings in observation, and spread the scriptures as widely as possible.
O bhikṣus, the robe that I set forth as the norm, whether it is [made
from rags] picked up in cemetery mounds or donated by wealthy householders or obtained from ordinary households, should be sufﬁcient if it
can protect one’s body from cold and heat as well as from mosquitoes
and gadﬂies, covering the four major parts of the body. O bhikṣus, the
food that I set forth as the norm, whether it is obtained from almsrounds
or provided by lay householders, should be sufﬁcient if it satisﬁes one’s
need. Because there is a danger of death when physical afﬂiction and
various kinds of illness develop, one should receive as much food as is
needed. O bhikṣus, the abode that I set forth as the norm should be either
under a shady tree, in an outdoor corridor, in a room, in a house, in a
rock cave, or in various kinds of residences. Whatever abode it may be,
if it can protect one from cold and heat, wind and rain, mosquitoes and
gadﬂies, and also insofar as it provides a secluded resting place, that is
sufﬁcient. O bhikṣus, the medicine I set forth as the norm is made of
either urine or excrement, and butter, oil, molasses, and sugar, in order
to satisfy one’s need. Because there is a danger of death when physical
afﬂiction and various kinds of illness develop, one should receive as
much medicine as is needed.

74c

The Buddha said:

Suppose that a heretic brāhmaṇa practitioner comes to accuse you,
saying, “The śramaṇas, sons of the Śākyas, enjoy various self-enjoyments.” If such words are spoken, you should reply to him, “You should
not utter such words. If the śramaṇas, sons of the Śākyas, engage in various self-enjoyments, the reason is that there is a kind of enjoyment the
Tathāgata reprimands, while there is also another kind of enjoyment that
the Tathāgata praises.” The heretic brāhmaṇa may then ask, “What kind
of self-enjoyment is found blameworthy by the Tathāgata?” When this

104

Sutra 17: Purity

is asked, you should reply, “The qualities that the ﬁve kinds of desire
respectively obtain (pañca-kāma-guṇa) are endearing and enjoyable
and [so they] become objects of human attachment. What are these ﬁve
qualities? The visual faculty discerns forms, which, being endearing and
enjoyable, become an object of attachment. [In like manner,] the auditory
faculty discerns sounds, the olfactory faculty discerns smells, the gustatory
faculty discerns tastes, and the tactile faculty discerns physical touch.
Because these are endearing and enjoyable, they become objects of
attachment. Furthermore, the indirect causes of the ﬁve desires give rise
to delight and happiness, which the Tathāgata, Arhat, Perfectly Enlightened One condemns.
Furthermore, it is like the case of a person who deliberately kills other
sentient beings to obtain happiness. The desire to kill, taking a life, is
what the Tathāgata, Arhat, Perfectly Enlightened One condemns. Again,
it is like the case of someone who deliberately steals others’ prperty, in
order to obtain happiness. The desire to steal is what the Tathāgata, Arhat,
Perfectly Enlightened One condemns. Again, it is like the case of someone
who deliberately violates the practice of austerity in order to obtain happiness. The desire to commit sexual misconduct is what the Tathāgata,
Arhat, Perfectly Enlightened One condemns. Again, it is like the case
of someone who deliberately speaks falsehoods in order to obtain happiness. The desire to lie is what the Tathāgata, Arhat, Perfectly Enlightened One condemns. Again, it is like the case of someone who deliberately spends his wealth on drinking, and so on, as he wishes, in order to
obtain happiness. The desire to [spend one’s wealth] on drinking and so
on is what the Tathāgata, Arhat, Perfectly Enlightened One condemns.
Again, it is like the case of someone who deliberately engages in heretical
practices of self-mortiﬁcation (ascetic practice) in order to obtain happiness. The desire to engage in heretical practices of self-mortiﬁcation
is what the Tathāgata, Arhat, Perfectly Enlightened One condemns.”
O bhikṣus, I condemn the ﬁve kinds of sensation fulﬁlled by the ﬁve
kinds of desire. These are the objects of human attachment. What are
these ﬁve? The visual faculty discerns forms, which, being endearing
and enjoyable, become an object of attachment. [In like manner,] the
auditory faculty discerns sounds, the olfactory faculty discerns smells,

105

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

the gustatory faculty discerns tastes, and the tactile faculty discerns physical touch. As these are endearing, they become objects of human attachment. Though these are the kinds of happiness [sought by ordinary people], the śramaṇas, sons of the Śākyas, do not regard them as [real]
happiness. It is just like a person who deliberately kills other sentient
beings in order to obtain happiness. This is not the kind of happiness
[sought by] śramaṇas, sons of the Śākyas. Again, it is just like someone
who deliberately steals others’ things in order to obtain happiness. This
is not the kind of happiness [sought by] śramaṇas, sons of the Śākyas.
Again, it is just like someone who deliberately violates the practice of
austerity in order to obtain happiness. This is not the kind of happiness
[sought by] śramaṇas, sons of the Śākyas. Again, it is just like someone
who deliberately speaks falsehoods in order to obtain happiness. This
is not the kind of happiness [soiught by] the śramaṇas, sons of the Śākyas.
Again, it is just like someone who deliberately spends his wealth on
drinking, and so on. as he desires. This is not the kind of happiness
[sought by] śramaṇas, sons of the Śākyas. Again, it is just like someone
who deliberately engages in heretical practices of self-mortiﬁcation.
This is not what the Tathāgata taught as right practice. It is not the kind
of happiness [sought by] śramaṇas, sons of the Śākyas.
Again, some heretic brāhmaṇa practitioners may ask, “What kind of
self-enjoyment is praised by the śramaṇa Gautama?” O bhikṣus, if you
are asked such a question, you should reply, “Dear friends, the qualities
(i.e., sensations) obtained by the ﬁve kinds of desire are endearing and
enjoyable, and [are therefore likely to] become objects of human attachment. What are these ﬁve? The visual faculty discerns forms, and so
forth, up to the tactile faculty which discerns physical touch, through
which respective sensations are cherished and enjoyed, and become
objects of attachment. Dear friend, these kinds of happiness, which arise
from the ﬁve kinds of desire as direct cause and their respective objects
as indirect cause, should be eradicated as quickly as possible. It is just
like someone who deliberately kills other sentient beings in order to
obtain happiness. If there is this kind of happiness, one should eradicate
it immediately. Again, it is just like someone who deliberately steals
others’ things in order to obtain happiness. If there is this kind of happiness,

75a

106

Sutra 17: Purity

one should eradicate it immediately. Again, it is just like someone who
deliberately violates the practice of austerity in order to obtain happiness.
If there be this kind of happiness, one should eradicate it immediately.
Again, it is just like someone who deliberately speaks falsehoods in
order to obtain happiness. If there is that kind of happiness, one should
eradicate it immediately. Again, it is just like someone who deliberately
spends his wealth on drinking and so on, as he desires, in order to obtain
happiness. If there is this kind of happiness, one should eradicate it
immediately. Again, it is just like someone who deliberately engages in
heretical practices of self-mortiﬁcation in order to obtain happiness. If
there is this kind of happiness, one should eradicate it immediately.
Furthermore, it is just like someone who, distancing himself from
avarice and from other evil deﬁlements, realizes the ﬁrst meditative state
of absorption in which there is an awareness of an object and an act of
examining, while the sense of joy and bliss increase through removal
of the cause of birth (i.e., reaching the supramundane realm). This kind
of happiness is what the Buddha praises. Again, it is just like someone
who, eliminating the awareness of an object and the subjective act of
examination, with increasing tranquility or self-conﬁdence, continually
applying mental concentration, enters the second meditative state of
absorption in which there is neither the awareness of an object nor a
subjective act, but the sense of joy and bliss predominate in the arising
state of concentration. This kind of happiness is what the Buddha praises.
Again it is just like someone who, with the fading away of the sense of
joy but dwelling in the sense of equanimity, fully aware of subtler bliss,
reaches the third meditative state of absorption in which he experiences
the mindfulness, equanimity, and bliss that are sought by the wise and
holy practitioner. This kind of happiness is what the Buddha praises.
Again, it is just like someone who, having transcended both pain and
pleasure and removed sorrow and joy, realizes the fourth meditative
state of absorption in which there is neither pain nor pleasure but an
increase of the state of equanimity that consolidates pure and genuine
mindfulness. This kind of happiness is what the Buddha praises.
If any heretic brāhmaṇa practitioners should ask, “How many meritorious effects do you seek to realize in this kind of happiness?”, you

107

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

should reply, “This kind of happiness is comprised of seven meritorious
effects. What are these seven? One realizes direct experience of the ultimate path in the present life; if deﬁlement obstructs him from realizing
it, he may realize it at the time of his death. If he is again obstructed from
it at the time of death, he may eradicate the ﬁve kinds of deﬁlement21 that
bind sentient beings to the lower realm of desire, or he may realize one
of the ﬁve kinds of ﬁnal nirvana without returning to this world: ﬁrst, an
anāgāmin (nonreturner) who passes away in the middle of his term of
life in some particular heaven; second, an anāgāmin who passes away
from the realm of desire (kāmadhātu) and is reborn in the realm of form
(rūpadhātu) and enters nirvana from there; third, an anāgāmin who enters
nirvana after proper mental preparation; fourth, an anāgāmin who enters
nirvana without any mental preparation; and ﬁfth, an anāgāmin who is
born in the highest Akaniṣṭha Heaven (i.e., ārūpyadhātu, formless realm)
and enters nirvana from there. Dear friends, these are the seven meritorious
effects of the foregoing kinds of happiness.
Suppose a bhikṣu is still engaged in the practice of moral discipline,
seeking the higher goal of safety and peace, but is unable to eradicate
the ﬁve kinds of moral and spiritual hindrances: (1) sexual desire, (2)
malice, (3) sloth and drowsiness, (4) agitation and worry, and (5) doubt.
If a bhikṣu is still engaged in the practice of moral discipline, seeking
the higher goal of safety and peace, but is unable to eradicate the ﬁve
kinds of moral and spiritual hindrances, unable to exert himself in the
four kinds of mental awareness, and unable to exert himself in the practice
of the seven auxiliary disciplines of enlightenment, he would in no way
be in the position to seek clear insight in order to strengthen the possibility
of realizing that state that is beyond human conditions and that of saintly
transcendent knowledge. Dear friends, only when a bhikṣu who is practicing moral discipline, seeking the higher goal of safety and peace, is
able to eradicate the ﬁve kinds of moral and spiritual hindrances, to exert
himself in the four kinds of mental awareness, and to exert himself in
the practice of seven auxiliary disciplines of enlightenment, will he then
be in the position to seek clear insight in order to strengthen the possibility
of realizing the state that is beyond human conditions and of that of
saintly transcendent knowledge.

75b

108

Sutra 17: Purity

Dear friends, when a bhikṣu realizes the state of an arhat by eradicating
all deﬁlements, he has accomplished what should be accomplished in
life, thus lightening his burden. From this he acquires meritorious beneﬁt
for himself, puts an end to various existential fetters, attains liberation
through right knowledge, and never falls into the nine kinds of wrong
conduct. What are these nine kinds [of wrong conduct]? They are (1)
taking life (killing), (2) taking what is not given (stealing), (3) breaking
the practice of austerity, (4) speaking falsehoods, (5) forsaking the path,
(6) following [the dictates of desire, (7) following [the dictates of] anger,
(8) following [the dictates of] fear, and (9) following [the dictates] of
delusion. Dear friends, this is called the resulting state of the arhat in
which, having eradicated all deﬁlements, he accomplishes what should
be accomplished in life, thus lightening his burden; from this he acquires
meritorious beneﬁt for himself, puts an end to various existential fetters,
attains liberation through right knowledge, and distances himself from
the nine kinds of wrong conduct.
Again, some heretic brāhmaṇas criticize Buddhists, saying, “The
śramaṇas, sons of the Śākyas, uphold a doctrine that says impermanent
things exist.” You should reply, “Dear friends, you should not make this
kind of critical comment against us. Why do you think that the śramaṇas,
sons of the Śākyas, uphold the theory that there exist noneternal things?
The truth thus held by the śramaṇas, sons of the Śākyas, however, is
itself eternal, immovable, and immutable, just like the threshold of a
gate is immovable and immutable, [though passersby may come and go
through it]. In like manner, the truth [about the way in which impermanent
things exist in continuity] held by the śramaṇas, sons of the Śākyas, is
eternal and immovable.
Again, some heretic brāhmaṇas criticize Buddhists, saying, “The
śramaṇa Gautama knows all past events but he does not know future
events.” Since heretic brāhmaṇas presuppose a different notion of knowledge as well as a different notion of transcendent insight, their words
of criticism [on Buddhist teachings] are baseless. Past events, which are
directly seen before his eyes, would never have escaped from the Tathāgata’s supernormal power of vision. As for the future, he gives rise to
the knowledge born of enlightenment. If events that took place in the

109

75c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

past were neither real nor productive of delight and happiness, and therefore not beneﬁcial to anyone, the Buddha does not record [such events].
Again, even if they were real, [if those past events] were not productive
of delight and happiness and not beneﬁcial to anyone, the Buddha does
not record them. Again, if those events were real and productive of
delight and happiness, but were still not beneﬁcial to anyone, the Buddha
does not record them. If, however, [those past events] were real, productive of delight and happiness, and also beneﬁcial to all, the Tathāgata
has cognizance of them all and subsequently recalls them. In the case
of events that take place in the present as well as in the future, the Tathāgata’s supernormal power should be regarded equally, as before. In the
past, present, and future the Tathāgata’s words will never be false, regardless whether they are spoken on proper occasions, are about practical
and factual matters, or about useful matters, or on doctrine, or about the
disciplines.
The Buddha initially realized supreme enlightenment during the ﬁrst
third of the night, and [that experience] remained with him throughout
his life, until the latter third of the night [on which he entered parinirvāṇa]. Throughout the period between these two nights, whatever speech
the Buddha made is, without exception, true as to how things really are.
Thus he is called the Tathāgata. Moreover, the Tathāgata’s speech is factual, and facts are like the Buddha’s speech. Thus he is called the Tathāgata. What does the title “Perfectly Enlightened One” mean? The Buddha
perfectly knows all the contents of his insight, his cessation, and his
enlightenment. Thus he is called “perfectly enlightened.”
Again, some heretic brāhmaṇas assert a theory that “the world exists
eternally is alone true, while the rest is false.” Other heretics assert
another theory that “the world exists temporarily is alone true, while the
rest is false.” Again, a third theory asserts that “the world both eternally
exists and temporarily exists is alone true, while the rest is false.” Again,
a fourth theory asserts that “the world neither eternally exists nor temporarily exists is alone true, while the rest is false.” Again, a ﬁfth theory
that asserts that “this world has its limit [in time and space] is alone true,
while the rest is false.” Again, a sixth theory asserts that “this world has
no limit [in time and space] is alone true, while the rest is false.” Again,

110

Sutra 17: Purity

a seventh theory asserts that “this world has both limit and no limit is
alone true, while the rest is false.” Again, an eighth theory asserts that
“this world has neither limit nor no limit is alone true, while the rest is
false.” Again, a ninth theory asserts that that “having both this life and
this body is alone real, while the rest is false.” Again a tenth theory
asserts that “having neither a life nor a body is alone real, while the rest
is false.” Again, an eleventh theory asserts that “having both a different
life and a different body is alone real, while the rest is false.” Again, a
twelfth theory asserts that “having neither a different life nor a different
body is alone real, while the rest is false. Again, a thirteenth theory
asserts that “the Tathāgata has an end [to his existence] is alone true,
while the rest is false.” Again, a fourteenth theory asserts that “the Tathāgata has no end [to his existence] is alone true, while the rest is false.”
Again, a ﬁfteenth theory asserts that “the Tathāgata has both an end to
his existence and no end to his existence is alone true, while the rest is
false.” Again, a sixteenth theory asserts that “the Tathāgata has neither
an end to his existence nor no end to his existence is alone true, while
the rest is false.” The foregoing are called the basic [alternative] theories
concerning past (i.e., original) existence. I have recorded for your sake
[these] theories that assert “this world is eternal,” and so on, up to the
[last] theory that asserts “the Tathāgata has neither an end to his existence
nor no end to his existence.” The foregoing are all wrong views (mithyādṛṣṭi) concerning the basic theories of future existence. I have recorded
them for your sake.
I shall also record the [views] concerned with the basic theories of
future existence. What is the theory of future existence? I will record
the following possibilities. A ﬁrst theory asserts that “the self consists
of materiality and has an end according to [one’s] thought (i.e., consciousness) is alone true, while the rest is false.” In like manner, a second
theory asserts that “the self consists of immateriality and has an end
according to one’s thought”; a third theory asserts that “the self consists
of both materiality and immateriality and has an end according to one’s
thought”; a fourth theory asserts that “the self consists neither of materiality nor immateriality and has an end according to one’s thought”; a
ﬁfth theory asserts that “the self[’s existence] has a limit [in space and

111

76a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

time]”; a sixth theory asserts that “the self has no limit [in time and
space]’; a seventh theory asserts that “the self has both limit and no
limit”; an eighth theory asserts that “the self has neither a limit nor no
limit and has an end according to one’s thought”; a ninth theory asserts
that “the self has no happiness and has an end according to one’s thought”;
a tenth theory asserts that “the self has both happiness and suffering and
has an end according to one’s thought”; an eleventh theory asserts that
“the self has neither suffering nor happiness and has an end according
to one’s thought”; a twelfth theory asserts that “the self consists of a
single thought and has an end according to one’s thought”; a thirteenth
theory asserts that “the self consists of multiple thoughts and has an end
according to one’s thought”; a fourteenth theory asserts that “the self
consists of a few thoughts and has an end according to one’s thought”;
a ﬁfteenth theory asserts that “the self consists of an inﬁnite number of
thoughts and has an end according to one’s thought is alone true, while
the rest is false.” These are called the basic theories of wrong views concerning future existence. I have recorded them for your sake.
Again, some śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas may raise the following theories and views, [which assert that] “this world eternally exists is alone
true, while the rest is false,” and so forth, up to the [last] theory, which
asserts that “the self is consists of an immeasurable number of thoughts
is alone true, while the rest is false.” Again, “such-and-such theories,
such-and-such views, are alone true, while the rest is false.”
You should answer, “You have certainly raised this theory, but why
should this theory asert that ‘the world eternally exists is alone true,
while the rest is false’? This kind of theoretical statement is not accepted
by the Buddha. Why? Because all of these theories and views [in which
respective theories are formulated] is comprised of some fetter of attachment. From examining the foregoing theories, I infer that there is no
one among all the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas who can equal my theory
and view. How could there be anyone equal to myself, especially because
they overemphasize their respective theories over those of others? These
varieties of wrong views concerning the self are merely [empty] speech,
and there is none about which both parties can discuss. This refutation

112

Sutra 17: Purity

equally applies to all the other theories, up to the one that asserts that
the self consists of an immeasurable number of thoughts.
Again, some śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas uphold a theory that this world
is created by itself. Again, other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas uphold another
theory that this world is created by [something] other [than itself]. Again,
a third group asserts that this world is created by both itself and by others.
Again, a fourth group may assert that the world is created neither by
itself nor by others, but [came into being] suddenly, [without cause].
[You should know that the very existence of] these śramaṇas and
brāhmaṇas who uphold the theory that the world is created by itself,
however, are [ultimately] based on the causality of the contact of the
sense faculties with their respective objects. [Therefore,] no one can
explain the origin of the world in a theory without including the causality
of sense contact. Why is this so? Because the six sense faculties establish
contact with their respective objects by way of the physical body. On
the basis of this contact (sparśa), there arises sensation; on the basis of
sensation (vedanā), there arises craving; on the basis of craving (tṛṣṇā),
there arises grasping; on the basis of grasping (upādana), there arises
the will to becoming; on the basis of the will to becoming (bhava), there
arises birth; on the basis of birth (jāti), there arises old age and death
(jarāmaraṇa), and the mass of great troubles, such as sorrow, lamentation,
suffering, and afﬂiction. If there are no six sense faculties, contact cannot
arise; if there is no contact, sensation cannnot arise; if there is no sensation, craving cannot arise; if there is no craving, grasping cannot arise;
if there is no grasping, the will to becoming cannot arise; if there is no
will to becoming, birth cannot arise; if there is no birth, old age and
death, as well as the mass of great troubles, such as sorrow, lamentation,
suffering, and afﬂiction, cannot arise. In order to refute the remaining
three alternative theories, you may apply this same [principle of] causality
(i.e., dependent origination), because when there is contact of the senses
and [their] objects, existence arises; when there is no such contact, existence cannot arise.

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

113

76b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

If you wish to terminate these wrong views you should rely on the four
kinds of application of mental awareness, especially by applying them
in three ways of practice. How should a bhikṣu terminate these wrong
views through reliance on the four kinds of mental awareness, especially
by applying them in three ways? First, when a bhikṣu observes his inner
body (inner senses) in concentration he should make effort without slackening, being mindful of his observations to keep them in memory, thereby
removing worldly desires and anxiety; second, while observing his outer
body (outer senses) he should make effort without slackening, being
mindful of his observations to keep them in memory, thereby removing
worldly desires and anxiety; third, while observing both inner and outer
body he should make effort without slackening, being mindful of his
observations to keep them in memory, thereby removing worldly desires
and anxiety. These three forms of practice also apply to the observation
of one’s sensations, the observation of one’s mind (intellect), and the
observation of one’s psychophysical elements.
There are eight different states of liberation that result from these
practices. What are these eight? First, the liberation realized when one,
with an ideation of internal form, perceives external forms; second, the
liberation realized when one, without any ideation of internal form, perceives external forms; third, the liberation ealized when one has thus
terminated all deﬁlements; fourth, the liberation realized when one,
having transcended all ideations of form and annihilated sensory reaction,
abides in the ﬁrst formless state of concentration, the realm of inﬁnite
space; ﬁfth, the liberation realized when one, having transcended the
realm of inﬁnite space, abides in the realm of inﬁnite consciousness;
sixth, the liberation realized when one, having transcended the previous
realm, abides in the realm of nothingness or nonutility; seventh, the liberation realized when one, having transcended the previous realm, abides
in the realm of neither ideation nor nonideation; and eighth, the liberation
realized when one, having transcended the previous realm, abides in the
ﬁnal state of cessation, having transcended both senses and ideation,
which is equivalent to the third saintly state of anāgāmin.

At that time Ānanda was [standing behind] the World-honored One, fanning him. [When the Buddha’s exhortation was over,] Ānanda at once
114

Sutra 17: Purity

rearranged his outer robe to expose his right shoulder and, kneeling with his
right knee on the ground and both palms joined together, he said to the
Buddha:

It is wonderful, World-honored One, this doctrine [you have] exhorted is
endowed with foremost purity and subtlety. What title should be given to
this exhortation and how should it be received and carried out, sir?

The Buddha replied to Ānanda, “This sutra can be called “Purity” and
you should retain it without any admixture (lit., “in a pure manner”).”
Having thus listened to the Buddha’s exhortation, Ānanda was delighted,
respectfully received it, and carried it out as taught by the Buddha.
[End of Sutra 17: Purity]

115

Sutra 18

Happiness Caused by Oneself

(Dīgha Nikāya 28: Sampasādanīya Suttanta)
Thus have I heard. At one time, the Buddha was staying in the town of Nālandā
in the Pāvārika’s Mango Forest accompanied by one thousand two hundred
and ﬁfty disciples. The venerable elder Śāriputra, engaged in meditation in
a secluded place, thought:
My mind has become settled with the knowledge that throughout the
past, present, and future there is no śramaṇa or brāhmaṇa whose wisdom,
supernormal power, and meritorious virtues can equal those of the Tathāgata, Arhat, Perfectly Enlightened One (samyaksaṃbuddha).

Śāriputra then stood up from his meditation and went to see the Worldhonored One. Having honored the Buddha by bowing his forehead to his
feet, Śāriputra withdrew to one side and took his seat. He said to the Buddha:

A short while ago, when I was engaged in meditation in a secluded place,
it came to my mind that throughout the past, present, and future there
is no śramaṇa or brāhmaṇa whose wisdom, supernormal power, and
meritorious virtues can equal those of the Tathāgata, Arhat, Perfectly
Enlightened One.

The Buddha then said to Śāriputra:

Very good, you are able to speak [frankly] of your thought before me,
ﬁrmly settled with unshakable conviction, and thereby you are able to
make the lion’s roar like this. Among all the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas
there is no one who can ever match your capacity. What do you think,
O Śāriputra? Do you know what thoughts the past buddhas had in their
minds, what moral disciplines they practiced, what doctrines they upheld,
what transcendent insight they had, what liberation they realized, and
in what state of liberation they abided?
117

76c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

Śāriputra replied, “No, sir.”
[The Buddha continued:]

What do you think, O Śāriputra? Do you know what thoughts the future
buddhas will have in their minds, what moral disciplines they will practice, what doctrines they will uphold, what transcendent insight they
will have, what liberation they will realize, and in what state of liberation
they will abide?

Śāriputra replied, “No, sir.”
[The Buddha again continued:]

What do you think, O Śāriputra? Do you know what thoughts the present
buddha has in his mind, what moral disciplines he practices, what doctrines he upholds, what transcendent insight he has, what liberation he
has realized, and in what state of liberation he abides?

Śāriputra replied, “No, sir.”
Again, the Buddha said to Śāriputra:

You cannot know what thoughts the past, present, and future buddhas
had, has, and will have, respectively, in their minds. On the basis of what
reason have you decisively become settled with such a thought in your
mind? In reference to what fact have you reached such an unshakable
conviction, whereby you are able to make such a lion’s roar like that?
When all the other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas hear your announcement,
“My mind has become settled with the knowledge that throughout the
past, present, and future there is no śramaṇa or brāhmaṇa whose wisdom,
supernormal power, and meritorious virtues can equal those of the Tathāgata, Arhat, Perfectly Enlightened One,” they will not believe your words.

Śāriputra said to the Buddha:

Although I am unable to know what thoughts the past, present, and future
buddhas had, has and will have in their minds, I know the general characteristics of the Buddha. The Tathāgata has taught me the Dharma of
profundity and vastness that is concerned with good and bad, with [the
workings] of causality and its absence, illumination [with insight] and

118

Sutra 18: Happiness Caused by Oneself

its absence, [ignorance], and I know that the Tathāgata’s exhortation is
profound and vast. Having listened to the discourse, I have known each
subject of the contents and have thoroughly investigated them all. I
believe in the Tathāgata, Arhat, Perfectly Enlightened One; I believe
that the Dharma exhorted by the Tathāgata is thoroughly analyzable;
and that the Tathāgata has [truly] realized cessation of the multitude of
sufferings. These are the highest truths among all good doctrines. The
knowledge and insight inparted by the World-honored One are comprehensive, and his supernormal powers are all-inclusive. Therefore, among
all the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas of this world, there is none who can
ever equal the World-honored One. How could any of them ever so ignominiously wish to be superior to the World-honored One?
Again, there is another superior quality of the exhortation of the
World-honored One, namely, revealing the disciplines. These disciplines
constitute (1) the four kinds of application of mental awareness, (2) the
four kinds of strenuous effort, (3) the four kinds of supernormal powers,
(4) the four kinds of meditative absorption, (5) the ﬁve kinds of spiritual
faculties, (6) the ﬁve kinds of spiritual power, (7) the seven auxiliary
disciplines of enlightenment, and (8) the eightfold noble path. These are
called the highest methods of practice. The World-honored One’s knowledge and insight are comprehensive and his supernormal powers are allinclusive. Therefore, among all the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas of this
world there is none who can equal the World-honored One. How much
less could any of them ever so ignominiously wish to be superior to the
World-honored One?
Again, there is another superior quality of World-honored One’s
exhortation, namely, revealing the cognitive bases (āyatanas). The epistemic bases mean the eyes and forms, the ears and sounds, the nose and
smells, the tongue and tastes, the body and tactile sensation, and the
intellect and elements. The Tathāgatas, Arhats, Perfectly Enlightened
Ones of the past equally made these epistemic bases known, namely,
the visual faculty and objective forms, and so on, up to the intellectual
faculty and objective elements. The Tathāgatas, Arhats, Perfectly Enlightened Ones of the future too will be obliged to equally make these epistemic bases known, namely, the visual faculty and objective forms, and

119

77a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

so on, up to the intellectual faculty and objective elements. The Tathāgata,
Arhat, Perfectly Enlightened One of the present time, who is my master,
has also equally made these epistemic bases known, namely, the visual
faculty and objective forms, and so on, up to the intellectual faculty and
objective elements. No one can surpass the Tathāgata in revealing these
epistemic bases. His knowledge and insight are comprehensive and his
supernormal powers are all-inclusive. Therefore, among all the śramaṇas
and brāhmaṇas of this world, there is none who can ever equal the Worldhonored One. How much less could any of them ever so ignominiously
wish to be superior to the World-honored One?
Again, there is another superior quality of the World-honored One,’s
exhortation, namely, revealing the way of descending into the mother’s
womb [at the time of rebirth] with awareness. The descent into the
mother’s womb comprises four kinds: (1) entering the womb, abiding
in it, and coming out of it, all without awareness; (2) entering the womb
with awareness, but abiding in it and coming out of it without awareness;
(3) entering the womb and abiding in it with awareness, but coming out
of it without awareness; and (4) entering the womb, abiding in it, and
coming out of it, all with awareness. Of these four, the fourth is the highest, [as in the case of the Tathāgata], unsurpassed by any other being.
The World-honored One’s knowledge and insight are comprehensive
and his supernormal powers are all-inclusive. Therefore, among all the
śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas of this world there is none who can equal the
World-honored One. How much less could any of them ever so ignominiously wish to be superior to the World-honored One?
Again, there is another superior quality of the World-honored One’s
exhortation, namely, revealing the path of religion [consisting of four
motivations]. The śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas enter the state of mental
concentration through various methods, and while abiding in that state
they apply the seven auxiliary disciplines of enlightenment in practice,
starting with the four kinds of mindfulness or mental awareness, according
to four motivations: (1) desire for realization, (2) riddance from worldly
affairs, (3) cessation of deﬁlements, and (4) deliverance from the samsaric
life cycle. In like manner, they strive in the practices of discernment of
the psychophysical elements, endeavor, delight, freedom from bodily

120

Sutra 18: Happiness Caused by Oneself

and mental disturbance, the practice of concentration, and the mind of
equanimity according to the above four motivations. These motivations
are [the most effective], unsurpassed [by any other principle]. The Worldhonored One’s knowledge and insight are comprehensive and his supernormal powers are all-inclusive. Therefore, among all the śramaṇas and
brāhmaṇas of this world, there is none who can equal the World-honored
One. How much less could any of them ever so ignominiously wish to
be superior to the World-honored One?
Again, there is another superior quality in the World-honored One’s
exhortation, namely, revealing the process or method of cessation. The
process of cessation is of four kinds: (1) gradual realization (intuition)
of the cessation of suffering, of which the two factors of gradualness
and lingering suffering in the process are inferior; (2) prompt realization
of the cessation of suffering, of which only the [lingering] suffering in
the process is inferior; (3) gradual realization of the cessation of pleasure,
of which only the process of gradualness is inferior; and (4) prompt realization of the cessation of pleasure but without its wider dissemination,
of which only the absence of dissemination is inferior. The process of
cessation propounded by the present Tathāgata constitutes not only the
prompt realization of the cessation of pleasure but also the wider dissemination of this method as far as the supernormal powers exercised
by heavenly beings.

Śāriputra said to the Buddha:

The teachings imparted by the World-honored One are of the nature of
highest wonder, because even women, who have a lower scale of intelligence, can uphold the teachings, eradicate the evil inﬂuences of the deﬁlements, realize the supramundane realm free from such inﬂuences, realize
the liberation of the mind [free from craving and attachment], the liberation
of transcendent insight [free from ignorance], and directly experience the
realization thereof in this present life, namely, “Whoever has exhausted
[the cause of] birth and death, accomplishes the goal of the practice of
austerity, completes whatever should be done in life, for whom there will
be no more birth after this life.” This is the highest realization of cessation,
unsurpassable by any other doctrine. The World-honored One’s knowledge

121

77b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

and insight are comprehensive and his supernormal powers are all-inclusive.
Therefore, among all the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas of this world none
can ever equal the World-honored One. How much less could any of them
ever so ignominiously wish to be superior to the World-honored One?
Again, there is another superior quality in the World-honored One’s
exhortation, namely: discourses [having the nature] of purity. The discourses of purity mean that the World-honored One neither speaks useless
and false words, [as can be observed] among the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, nor does he seek verbal triumph, nor does he side with any group;
whatever he says is gentle, well-timed, and has factual basis. These are
the characteristics of the Tathāgata’s discourses regarded as pure and
genuine and unsurpassable. The World-honored One’s knowledge and
insight are comprehensive and his supernormal powers are all-inclusive.
Therefore, among all the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas of this world there
is none who can ever equal the World-honored One. How much less
could any of them ever so ignominiously wish to be superior to the
World-honored One?
Again, there is another superior quality of the World-honored One’s
exhortation, namely, the teaching of the realization of insight. (1) The
śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas enter the state of mental concentration through
various methods, and while abiding in that state they observe the body
from head to toes and vice versa. Inside and outside the skin, they observe
the presence of unclean hair on the head as well as on the body, nails,
the backs of the hands or insteps of the feet, liver, lungs, intestines, stomach, spleen, kidneys, the ﬁve viscera (i.e., heart, lungs, liver, kidneys,
stomach), sweat, fat, marrow, brain, excretions and urine, nasal mucus,
and tears. As these are all unclean, there is nothing whatsoever to which
one may become attached. This is the ﬁrst stage of realization of insight.
(2) The śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas enter the state of mental concentration
through various methods, and while abiding in that state, excluding the
unclean items of the skin and ﬂesh, they observe exclusively the skeleton
and teeth. This is the second stage of the realization of insight. (3) The
śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas enter the state of mental concentration through
various methods, and while abiding in that state, excluding the unclean
items of the skin and ﬂesh as well as the skeleton and teeth, they observe

122

Sutra 18: Happiness Caused by Oneself

exclusively where consciousness abides, thereby determining that consciousness abides in the present life, it abides in the future life, there is
no discontinuity of the present life, there is no discontinuity of the future
life after, there is no liberation in this present life, and there is no liberation
in the future life. This is the third stage of the realization of insight. (4)
The śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas enter the state of mental concentration
through various methods, and while abiding in that state, excluding the
unclean items of the skin and ﬂesh as well as the skeleton and teeth,
they observe once again exclusively where consciousness abides, thereby
determining that consciousness abides in the future life but not in the
present life, there is discontinuity of the present life but no discontinuity
of the future life after, there is liberation in the present life but no liberation
in the future life. This is the fourth stage of the realization of insight.
(5) The śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas enter the state of mental concentration
through various methods, and while abiding in that state, excluding thse
unclean items of the skin and ﬂesh as well as the skeleton and teeth,
they observe for a third time exclusively where consciousness abides,
thereby determining that consciousness abides neither in the present life
nor in the future life, there is discontinuity of both the present life and
the future life, and there is liberation in the present life as well as in the
future life. This is the ﬁfth stage of the realization of insight, of which
no one can surpass [the Tathāgata’s supernormal power].
The World-honored One’s knowledge and insight (jñāna-prajñā) are
comprehensive and his supernormal powers are all-inclusive. Therefore,
among all the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas of this world, there is none who
can ever equal the World-honored One. How much less could any of them
ever so ignominiously wish to be superior to the World-honored One?
Again, there is another superior quality in the World-honored One’s
exhortation, namely, imparting [the critically examined] theories of eternalism, which is unsurpassed by any other person. The theories of eternalism are the following three: śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas enter the state
of mental concentration through various methods, and while abiding in
that state they recollect twenty evolving and devolving cycles of eons,
saying, “The eternal existence of the world is alone true, while the rest
is false.” Why is this so? Because of my recollection I know that there

123

77c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

were such evolving and devolving cycles of eons. But I do not know
anything about any period beyond that, nor do I know anything about
what takes place in the future.” These śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas proclaim
their ignorance both morning and evening, asserting that “Only the world
is eternal is true, while the rest is false.” This is called the ﬁrst theory
of eternalism. (2) The śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas enter the state of mental
concentration through various methods and, while abiding in that state,
they recollect forty evolving and devolving cycles of eons and say, “Only
the eternal existence of the world is true, while the rest is false. Why is
this so? Because of my recollection I know that there were such evolving
and devolving cycles of eons. I also know all the past evolving and
devolving cycles of eons, but I do not know anything about [current]
evolving and devolving cycles of eons.” This theory knows the beginning
of the world but not the period of its ending. These śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas proclaim their ignorance morning and evening, asserting that
“Only the world is eternal is true, while the rest is false.” This is called
the second theory of eternalism. (3) The śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas enter
into the state of mental concentration through various methods and, while
abiding in that state, they recollect eighty evolving and devolving cycles
of eons, saying, “Only the eternal existence of the world is true, while
the rest is false. For what reason? Because of my recollection I know that
there were such evolving and devolving cycles of eons. I also know whatever past eons of evolving and devolving cycles beyond that as well as
whatever future eons of evolving and devolving cycles beyond the present
time, without exception.” These śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas proclaim their
ignorance morning and evening, asserting that “Only the world is eternal
is true, while the rest is false.” This is called the third theory of eternalism.
[The Tathāgata, however, critically examined all these forms of eternalism,
[and his knowldege] is unsurpassable by anyone.]
The World-honored One’s knowledge and insight are comprehensive
and his supernormal powers are all-inclusive. Therefore, among all the
śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas of this world there is none who can ever equal
the World-honored One. How much less could any of them ever so ignominiously wish to be superior to the World-honored One?

124

Sutra 18: Happiness Caused by Oneself

Again, there is another superior quality of the World-honored One’s
exhortation, namely, imparting the mind of other persons. The four kinds
of mind-reading are (1) some śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas investigate external signs (nimitta) and predict, “The intended object of another mind is
such-and-such” and “The intended object of this mind is such-and-such,”
and the result is either true or false. This is the ﬁrst kind of mind-reading.
(2) Other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas do not investigate external signs
but rely on the words of gods or nonhuman beings and predict, “Your
thought is like this or like that,” which is also either true or false. This
is the second kind of mind-reading. (3) Again, some śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas neither investigate external signs nor rely on the words of gods
and non-human beings, but examining themselves (lit., the body) and
listening to others’ words, they then predict, “Your thought is like this
or like that,” which is also either true or false. This is the third kind of
mind-reading. (4) Again, some śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas neither investigate external signs, nor rely on the words of gods and non-human
beings, nor do they examine themselves or others, but removing both
an awareness of an object and an act of examining they thereby enter
the state of mental concentration, and while abiding in that state, investigate the minds of others and predict, “Your thought is like this or like
that.” There is no error in this kind of mind-reading. This is the fourth
kind of mind-reading. [The Tathāgata’s supernormal power of mindreading is unsurpassable by anyone.]
The World-honored One’s knowledge and insight are comprehensive
and his supernormal powers are all-inclusive. Therefore, among all the
śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas of this world there is none who can ever equal
the World-honored One. How much less could any of them ever so ignominiously wish to be superior to the World-honored One?
Again, there is another superior quality of the World-honored One’s
exhortation, namely, teaching the four instructions for saintly realization.
The fourfold instructions are (1) at times, a person following the [Tathāgata’s] instruction without turning away eradicated the evil inﬂuence of
the deﬁlements and thus realized the supramundane realm free from such
inﬂuences, realized the liberation of the mind [free from craving and
attachment], the liberation of transcendent insight [free from ignorance],

125

78a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

and directly experienced the realization thereof in this present life: “Whoever has exhausted [the cause of] birth and death, accomplishes the goal
of the practice of austerity, completes whatever should be done, for him
there will be no more birth after this life.” This is the effect of the ﬁrst
kind of instruction.
(2) Again at times, a person following the [Tathāgata’s] instruction
without turning away eradicated the ﬁve kinds of deﬁlement that bind
sentient beings to the lower realm of desire, i.e., the heretical belief in a
self, attachment to practices and observances other than those approved
by the Buddha, doubt, sexual desire, and malice, realized the state of nonreturner to be reborn [among the gods at the end of their life] and will not
return to this world. This is the effect of the second kind of instruction.
(3) Again at times, a person following the [Tathāgata’s] instruction
without turning away eradicated the three kinds of fetters, i.e., the heretical
belief in a self, attachment to practices and observances other than those
approved by the Buddha, doubt, the forces of desire, anger, and delusion,
and thereby realized the state of once-returner and, having returned to this
world, realized nirvana. This is the effect of the third kind of instruction.
(4) Again at times, a person following the [Tathāgata’s] instruction
without turning away eradicated the three kinds of fetters, thereby realized
the state of stream-winner and, returning to this world seven times,
realize the ultimate goal of nirvana without falling into any evil course
of existence. This is the effect of the fourth kind of instruction.
The foregoing instructions are unsurpassable. The World-honored
One’s knowledge and insight are comprehensive and his supernormal
powers are all-inclusive. Therefore, among all the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas of this world there is none who can ever equal the World-honored
One. How much less could any of them ever so ignominiously wish to
be superior to the World-honored One?
Again, there is another superior quality in the World-honored One’s
exhortation, namely, enabling the disciples to uphold the pure and genuine
moral disciplines. The set of moral disciplines are as follows: the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas should speak honestly, with no deception; they
always caution themselves to reduce the amount of sleep of their own
accord; they neither enage in ﬂattery nor speak falsehoods; they do not

126

Sutra 18: Happiness Caused by Oneself

engage in fortune-telling, whether it is for a good or bad omen; they
praise others but do not falsely praise others, in order to demonstrate
that they seek no beneﬁt from others; they practice meditation and cultivate wisdom; they exercise eloquence without hesitation; they concentrate on whatever they are engaged in, without distraction; and they
make effort without slackening.
The Tathāgata’s ediﬁcation is unsurpassable. The World-honored
One’s knowledge and insight are comprehensive and his supernormal
powers are all-inclusive. Therefore, among all the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas of this world there is none who can ever equal the World-honored
One. How much less could any of them ever so ignominiously wish to
be superior to the World-honored One?
Again, there is another superior quality in the World-honored One’s
exhortation, namely, imparting validation of the liberation accomplished
by others. The knowledge of validation concerning others’ realization
of liberation means that the World-honored One, reckoning various other
causal conditions, thinks to himself and validates that this person has
realized the state of stream-winner, or the state of once-returner, or the
state of nonreturner, or the state of arhat. This kind of validation is unsurpassable. The World-honored One’s knowledge and insight are comprehensive and his supernormal powers are all-inclusive. Therefore, among
all the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas of this world there is none who can
ever equal the World-honored One. How much less could any of them
ever so ignominiously wish to be superior to the World-honored One?
Again, there is another superior quality in the World-honored One’s
exhortation, namely, imparting the supernormal knowledge of one’s former states of existence. The śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas enter the state of
mental concentration through various methods, and while abiding in
that state they recollect the events of innumerable past worlds, extending
to one life, two lives, and so on up to hundreds of thousands of lives
through the period of the evolving and devolving cycles of eons. They
recollect, “I was born in a certain place, my name and family was Soand-so, my race and clan were such-and-such, my life span was suchand-such, my favored food and drink were such-and-such, my suffering
and happiness were such-and-such.” In reference to the characteristics

127

78b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

of their transmigration from this world to another world, from that world
to this world, and so on, they recollect innumerable past eons, always recollecting their origins passing through various existences as “This is the
state of ideation,” “This is the state of nonideation,” or “This is the state
of neither ideation nor nonideation,” and they thus recollect everything
and know everything. The Tathāgata’s power of this kind of knowledge
is unsurpassable. The World-honored One’s knowledge and insight are
comprehensive and his supernormal powers are all-inclusive. Therefore,
among all the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas of this world there is none who
can ever equal the World-honored One. How much less could any of them
ever so ignominiously wish to be superior to the World-honored One?
Again, there is another superior quality of the World-honored One’s
exhortation, namely, imparting supernormal vision. Supernormal vision
means that the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas enter the state of mental concentration through various methods, and while abiding in that state they
perceive various persons thoroughly and exhaustively as either dead or
alive, as either endowed with a good complexion or a bad one, as either
born into a good course of existence or a bad one, or as either endowed
with an agreeable ﬁgure or an ugly one, according to the kinds of actions
they undertook in life. For instance, some sentient beings committed evil
actions of body, speech, or mind, slandered the Buddhist śrāvaka arhats,
held upside-down (i.e., perverse) views, and upon their deaths they fell
into the three evil courses of existence. In contrast, other sentient beings
upheld good conduct of body, speech, and mind, did not slander the arhats,
and held right views, and upon their deaths they were born among the
gods, and with the supernormal power of vision they observe sentient
beings, perceiving and knowing them as they really are. This is unsurpassable. The World-honored One’s knowledge and insight are comprehensive and his supernormal powers are all-inclusive. Therefore, among
all the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas of this world there are none who can
ever equal the World-honored One. How much less could any of them
ever so ignominiously wish to be superior to the World-honored One?
Again, there is another superior quality of the World-honored One’s
exhortation, namely, imparting the supernormal power of the wise and
saintly disciples. In ordinary meaning, the supernormal power of swiftness

128

Sutra 18: Happiness Caused by Oneself

means that the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas enter into the state of mental
concentration through various methods, and while abiding in that state
they acquire innumerable extraordinary powers, such as multiplying
thier body into many at will and reversing them into a single body at
will; passing through stone walls without obstruction; sitting in the lotus
posture in midair, like a ﬂying bird; jumping into the ground as if into
water and lying on the surface of water as if on the ground; creating
ﬁery ﬂames and smoke like an actual bonﬁre; supporting the sun and
moon in one’s hand; or standing up so as to reach the heaven of the god
Brahmā. If these śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas boast of their acquisition of
these powers, we should say to them, “We do not deny that these supernormal powers exist. But we say that these are the inferior kinds [of
supernormal powers] performed by lowly, vulgar, ordinary people, and
not the superior kinds performed by the wise and saintly disciples. When
a bhikṣu, abiding in various worlds, is not corrupted despite being in
surroundings that induce attachment, and by discarding attachments or
distancing himself from them he carries out his practice properly, as
required, this is called the supernormal power of the wise and saintly
disciples. Also, when a bhikṣu is in an unpleasant environment but does
not feel indignation or hatred, instead discarding these [afﬂictive emotions], and carries out his practice properly, as required, this is called
the supernormal power of the wise and saintly disciples. In these various
environments they distance themselves from both attachment and nonattachment, practice to maintain their equilibrium, and concentrate on
doing so without fail. This is called the supernormal power of the wise
and saintly disciples.
Moreover, the World-honored One is endowed with the power of
exertion and valor and with great insight; despite [empirical] cognition
and awareness, he yet sees all with the insight of universal oneness.
Hence, he is called One Who Has Realized the Insight of Universal
Equality [of All that Exists]. Again, the World-honored One is neither
pleased with desires, nor with lowly, vulgar performances, nor does he
accept suffering and agony derived from wasteful toil. O World-honored
One, if one wishes to eradicate the evil inﬂuences of deﬁlements, he
should engage in contemplation of an object and of an act of examining,

129

78c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

increasing the sense of joy and bliss, and thus abide in the ﬁrst meditative
state of absorption. This method removes evil forces [such as avarice,
carnal desire, desire, evil, and wrong deeds]. Your Holiness [taught in
the discourses] the practice of contemplation of an object and of an act
of examining, the increase of the sense of joy and bliss while abiding
in the ﬁrst meditative state of absorption, and in similar manner [taught]
the second, third, and fourth meditative states of absorption, respectively.
Your Holiness is endowed with the power of exertion and valor and with
great insight, and despite [empirical] cognition and awareness, Your
Holiness sees all with the insight of universal oneness, and therefore is
called One Who Has Realized the Insight of Universal Equality [of All
that Exists].

The Buddha said to Śāriputra:

Suppose a heretic follower or someone of a different school comes to
ask a question of you, “Could the past śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas equal
the śramaṇa Gautama?’ How should you answer him? Again, if he questions you, “Could future śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas equal the śramaṇa
Gautama?” How should you answer him? Again, if he questions you,
“Can the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas in the present equal the śramaṇa
Gautama?” How should you answer him?

Śāriputra replied to the Buddha:

If someone asks me, “Were the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas of the past
the equals of the śramaṇa Gautama?”. I would answer, “Yes.” If he asks
me again, “Are the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas of the future the equals
of the śramaṇa Gautama?”, I swould answer, “Yes.” If he asks, “Are
the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas of the present the equals of the śramaṇa
Gautama?”, I would answer, “No.”

The Buddha again said to Śāriputra:
79a

The heretic brāhmaṇas may also ask you, “Why do you assert ‘Yes, there
was or there will be’ in one case and ‘No, there is not’ in another case?”

Śāriputra replied to the Buddha:

130

Sutra 18: Happiness Caused by Oneself

I would answer, “The past buddhas who were perfectly enlightened are
equal with the Tathāgata of the present time. The future buddhas who
will be perfectly enlightened will also be equal with the Tathāgata of
the present. I have learned from the Buddha himself that despite His
Holiness’ wishes and efforts, the perfectly enlightened Buddha of the
present time has not been able to introduce any other equally [qualiﬁed]
buddha into this world.” O World-honored One, should this answer,
based on my learning, on the Dharma, and in accordance with the
Dharma, be regarded as appropriate, sir?

The Buddha replied:

This answer of yours is not wrong on the basis of the Dharma and according to the Dharma. Why is this so? Because the past and future buddhas,
who were and will be perfectly enlightened, are equal with me, but it is
not possible to have a second perfectly enlightened buddha appear in
this present world.

At that time, the venerable Udāyin was standing behind the World-honored
One, fanning him. The Buddha said to Udāyin:

O Udāyin, you should contemplate the discipline of desiring less and
being satisﬁed with less. Now, because I have great supernormal power
and splendor, I desire less and am satisﬁed with less, and I am quite content, having no desire to be fulﬁlled. O Udāyin, if any of the śramaṇas
or brāhmaṇas exert themselves to accomplish this particular discipline
and realize it, they will be entitled to raise their own banner and declare
to all four quarters of the world, “I, the Tathāgata, have realized the discipline of desiring less and being satisﬁed with less. As I observe the
Tathāgata’s discipline of desiring less and being satisﬁed with less, he
has great supernormal power and splendor, on the basis of which he is
free from desire.”

At that time, Udāyin rearranged his outer robe, exposing his right shoulder,
and kneeling down with his right knee on the ground, holding both palms
together respectfully, he said to the Buddha:

131

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

It is marvelous, sir, O World-honored One, there is hardly anyone who,
like the World-honored One, desires less and is satisﬁed with less. O
World-honored One, Your Holiness has little desire [precisely] because
of the great supernormal power and splendor that you command. If any
of the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas exercise exertion and realize this particular
principle, they are entitled to raise their own banner and declare to all four
quarters of the world, “From now on the World-honored One is endowed
with the discipline of desiring less and being satisﬁed with less.”
O Śāriputra, you should exhort this particular discipline frequently
for the sake of the bhikṣus, bhikṣuṇīs, laymen (upāsakas), and laywomen
(upāsikās). If any of them has doubt about the Buddha, Dharma, and
Sangha or about the path of practice, they should listen to the foregoing
and thereby become free from entanglement in the net of such doubts.

At that time, the World-honored One said to Śāriputra:

You should exhort this particular discipline frequently for the sake of the
bhikṣus, bhikṣuṇīs, laymen, and laywomen.Why? If any of them has
doubt about the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha or about the path of practice,
he should be able to resolve his doubt by listening to what you exhort.

Śāriputra replied, “Yes, sir, World-honored One.”
Thereupon, Śāriputra often exhorted the foregoing for the sake of the
bhikṣus, bhikṣuṇīs, laymen, and laywomen. Since the words of his exhortation
were pure and genuine, he called his exhortation the “Sutra of Purity.” Having
listened to the Buddha’s exhortation, Śāriputra was delighted, respectfully
received the doctrine, and carried it out.
[End of Sutra 18: Happiness Caused by Oneself]

132

Sutra 19

A Great Assembly

(Dīgha Nikāya 20: Mahāsamaya Suttanta)
Thus have I heard. At one time, the Buddha was staying in the forest of
Kapilavastu in the Śākya country, accompanied by an assembly of ﬁve hundred
bhikṣus. All of these disciples were arhats, without exception. Heavenly
spirits came from all directions (lit., “ten directions”) and assembled there
to pay their respects to the Tathāgata and the assembly of bhikṣus. The four
gods of Śuddhāvāsa Heaven then thought to themselves:

The World-honored One is now staying in the forest of Kapilavastu in the
Śākya country, accompanied by an assembly of ﬁve hundred bhikṣus, all
of whom are arhats, without exception. All the heavenly spirits of the ten
directions also came to assemble and pay homage to the Buddha and the
assembly of bhikṣus. Let us now also go to the place of the World-honored
One and each praise the Tathāgata by composing verses.

Thereupon, the four gods of Śuddhāvāsa Heaven descended in an instant,
as quickly as the time it takes for a wrestler to bend and stretch out his arm,
to the forest of Kapilavastu in the Śākya country.
At that time, having reached the place, the four Śuddhāvāsa gods honored
the Buddha by bowing their foreheads to his feet, and stood to one side. One
of the Śuddhāvāsa gods then at once composed a verse before the Buddha,
praising him:
At the great assembly on this day,
All the heavenly spirits have come to assemble here,
For the sake of the Dharma and to pay homage
To this unsurpassed assembly.

Having recited this verse, the god withdrew to one side and remained
standing. Another Śuddhāvāsa god then composed a verse, reciting:

133

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

Each bhikṣu observes a host of deﬁlements,
And singlemindedly makes effort to prevent evil inﬂuences.
Desire is like an ocean that swallows all ﬂows of rivers,
The wise thus defends all of his senses.

Having recited this verse, the god withdrew to one side and remained
standing. The third Śuddhāvāsa god then composed a verse, reciting:
Terminating the deﬁlements and ﬂattening the pits of attachment,
Filling in the ditches of ignorance,
Thus abiding on the ground of purity and evenness,
Just as when controlling an elephant.

Having recited this verse, the god withdrew to one side and remained
standing. The fourth Śuddhāvāsa god then composed a verse, reciting:
Whoever has taken refuge in the Buddha
Will never fall into an evil course of existence.
Having abandoned the human body,
He will acquire the heavenly body of purity.

79c

When the four Śuddhāvāsa gods had completed their verses of praise, the
Buddha acknowledged them accordingly. They again honored the Buddha
by bowing their foreheads to his feet, and, after circumambulating him three
times, they suddenly disappeared.
Soon after the disappearance of the gods, the Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

Now the heavenly gods have assembled. Those spirits of the ten directions
have also assembled here in great numbers to pay respect to the Tathāgata
and the assembly of bhikṣus. O bhikṣus, the past buddhas, arhats, perfectly
enlightened ones also attracted heavenly beings to their assemblies in
like manner, just as today this assembly has attracted them to come forth
into my presence. The future buddhas, arhats, perfectly enlightened ones
will also attract heavenly beings to their assemblies in like manner, just
as today this assembly has attracted them to come forth into my presence.
O bhikṣus, now many heavenly gods have come to assemble, and the
spirits of the ten directions have also come here to pay their respect to

134

Sutra 19: A Great Assembly

the Tathāgata and the assembly of bhikṣus. Therefore, I shall call the
names of the gods who are present in verse. The bhikṣus should know:
Many yakṣa spirits of the earth
Are hidden in the hills and valleys,
Appearing with the aura of authority,
Wearing white garments, clean and spotless.
Having been informed of this news,
All the gods are descending from the Brahmā heaven.
I shall now call their names in due order without error,
The host of gods who are now coming.
O bhikṣus, you should know that
The ordinary people of the world,
Even one out of hundred, cannot see them.
Why can’t they see these gods?
Looking at the host of seventy thousand yakṣa spirits,
Or that of one hundred thousand spirits,
They see no one even in one direction.
How much less could they see
All the spirits throughout the world?

The god of the earth is accompanied by seven thousand earth yakṣa spirits
of several species. Endowed with supernormal powers, brilliant light, and
the colors of their complexions and features, bearing renowned names,
they have all come to this forest where the assembly of bhikṣus is held.
There is the god of the Snow Mountains (Himalayas), accompanied by
six thousand yakṣa spirits of several species. Endowed with supernormal
powers, brilliant light, all the colors of their complexions and features,
bearing renowned names, with hearts of delight and joy they have all come
to this forest where the assembly of bhikṣus is held. There is the god of
Mt. Śairagiri, accompanied by three thousand yakṣa spirits of several
species. Endowed with supernormal powers, brilliant light, and the colors
of their complexions and features, bearing renowned names, with hearts
of delight and joy, they have all come to this forest where the assembly
of the bhikṣus is held. These gods and their accompanying sixteen thousands

135

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

yakṣa spirits of several species, all of them endowed with supernormal
powers, brilliant light, and the colors of their complexions and features,
bearing renowned names, with hearts of delight and joy they have all
come to this forest where the assembly of bhikṣus is held.
There is also the god Vaiśyamitra, residing in the country of Aśvaka,
accompanied by ﬁve hundred yakṣa spirits, all equally endowed with
supernormal powers and the aura of authority. There is also the god
Kumbhīra, residing on the hill called Vepulla near the city of Rājagṛha,
accompanied by innumerable yakṣa spirits; they have all come to pay
respect and are stationed around the assembly. Again, in the eastern
quarter of the heaven there is the guardian god Dhṛtarāṣṭra, overseeing
the gandharva demigods, endowed with a great splendor; he has ninetyone sons, all of whom are named Indra and are endowed with supernormal powers without exception. In the southern quarter of the heaven
there is the guardian god Virūḍhaka, overseeing many nāga kings,
endowed with a great splendor; he has ninety-one sons, all of whom are
called Indra and are endowed with supernormal powers without exception. In the western quarter of the heaven there is the guardian god
Virūpākṣa, overseeing the kumbhāṇḍa demigods, endowed with a great
splendor; he has ninety-one sons, all of whom are called Indra and
endowed with supernormal powers. In the northern quarter of the heaven
there is the guardian god Vaiśravaṇa, overseeing the yakṣa spirits,
endowed with great splendor; he has ninety-one sons, all of whom are
called Indra and endowed with supernormal powers. These four guardian
gods who sustain the world are replete with splendor. With brilliant illumination, they have all come to the forest of Kapilavastu.

80a

At that time, the World-honored One, wishing to rid their minds of subtle,
deceptive, and unreal nature, invoked the following esoteric passages for
incantation (dhāraṇī):
mo jiu lou luo mo jiu lou luo / pi lou luo pi lou luo / zhan tuo na jia mo
shi zhi / jia ni yan dou / ni yan dou po na lu / wu hu nu nu / zhu / ti po
su mu / mo tou luo / zhi tuo luo si na / jian ta po / na luo zhu du ni sha /
shi he / wu lian tuo luo / bi po mi duo luo shu chen tuo luo / na lü ni he /
dou fou lou / shu zhi ji po //

136

Sutra 19: A Great Assembly

In this manner, the guardian gods, the gandharva demigods, and the
rākṣasa spirits, all equally endowed with supernormal powers, brilliant light,
and the colors of their complexions and features, bearing renowned names,
with hearts of delight and joy have come to the forest where the assembly
of bhikṣus is held. At that time, the World-honored One again invoked the
following esoteric incantation (dhāraṇī):

a xi / na tuo se / na tou / pi she li sha he / dai cha she po ti / ti tou lai zha / ti
po sha he / ruo li ya / jia pi luo / she po na jia / a tuo na jia mo / tian ti
jia / yi luo po zha / mo he na jia / pi mo na jia duo / tuo jia tuo yü / na jia
luo du / po he sha he / cha ji ti / po ti luo ti / po ti luo ti/ pi mei ta ji he /
pi he si po ning / a po po si / zhi duo luo / su he ni na / qiu si duo / a po
yu / na jia luo qu a si / xiu ba luo / sa ti nu a jia / fo to sa / shi luo ning /
po ya you luo tou po yan lou / su pan tu fo tou / she luo du / jia lei lou //

The World-honored One then invoked the following esoteric incantation
for the sake of the asura demigods:

qi to / ba du he di / san wu ti / a xiu luo a shi to / po yan di / po san po
si / yi di a to / ti po / mo tian di / jia li miao / mo he bi mo a xiu luo to na
bi luo to bi mo zhi dou lou xiu zhi di li / po luo he li wu yi lian na po /
she li a xi / ba li fu duo luo na / sa bi bi luo ya na na mi / sa na mi di /
po li xi ruo / luo ya ba dou lou yi he a po luo mi san / mo you yi / tuo na /
ba to ruo pi qiu na san mi di ni ba //

The World-honored One then invoked the following incantation for the
sake of the various heavenly gods:
a fu / ti po bi li xi jie / ti yü / po you / duo to to ba lou du ba lou ni / shi
ti su mi / ya she a tou / mi duo luo po / jie luo na yi po a luo ti po / mo
tian di yü / to she ti she / jie yü / sa bi / na nan duo luo po ba na / yi di
pan ta hou di ban na pan ta / ya she bi du / mu to po na a xi jian ta / pi
qiu na po di po ni / bi nu ti bu she jie li / a xi di yong mi / na cha ti li fu
luo xi ji ta a to man to luo po luo / bi zhan ta su po ni xiao ti po / a to
zhan to / fu luo chi zhi ta / su li ya su po ni xiao ti po a to su ti ya / fu
luo shi ta / mo jia to po su yin du lü a tou shi jiu fu luo ta lu / shu jia jia
luo mo luo na a ta / bi mo ni po / wu po ti ji he / po luo / luo mi a ni/ mu

137

80b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

81a

he bi po / luo mi a ni / sa to mo duo a he li mi sha a ni po zhou du / tan
nu a lu you ti she a xi ba sha / she mo / mo he she mo / mo du sha a / mo
du shu duo mo / qi to bo dou li a / to mo du ba tou li a xi a luo ye ti po a
to li to ye po si / bo luo mo he bo luo a to ti po mo tian di ye / cha mo
dou lü to / ye mo / jia sha ni a / ni / lan bi / lan bi zhe ti / shu ti na mo yi
li / nian mo luo ti / a to xi bo luo nian mi ta / a xi ti po ti po du lan ti / a
ji / shi fu bo / mo a li to lü ya / wu mo fu fu ni po si yuan zhe po to mu /
a zhou to / a ni shu dou tan ya du / a tou a li bi she men yi li //

These are the sixty kinds of gods. The World-honored One then invoked
the following incantation for the sake of sixty-eight brāhmaṇas who excel
in the ﬁve kinds of supernormal powers:
luo ya li she ya a xi jian ta po mo jia pi luo ba dou bi di du du a tou sha
mu sa ti yang shi pi di mou ni a tou bi li ya cha jia shi li she po he ruo
du a tou fan mo ti po ti na po bi di mou ni a tou jiu sa li yi ni lu mo du
li yang shi luo ye ban du a lou ming yuan tou mo he luo ye a jiu to lou
yi du a tou lu bi ju sa li a lou jia ling yi jia yi luo tan xi zui pi fu ye fu
du lü li li xian to fu a tou ti na jia pi po / he yi jia ya luo ye duo to a jia
du po luo man to du jia mu luo ye a tou yin to luo lou mi jia fu to lu mu
mo jia xi a chi shang qu bi yü a tou xi lan ruo jia pi bi li mi yü li duo ta
a jia du a xi po hao luo zi mi du lü duo to a jia duo po si fo li shou to
luo luo yü duo to a jia duo yi li ya cha mo he luo yü xian a fu duo to a
jia duo ban du po yü po li di chi a luo yü duo to a jia duo wu a lan mo
he luo yü bian bei po li mo li shu po xi ta na mo a pan ti ku mo li luo yü
a ju si li tuo na po di a tou shi bi luo yü shi yi ni mi ni mo he luo yü fu
po lou duo tuo a jia du po tuo po li mo he luo yü ju sa li mo ti shu shi
han ti shan po li luo yü xiu tuo luo lou duo ta a jia du a he yin tou lou
a tou mo luo yü yü su li yü ta bi di fu a he hi li si a tou heng a ya lou po
luo mu cha ya mu a yi du a tou yi mo ya she pi na po cha mo luo yü he
li jian du yü pi du po zhi yü shi shu bo na lu mo su luo yü ya ci duo yu
xi lan ruo su yu xi lan ruo su pan na bi chou du zhi ye shu luo she bo
luo bi tuo yü tuo po he yi po he po po mou sha he sha tan fu she ta she
fa du sha li luo tuo na mo ban qi shu duo duo luo jian ta po sha he po
sa duo ti su bi luo yü a xi jian shu pi qiu san mi di po ni di po ni //

81b

138

Sutra 19: A Great Assembly

At that time there were also one thousand and ﬁfty brāhmaṇas, for whom
the World-honored One again invoked the [same] incantation. There was a
Brahmā god of the primary rank (subrahmā paramārtha) and his retainer gods,
are endowed with supernormal powers. There was a Brahmā youth, Tiṣya by
name, endowed with a great supernormal power. Again, one hundred thousand
lords of the Brahmā worlds, each surrounded by his retainers, have come [to
that forest]. Finally, the supreme lord Brahmā, who presides over the thousand
Brahmā worlds, having observed the assembly of the multitude around the
World-honored One, also descended to that forest, accompanied by his retainers.
At that time, the Evil One [Māra], having observed the assembly of the
multitude around the World-honored One, thought with malicious intent, “I
will take my army of demons and destroy all the members of that assembly
until all are driven away.”
At once [Māra] commanded the four divisions of his army and, beating
the chariot with his own hands and shouting in a thunderous voice that shook
everywhere, rushed toward the forest. Anyone seeing this would certainly
be terriﬁed. Releasing a great rainstorm with thunder and lightning, shaking
the entire world, he approached the forest of Kapilavastu and completely
surrounded the assembly.
The Buddha then said to the bhikṣus in the assembly, “O bhikṣus, you
should know that the lord Evil One [Māra] and his retainers are approaching
with malicious intent.” He then continued in verse:
All of you, now it is time
To establish the Buddha’s Dharma ﬁrmly,
With respect and obedience to the teaching,
You should destroy the multitude of evil ones,
Just as an elephant strikes the ﬂower bush.
Concentrate your minds, without slackening,
With pure and genuine moral discipline,
Keep your mind ﬁxed, contemplate your thoughts, and
Thereby protect the ﬁrm intent of your minds.
If you do not slacken [your efforts] within the right Dharma,
You will cross over the ground of old age and death and
Eradicate the origin of all suffering forever.

139

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

O dear disciples, having listened to my words,
You should exert yourself further.
Transcend desires even without moving a hair toward them.
This assembly will become most distinguished, and
Acquire great insight, and name and reputation.
With disciples as valiant [as you are],
This assembly will be respected and revered
By the multitude of all beings.

At that time, many gods and spirits, including the ﬁve sages with supernormal powers, who had assembled in the forest of Kapilavastu, wondered
at the strange events caused by the evil ones. When the Buddha exhorted
this doctrine, the eighty-four thousand gods of the heavens removed all their
deﬁlements and thus acquired genuine insight into the nature of the Dharma.
The devas, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and
mahoragas, all human and nonhuman beings, having listened to the exhortation, were delighted and respectfully received the teaching.
[End of Sutra 19: A Great Assembly]

140

Sutra 20

Ambaṭṭha

(Dīgha Nikāya 3: Ambaṭṭha Suttanta)
Thus have I heard. At one time, the Buddha was sojourning in the country
of Kauśala, accompanied by one thousand two hundred and ﬁfty bhikṣus.
On reaching the brāhmaṇa village called Icchānaṅkala, the Buddha and his
disciples settled in the Icchānaṅkala Grove for an overnight stay.
At that time, a brāhmaṇa, Puṣkarasārin by name, resided in the village of
Puṣkarasvādi. The village was a large and prosperous one. It had been granted
by King Prasenajit to the brāhmaṇa Puṣkarasārin as his ﬁef, and was exempt
from tax collection. The brāhmaṇa Puṣkarasārin had been born into a pure
matrimonial lineage of seven generations and was never slighted by anyone
in society. He was thoroughly versed in the [Vedas,] the three ancient collections
of hymns, and had detailed knowledge of the various brāhmaṇa scriptures.
He was also well trained in the physiognomy of a great person, the sacriﬁcial
rites, and the ceremonial proceedings. He had ﬁve hundred student disciples
and never tired of teaching them. His most able student, who was called
Ambaṭṭha, had also been born in a pure matrimonial lineage of seven generations and was never slighted by anyone in society. He too was thoroughly
versed in the three [Vedas] and well trained in the physiognomy of a great
person, the sacriﬁcial rites, and the ceremonial proceedings, and, [like his
teacher,] he had ﬁve hundred student disciples whom he never tired of teaching.
[In short,] in every way he equaled his teacher.
The brāhmaṇa Puṣkarasārin then happened to hear the following:

The śramaṇa Gautama, son of the Śākya clan, renounced domestic life
to enter religious practice and realized the goal of enlightenment, and
he has now come to the brāhmaṇa village called Icchānaṅkala in Kauśala
accompanied by one thousand two hundred and ﬁfty bhikṣus. They are
staying in the Ichhānaṅkala Grove for the night. Gautama is renowned
everywhere with his excellent name as the Tathāgata and is endowed
141

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

with the ten titles, such as One Liberated from Attachment (Arhat), Perfectly Enlightened One, and so on. He has surpassed all the gods and
humans, the evil ones and their lord [Māra], as well as all śramaṇas and
brāhmaṇas, and has himself experienced [ultimate liberation] directly
and teaches his religious path to others. His teaching, whether at the
beginning, the middle, or the end, is endowed with real meaning and
essentials and is harmoniously balanced with the pure and genuine practice of austerity. Everyone should go see this kind of superior person.

The brāhmaṇa Pokkharasādi thought to himself:

I would rather go to see the śramaṇa Gautama now. It is probably because
he is endowed with the thirty-two eminent marks characteristic of a
superior person that his name has become renowned. I should examine
if all this is true by examining the actual person. I might see some characteristics that are unique to the enlightened.

Again, he thought to himself:

Now, my best disciple Ambaṭṭha was born in a pure matrimonial lineage
of seven generations and is never slighted by anyone in society. He is
thoroughly versed in the three [Vedas] and has detailed knowledge of
the various brāhmaṇa scriptures. He is also well trained in the physiognomy of a great person, the sacriﬁcial rites, and the ceremonial proceedings. I must ask this disciple, who alone will be able to identify the marks
of a buddha, to go see Gautama.

82b

He thus instructed Ambaṭṭha, “Go see Gautama and examine whether or
not it is true that he is endowed with the thirty-two eminent marks of a great
person.”
Ambaṭṭha then asked his teacher, “With what criteria should I investigate
the marks of Gautama to know whether he is really endowed with them, sir?”
The teacher then informed him:
I will now tell you. If a person is endowed with the thirty-two eminent
marks characteristic of a great person, there should be no doubt about
his destiny, such that he will necessarily take either of two careers in
life. If he remains in the householder’s career, he becomes a universal

142

Sutra 20: Ambaṭṭha

ruler who turns the sacred wheel (cakravartin); he will rule over all four
quarters of the earth, he will rule the realm of his dominion according
to the law, govern the people and material wealth, and he will be well
endowed with the seven kinds of treasures: (1) the golden heavenly
wheel, (2) the elephant treasure, (3) the horse treasure, (4) the divine
gem treasure, (5) the jadelike queen treasure, (6) the gentleman householder treasure, and (7) the military commander treasure. This ruler will
have a thousand sons who are all valiant, sagacious, and victorious over
enemies even without [engaging in a] military campaign. With universal
peace prevailing, there will be no threat to the populace or to their wealth
and property. If, however, he becomes dissatisﬁed with household life
and enters the path of religion, forsaking domestic life, he will become
the Tathāgata, Arhat, Perfectly Enlightened One, endowed with the ten
supreme titles. Applying this [major] criterion, you may examine whether
or not Gautama's reputation is really true.

Ambaṭṭha then, with this instruction from his teacher, readied his carriage
and, accompanied by his ﬁve hundred students, he left the village early in
the morning, heading toward the Icchānaṅkala Grove. On reaching the forest
he dismounted from the carriage and proceeded on foot to the place of the
World-honored One. Whenever the Buddha sat down Ambaṭṭha stood up,
while whenever the Buddha stood up, he took his seat. In this manner the
two carried out their debate on the meaning and the truth.
The Buddha spoke to Ambaṭṭha the Mānava [calling him a student], “Do
you debate with your senior colleagues, teachers, and renowned brāhmaṇas
in this manner?”
Mānava said to the Buddha, “What is this question?”
The Buddha said to Mānava:

Whenever I sit down, you stand up, while when I stand up, you sit down.
Behaving in this manner [constantly], you debate with me. Is this how
your teacher discusses things with you?

Mānava answered the Buddha:

Speaking of our brāhmaṇa manner, I say that if one sits down, the other
also sits down. If one stands up, the other also stands up. If one lies

143

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

down, the other also lies down. But these days the śramaṇas look physically emaciated, live without a wife, are vulgar and inferior, and learn
only the manner of those who are dark and ignorant. When I debate with
these people, I do not care whether I am sitting or standing.

82c

At that moment, the World-honored One said to him, “Dear fellow, your
studentship (Mānava) has not become yet civilized.”
When Mānava heard the words “Dear fellow” and “not yet civilized,”
spoken by the World-honored One, he felt infuriated and accused the Buddha,
“The Śākya clansmen are inclined toward malice and do not know proper
manners.”
The Buddha responded to Mānava, “My dear fellow, why can’t the Śākya
clansmen surpass you?”
Mānava replied:
Some years ago I was visiting the country of Kapilavastu of the Śākyas,
for some minor business of my teacher. At that time, many clansmen had
assembled in their meeting hall for some purpose. Though they noticed
me approaching them, they treated me disrespectfully and dismissively.
They neither paid me proper courtesy nor exchanged a mutual greeting.

The Buddha said to Mānava:

Those Śākya clansmen were in their home country, enjoying their freedom
in the pursuit of fun. Just as when wild birds return to their nests in the
forest, they can be free, ﬂying in and out of their nests, so too, can’t the
Śākya clansmen behave as freely as they wish in their pursuit of fun and
play?

Mānava said to the Buddha:

There are four different social classes, namely: the kṣatriyas (nobles),
the brāhmaṇas (priests), the vaiśyas (householders), and the śūdras (servants). Although people of [the three other castes] always treat brāhmaṇas
with respect, reverence, and service, the Śākya clansmen do not conform
this general norm of society. The sons of the Śākya are lowly, like menial
workers, vulgar and inferior, and they do not pay reverence to brāhmaṇas.

144

Sutra 20: Ambaṭṭha

At that moment, the World-honored One quietly thought to himself:
This Mānava utters derogatory and abusive words repeatedly, in the way
that lowly servants speak. I should now tell him the real origin of his
status and thereby reform him to become more civilized.

The Buddha then asked Mānava, “What is your familial name?”
He replied, “My family is Kaṅhāyana.”23
The Buddha said to Mānava, “If that is your family name, then your ancestors must be of the caste of servants (śūdra) under the Śākya ancestors.”
At that moment, the ﬁve hundred students of Mānava loudly objected to
the Buddha:

You dare not to say such a thing as that our teacher Mānava is of the
descendant of the śūdras who served the Śākya ancestors. Why? Mānava
is the son of a pure family lineage, endowed with superior facial featurse
and complexion, with excellent rhetorical skill, extensive knowledge,
well learned, and capable of arguing back and forth with Gautama.

At that moment, the World-honored One said to the ﬁve hundred students
of Mānava:

If your teacher is not endowed with all [the qualities] you assert about
him, I will leave him alone and debate with all of you instead. If your
teacher is truly endowed with all [the qualities] that you have asserted
about him, you should remain quiet and I will continue to debate with
your teacher.

The ﬁve hundred students then replied to the Buddha, “Yes, sir. We will
remain quiet and listen to your debate with our teacher.” They then all fell
silent.
Thereupon, the World-honored One said to Ambaṭṭa:

Once in the immemorial past, there was a king, Okkāka24 by name. The
king had four sons, Okkāmukha, Hatthinīya, Karaṇḍu, and Sīnipura.
These four princes were exiled by the king due to some minor offense,
and then traveled to the southern foothills of the Himalayas and abided
in the forest of sākasaṇḍa trees. The queen mothers of these four princes

145

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

and their families all yearned for them. They met to discuss the matter
and then went to King Okkāka, requesting his permission [to go visit
their sons], “Your majesty, it has been a long time since we were separated
from the four princes. We wish to visit them and look after them, sir.”
The king replied, “If you wish to do so, go ahead.”
Having received the king’s permission, the mothers and their relations
at once traveled to the southern foothills of the Himalayas and reached
the residence of the four princes. The mothers proposed [to one another],
“I will give my daughter to your son. Give your daughter to my son,”
and thus they arranged for the princes to marry mutually with their
daughters. Later on, [as a result of these marriages] many sons were
born, having handsome features and good complexions.
When it was reported to King Okkāka that the mothers of the four
princes had gotten them all married with their daughters, who had then
given birth to many handsome sons, he was delighted, saying:

83a

They are truly sons of the Śākya, sons who are truly capable. They
have [successfully] come into existence through their own strength.
They should be called Śākya (“Capable”).25

King Okkāka was thus an ancestor of the Śākya clansmen. The king
wore a navy-blue garment, called “Direction” or “Pointer,” and was
endowed with handsome features and complexion. He impregnated a
brāhmaṇa woman. When a son, Mānava (i.e., son of Manu) was born,
the child immediately said to his brāhmaṇa mother and father, “Please
bathe me and cleanse the ﬁlth from me. When I grow up I shall duly
repay my indebtedness to you.”
Since the child was able to speak immediately after his birth, he was
called “Voicing King.” It was just as today, if a newborn infant speaks at
the moment of birth, people are fearful of the child and call him “Terrifying”
[as if he were demon or goblin, and so on.] Since he spoke [immediately
after his birth] the newborn child was named “Voicing King,” and from
that time onward future generations of his brāhmaṇa lineage made it their
familial name.

The Buddha then said to Mānava, “Haven’t you already heard from your

146

Sutra 20: Ambaṭṭha

senior teachers and great brāhmaṇas this story about the origin of your
family name?”
Mānava, however, remained silent and did not answer. The Buddha asked
him the same question but [again] he did not respond. Before asking him for
the third time, the Buddha said to Mānava:
I am about to ask the same question for a third time. You should promptly
reply to me. If not, the yakṣa spirits (vajira-pāṇin), who ﬂank me on
both sides, holding golden pestles in their hands, stand ready to smash
your head into seven pieces.

The yakṣa spirits then raised their golden pestles and stood up in midair
over Mānava’s head. They were ready to smash his head with their pestles
if Mānava did not answer promptly.
The Buddha said to Mānava,“Please look up to see [the yakṣas,” and he
saw the yakṣa spirits in midair, raising their weapons. Terriﬁed, with his hair
standing on end, Mānava stood up and moved to sit closer to the World-honored One for refuge. He then asked the World-honored One for help and protection, promising “I will answer the question, sir.”
The Buddha at once asked him again, “Haven’t you already heard this
story about the origin of your familial name from your senior teachers and
great brāhmaṇas?”
Mānava replied, “Yes, sir. I have heard that these things once happened,
and I believe it, sir.”
Mānava’s ﬁve hundred students then said to each other in loud voices:
Ambaṭṭha, our teacher, is really a descendant of the śūdras that served
the Śākya clans. What the śramaṇa Gautama said is true. We are guilty
of committing rudeness out of our [baseless] conceit.

At that moment, the World-honored One thought to himself:

These ﬁve hundred students will surely regard Ambaṭṭha as a descendant
of slaves later on. I may have to create an expediency to erase the name
śūdra from their minds.

He then said to them:

147

83b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

All of you, you should not regard your teacher [Ambaṭṭha] to be the
descendant of slaves. Why? Because his forefather was a brāhmaṇa and
a great sage, endowed with great authority and power. He revolted against
King Okkāka and requested one of his princesses as his wife, and because
of the king’s fear the princess was granted to him as his wife.

With these words, the Buddha helped Ambaṭṭha to escape the name śūdra.
The World-honored One then continued:

What do you think, O Mānava? If a woman is the daughter of a true kṣatriya lineage of seven generations, she should never be slighted by people
in society. If she is granted to a brāhmaṇa as his wife and bears a child,
O Mānava, and if this child is handsome and of fair complexion, can he
then join the class of the kṣatriyas, receive a seat and water from the
hands of a brāhmaṇa [out of respect], and learn to recite the laws of the
kṣatriya duties?

[Ambaṭṭha] replied, “No, sir.”
[The Buddha continued,] “Can this child inherit his father’s wealth and
business?
[Ambaṭṭha answered, “No, sir.”
[The Buddha again continued,] “Can he take over his father’s livelihood?”
[Ambaṭṭha again replied,] “No, sir.”
The Buddha then said:
What do you think, O Mānava? If a woman is a daughter of a true brāhmaṇa lineage of seven generations, she should never be slighted by
people in society. If she is granted to a kṣatriya as wife and bears a child,
and if this child is handsome with fair complexion, can he join the class
of the brāhmaṇas and receive a seat and water from the hands of a brāhmaṇa [out of respect]?

Ambaṭṭha replied, “Yes, sir.”
[The Buddha continued,] “Can he learn to recite the duties of a brāhmaṇa,
inherit his father’s wealth, and succeed his father’s livelihood?”
[Ambaṭṭha replied,] “Yes, sir.”
[The Buddha further pressed Ambaṭṭha:]

148

Sutra 20: Ambaṭṭha

What do you think, O Mānava? If a brāhmaṇa dislikes being a brāhmaṇa
and tries to join the kṣatriyas, can he sit and stand among them, and
receive water and recite the rules of the kṣatriya duties?

[Ambaṭṭha replied,] “No, sir.”
[The Buddha continued,] “Can he inherit his father’s wealth and succeed
the same livelihood?”
[Ambaṭṭha again replied,] “No, sir.”
[The Buddha further pressed Ambaṭṭha:]

If a kṣatriya dislikes being a kṣatriya and tries to join the brāhmaṇas,
can he sit and stand among them and receive water, recite the laws of
the brāhmaṇa duties, inherit his father’s wealth, and take over the same
livelihood?

[Ambaṭṭha again replied,] “Yes, sir.”
[The Buddha concluded:]

Because of these laws, O Mānava, of all women, a kṣatriya woman is
superior, and of all men, a kṣatriya man is superior. It is not the brāhmaṇa
[class that is highest]. The god Brahmā himself made a verse to this
effect:
The kṣatriya is superior among all beings;
If his lineage is pure and genuine, and
Endowed with insight and harmonious practice,
He is the highest among all the gods and humans.

The Buddha said to Mānava:

This verse composed by Brahmā is a good theory and not wrong. I am
a good example. Why? Because I now also assert this same theory as
Tathāgata, Arhat, Perfectly Enlightened One:
The kṣatriya is superior among all beings;
If his lineage is pure and genuine, and
Endowed with insight and harmonious practice,
He is the highest among all the gods and humans.

83c

149

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

Mānava said to the Buddha, “O Gautama, who is this ‘unsurpassed one
harmoniously endowed with insight and practice’?”
The Buddha said to Mānava, “Listen attentively. You should retain and
consider well what I will now explain for your sake.”
[Ambaṭṭha replied,] “Yes, sir. I shall listen intently.”
The Buddha said to Mānava:

If a tathāgata (“one perfected in the speech of reality”) appears into this
world, he should be called [the following ten epithets]: (1) Arhat), (2)
Perfectly Enlightened One, (3) Harmoniously Endowed with Insight
and Practice, (4) Well-gone One, one who has transcended [and will not
return to the cycle of samsara], (5) Knower of the Human World, (6)
Unrivaled Leader, (7) Trainer of Human Religiosity, (8) Teacher of Gods
and Humans, (9) Enlightened One, and (10) World-honored One.
Among all the gods, humans, śramaṇas, brāhmaṇas, heavenly
guardian gods, evil ones, and the lord Brahmā, he is the only one who
is enlightened by himself and has directly experienced it. When he
teaches the Dharma to people his words are good at the beginning of
his speech, good in the middle of his speech, and also good at the end
of his speech, all equally endowed with true meaning and real essence,
able to motivate the audience toward pure and genuine practices.
If householders and their children, as well as others of different social
classes, wish to listen to the right Dharma, the Tathāgata will motivate
them to give rise to tranquil faith in their hearts. With serene faith in the
Dharma, they may thus reﬂect, “Because I have been in the householder’s
life until now, I am bound to my family to support my wife and children.
In this situation I cannot carry out the required practice of pure and genuine austerity. I should now shave my hair and beard, don the three mendicant robes, and join the practice of the path by forsaking domestic
life.” Later he renounces his household and wealth, dissociates himself
from his family and relations, shaves his hair and beard, and, wearing
the three robes, he renounces domestic life in order to join the practice
of the path.
Like fully ordained bhikṣus, he forsakes all physical adornment and
adheres to the following set of precepts: (1) With a vow not to injure

150

Sutra 20: Ambaṭṭha

sentient beings, one forsakes carrying a knife or stick, and, having a
sense of shame [about malice, etc.], he practices compassion toward all
beings. This is called the precept of abstinence from taking life. (2) Forsaking the idea to take what is not given, he eradicates thoughts of theft
altogether. His mind is pure and genuine, free from the slightest thought
of theft, even privately. This is called the precept of abstinence from
taking what is not given. (3) Forsaking sexual desire, he concentrates
his mind on the genuine practice of austerity with effort. He is not affected
by desire and abides in purity. This is called the precept of abstinence
from sexual misconduct. (4) Forsaking false words, he upholds the principle of sincerity, neither lying to others nor deceiving them. This is
called the precept of abstinence from speaking falsehoosd. (5) Forsaking
duplicitous speech, even if he hears something from someone else he
never conveys it to another person. Nor does he convey anything about
what he hears from the latter to the former. If both are mutually estranged,
he tries to help them reconcile [their differences] and thereby harmonize
their relationship. Whatever he speaks is harmonious, agreeable, and
well timed. This is called the precept of abstinence from duplicitious
speech. (6) Forsaking using abusive, harsh sppech, he abstains from
becoming rough and barbarous [in his speech and actions] and from creating a sense of afﬂiction and anger in another person. One’s speech
should be gentle so as not to create a sense of enmity or malice, and is
beneﬁcial to anyone who hears it. Thus, people are endeared to him with
respect and wish to hear his words. This is called the precept of abstinence
from harsh speech. (7) Forsaking ﬂattery, one knows the appropriate time
that is best suited for his use of words. He is honest and sincere, in compliance with law. In the case of disputes, he applies the rules of the Vinaya
discipline to successfully settle them. He speaks out only when it is causally
meaningful, and whatever he says is based on a real situation. This is
called the precept of abstinence from frivolous sycophancy. (8) Forsaking
liquor and intoxicants and distancing himself from places of dissipation.
He neither uses bodily ornaments, nor does he go out to hear songs
and see dancing or any kind of entertainment, nor does he use an elevated
wide couch [for sleeping] or partake of food outside of the authorized
period of each day. He neither receives wealth in cash or in any kind of

151

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

the seven precious stones, nor does he use them for their monetary value.
He neither marries nor lives with a woman, nor does he keep servants
or maids, [nor does he keep] an elephant, a horse and carriage, a cow,
hen, dog, pig, or sheep, nor does he own a rice ﬁeld or a residential
house, or a grove or forest. He neither cheats others by using scales that
have been illegally tampered with, nor does he engage in questionable
business transactions, pulling customers with his hands, or impose loans,
or make false accusations or fraudulent transactions. Forsaking all these
wrong actions, he terminates various disputes and legal suits and eradicates wrongdoing.
Whatever action he takes, he knows the approriate time, thus avoiding
[making] an inappropriate action at a wrong time. Knowing [his own
hunger], he partakes of an appropriate amount of food but refrains from
setting aside an extra portion for later. As far as his garments are concerned, he takes only whatever size is needed and no more, because
one’s clothing should match the size and shape of the body and be worn
at all times, just as a bird’s feathers go along with it when it ﬂies through
the air. Such is the general principle that a bhikṣu keeps no extra items
for himself.
O Mānava, the other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas receive charity from
their devotees yet they also actively seek more to store extra items. They
know nothing about the sense of having more than enough or of contentment in regard to clothing, food, and drink. Whoever joins my religious order, however, should realize that all these [unwholesome qualities]
are absent from the practice of my disciples.
O Mānava, the other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, having subsisted on
their devotees’ charity, are engaged in various means of livelihood as
well as planting seedlings [in farming], thus inviting evil spirits. Whoever
joins my religious order, however, should realize that all these [unwholesome actions] are absent in the practice of my disciples.
O Mānava, the other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, having subsisted on
their devotees’ charity, seek to acquire various material beneﬁts through
expedient means, such as ivory and other precious items, an elevated, comfortable couch, various embroidered cloth, carpets, bamboo ﬂoor mats, and

84a

152

Sutra 20: Ambaṭṭha

cushions. Whoever joins my religious order, however, should realize that
[seeking such things] does not happen in the practice of my disciples.
O Mānava, the other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, having subsisted on
their devotees’ charity, seek various means of beautifying themselves
out of vanity, [in order to impress their devotees,] such as rubbing their
bodies with thyme seed oil, bathing in scented water, applying scented
powder on the body, applying fragrant oil to the hair, wearing a ﬂower
garland, using blue eye shadow or applying make-up to their faces, wearing a shining clasp ring or a garment sash, or examining their appearance
in a mirror. They put on a pair of multicolord shoes and a white upper
garment and try to obtain a sword or stick, an attendant, a canopy, a fan,
and a carriage well decorated with banners. Whoever joins my religious
order, however, should realize that all [these behaviors] are absent in
the practice of my disciples.
O Mānava, the other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, having subsisted on
their devotees’ charity, engage in various play and games, such as chess,
gambling, checkers with eight-squared or ten-squared boards, or [any]
of hundreds of [other types of games] in every and all ways. Whoever
joins my religious order, however, should realize that [this kind of behavior] is absent in the practice of my disciples.
O Mānava, the other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, having subsisted on
their devotees’ charity, engage in useless talk that obstructs religious
pursuits, such as [gossiping about] the affairs of kings, battles, cavalry
horses, or matters of how bureaucrats and ministers as ride horses on
excursions, going to and from parks and pleasure gardens. Or they talk
about women, or about their daily lives in lying, sitting down, or walking,
or on the subjects of clothing, food, and drink, or their relations. Or they
discuss sea divers and their collection of treasures from the ocean. Whoever joins my religious order, however, should realize that all [these
kinds of idle speech] are absent in the practice of my disciples.
O Mānava, the other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, having subsisted on
their devotees’ charity, seek through innumerable expedient means wrong
livelihoods, using ﬂattering words and statements, or slandering each
other, thereby seeking beneﬁts and an advantage over the other. Whoever

153

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

joins my religious order, however, should realize that [such behavior]
is absent in the practice of my disciples.
O Mānava, the other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, having subsisted on
their devotees’ charity, engage in disputes with each other wherever they
are, whether in a pleasure grove or a bathing pond, or on the ﬂoor of a
building, accusing each other as to who is right or wrong, saying “I know
the text and rules but you have little knowledge about them. I am on the
right course, but your course is a deviation. Your argument is confused,
asserting later what ought to be asserted earlier, while asserting earlier
what ought to be asserted later. I am able to tolerate you but you cannot
tolerate me. Nothing you say is either true or real. When you ﬁnd some
doubt in yourself, come and ask me about it. I will surely answer all your
questions.” Whoever joins my religious order, however, should realize
that [such behavior] is absent in the practice of my disciples.
O Mānava, the other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, having subsisted on
their devotees’ charity, seek greater [rewards or beneﬁt] through various
expedient means. For instance, on behalf of a king, or a minister of the
king, or a brāhmaṇa, or a householder, they carry ofﬁcial communications
or private messages, traveling from this place to that place or returning
from there to here. Carrying letters for clients, they deliver them to the
designated recipients in respective destinations, then carry their replies
back, delivering them to their clients. Or they give instructions about
the ways to conduct the business of carrying messages for themselves
or others. Whoever joins my religious order, however, should realize
that [this behavior] is absent in the practice of my disciples.
O Mānava, the other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, having subsisted on
their devotees’ charity, engage solely in learning the business of military
strategy, battles, and disputes, or learning matters of armaments such as
swords, canes, bows and arrows, or how to arrange ﬁghts between domestic
animals such as roosters, dogs, pigs, goats, elephants, horses, bulls, or
camels, or how to stage ﬁghts between men and women, or how to perform
various skills to make the sound of a multitude, such as blowing conch
shells, beating drums, singing, dancing, dragging and tossing streamers,
and so on, in all sorts of other actions. Whoever joins my religious order,

84b

154

Sutra 20: Ambaṭṭha

however, should realize that all [such behavior] is absent in the practice
of my disciples.
O Mānava, the other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, having subsisted on
their devotees’ charity, engage in ignoble ways of life, learning wrong
paths that obstruct [the authentic path of religion], thus taking up a wrong
livelihood, such as performing fortunetelling for male or female clients
regarding auspicious and ominous signs, their handsomeness and ugliness,
or soliciting material support by way of similar predictions regarding
animals [in the business of husbandry]. Whoever joins my religious
order, however, should realize that [such behavior] is absent in the
practice of my disciples.
O Mānava, the other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, having subsisted on
their devotees’ charity, engage in ignoble ways of life, learning wrong
paths that obstruct [the authentic path of religion], taking up wrong livelihoods such as performing magical incantations to call ghost spirits into
one’s presence or to send them away, or causing [such spirits] to stay
with various repugnant spells. Thus, in many ways, they threaten people,
assembling and dispersing them, tormenting them thoroughly, or causing
them enjoyment. They also use incantations to calm a pregnant woman
for the safety of her unborn child, or they provide a [magical] garment
to their clients, or they use an incantation to change a man into a donkey
or cause him to become totally deaf and dumb. Displaying various methods, they stand up facing the sun or moon, performing varieties of ascetic
practice with both hands in order to solicit material gain. Whoever joins
my religious order, however, should realize that [such behavior] is absent
in the practice of my disciples.
O Mānava, the other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, having subsisted on
their devotees’ charity, engage in ignoble ways of life, learning wrong
paths that obstruct [the authentic path of religion], thus taking up a wrong
livelihood such as chanting magical spells for curing illness, or applying
evil or good spells, or using medical treatments such as acupuncture,
moxa cautery, or medicine to attempt to treat various illnesses [for material gain]. Whoever joins my religious order, however, should realize
that [such behavior] is absent in the practice of my disciples.

155

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

O Mānava, the other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, having subsisted on
their devotees’ charity, engage in ignoble ways of life, learning wrong
paths that obstruct [the authentic path of religion], thus taking up a wrong
livelihood such as performing magical spells for water or ﬁre, or a spell
to call a ghost spirit, or a spell for success in a political or military campaign, or a spell for birds, a spell for bodily limbs, or a spell for a talisman
to ensure the safety of one’s residence, a spell for swift recovery from
ﬁery burns, or a spell for curing a rat bite. Or they read a written incantation
to discern the life or death of the person concerned, or a written incantation
for deciphering dreams, or they read palms (chiromancy) and facial features (physiognomy), chant astronomical texts, or chant alphabetical
characters. Whoever joins my religious order, however, should realize
that [such behavior] is absent in the practice of my disciples.
O Mānava, the other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, having subsisted on
their devotees’ charity, engage in ignoble ways, learning wrong paths that
obstruct [the authentic path of religion], thus taking up a wrong livelihood
such as observing the weather and seasons to predict whether or not it will
rain, whether the price of crops will go up or down, whether or not there
will be an epidemic, whether a fearful event will take place or if there will
be peace and safety. Or they predict oncoming earthquakes, the appearance
of a comet, a solar or lunar eclipse, or a stellar eclipse, or the nonappearance
of such an eclipse, to determine whether it is a good or bad omen. Whoever
joins my religious order, however, should realize that all [such behvior]
is absent in the practice of my disciples.
O Mānava, the other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, having subsisted on
their devotees’ charity, engage in ignoble ways of life, learning wrong
paths that obstruct [the authentic path of religion], thus taking up a wrong
livelihood, asserting that this country is superior to that country, or that
this is not true; or asserting that another country is superior to this country,
and this is not true. Observing good or bad omens, they predict the fortunes and fates of the other countries with which they are concerned.
Whoever joins my religious order, however, should realize that all [such
behavior] is absent in the practice of my disciples.
[Whoever joins my religious order then shall be in compliance with
the following sacred precepts.] My disciples concentrate on the sacred

84c

156

Sutra 20: Ambaṭṭha

rules of discipline with a mind of nonattachment, and they experience
inner joy and an easeful state of existence. If the visual faculty does not
see an object, the mind does not grasp the characteristic of the object.
The visual faculty is neither bound nor linked to an object of form, but
ﬁrmly remains in quiescence with no attachment whatsoever. Also, free
from anxieties and problems, the sense faculties do not release evil inﬂuences. My disciples uphold the fundamental rules of the Vinaya discipline
and thus protect the pure and genuine visual sense faculty. It is the same
with the auditory, olfactory, gustatory, and tactile sense faculties.
Disciples should control the six kinds of sense contact and maintain
good control over them, so that the sense faculties remain quiescent and
at ease. It is like riding a carriage drawn by four horses: a good charioteer
holds the whip in one hand and controls the reins with his other hand,
so as not to let the wheels [of the chariot] leave the tracks. The practice
of a bhikṣu is also like this. Thoroughly controlling the six “horses”[of
his sense faculties], he does not let the wheels leave their tracks, and
thus he remains safe, in an easeful state. On the basis of such sacred disciplines, he has acquired the [sense] faculties transcendent [from the
objects and deﬁlements], and thus they are sacred.
As to the partaking of food, one should know contentment and also
not indulge himself in the quality of its taste. He should take only enough
food as is sufﬁcient to nurture his body [and keep it] free from malnutrition and illness. He should maintain his health without costly food to
the degree that he can eradicate an existing health problem without incurring a new one. Restoring his strength, he should make his body easeful
and pleasant. Just as a person applies medicine to a wound, thereby making a [positive] difference in healing the wound, neither pursuing a false
attractive appearance nor being haughty—O Mānava, a bhikṣu is also
like this. It is sufﬁcient for him to partake of food in order to sustain his
health, cherishing no self-pride. Just as one greases the wheel shaft of
a cart in order to transport a load in the cart wherever as he wishes, a
bhikṣu is also like this. One should partake of food only to the degree
that it sustains one’s physical health and allows one to carry out the practice of austerity.

157

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

O Mānava, a bhikṣu is also like this. Once he realizes the sacred faculties on the basis of the sacred disciplines, he should know contentment
in [minimizing] the quantity of food he partakes of [daily] and should
make effort toward enlightenment in the earlier and later thirds of each
night. Also during the day, whether he is walking or sitting, he should
always maintain mental alertness in order to eradicate the obstacles that
prevent the arising of good mental elements. During the earlier third of
the night, whether he is walking or sitting, he should always maintain
mental alertness in order to eradicate the ﬁve kinds of obstacles.26 During
the middle third of the night he should recline on his right side [to sleep].
He may awaken whenever a thought happens to arise. Since his mind is
expectant of the approaching dawn, there should be no confusion in his
mind. As soon as the later third of the night comes, he wakes up to practice
contemplation. Whether he is just waking up or already sitting, he should
maintain mental alertness always in order to eradicate the ﬁve kinds of
obstacles. When a bhikṣu is endowed with this kind of sacred discipline,
only then will he acquire the sacred faculties [as mentioned before] and
the discipline of contentment in partaking of the proper amount of food.
If a bhikṣu exerts himself toward enlightenment in the earlier and
later thirds of each night and always maintains mental alertness [or the
state of mindfulness in order to eradicate the obstacles], there should be
no confusion in his mind. What does it mean, however, to say that if a
bhikṣu maintains mental alertness there will be no confusion in his mind?
Such a bhikṣu is engaged diligently in observation of his inner body or
inner senses with no slackening, exerting himself, being mindful of his
observations to keep them in memory, thereby removing worldly desires
and anxiety. He is also engaged without slackening in observing his
outer body or outer senses, and also observing both inner and outer body,
exerting himself, being mindful of his observations to keep them in
memory, thereby removing worldly desires and anxiety. It is the same
with observing one’s sense perceptions (sensation), the mind (intellect),
and the psychophysical elements. This is called a bhikṣu’s mindfulness
with no confusion in his mind.
Why is it called the one mind or the total mind? Suppose that whether
a bhikṣu is walking, coming and going, looking right or left, bending

85a

158

Sutra 20: Ambaṭṭha

his body or stretching it, casting his eyes downward or upward, receiving
alms while holding his outer robe’s sleeve and almsbowl [simultaneously],
or whether he is turning to the left or right for convenience, sleeping or
waking, standing or sitting, speaking or in silence—on all these occasions,
he should be mindful always of his deportment in his one mind. This is
the sole mind. For instance, suppose there is a man traveling with a
group of his friends, walking either at the front or in the middle or at
the end of the group. He is always safe and has no fear. O Mānava, a
bhikṣu is also like that. Whether he is walking, coming or going, speaking
or not speaking, if he is always mindful of his deportment single-mindedly, he will have no fear. Based on this kind of sacred discipline, a
bhikṣu acquires the transcendent faculties that are sacred. He knows
contentment in his partaking of food, makes effort toward enlightenment,
whether in the earlier or later thirds of each night, and always maintains
mental alertness toward singleminded reﬂective recollection of observations. There is no room for confusion in the mind.
An easeful state of existence can be found in a secluded place, such
as under a forest tree, among the cemetery mounds, in mountain caves,
in open passages, or among piles of cow dung. At the proper time the
bhikṣu goes for almsround, then returns to his abode. Washing his hands
and feet, placing his robes and almsbowl securely, sitting down in the
lotus posture, keeping his body and mind upright, focusing mental alertness directly to the front, the bhikṣu eradicates parsimony and avarice
without leaving any desire and terminates anger and malice without
leaving any fetter of enmity. With a pure and genuine mind, he abides
always in the mind of compassion, minimizing the hours of sleep while
awaiting the approaching dawn. With no confusion in his mind, he eradicates obsessive conceptualization and removes doubt and delusion,
thereby overcoming entanglement in the net of doubt, while his mind
is saturated with favorable psychophysical elements. Just as when a servant boy is [adopted by his master’s family and] receives that family
name, and thus is delivered [from the status of slave] to a [new state] of
safety and ease; liberated from his servitude, his mind is ﬁlled with joy,
having nothing more to worry about or fear. Also, suppose someone,
having raised some capital for his intended business and carried out his

159

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

business successfully, and acquired a great deal of proﬁt, then returns [to
his home town]. After repaying all the loans [with interest] to his original
investors, there still remains in his hand sufﬁcient resources with which
to continue his business. With great joy, he thinks, “Previously, when I
raised capital by persuading my investors, I was really anxious that my
intended business would not be as successful as I hoped. But now, having
acquired a great deal of proﬁt, even after I have repaid my investors all
the capital I borrowed I still have a sufﬁcient amount of wealth remaining.
I no longer have any worry or fear like I did before.”
Or again, suppose someone has been cured from a lengthy illness,
and his diet and digestion as well as his complexion and strength have
all improved. He thus thinks, “Previously I suffered from illness, but
now I am completely cured. My diet, digestion, complexion, and strength
have all improved.” He feels great joy because he no longer has any
worry or fear like he did previously. [Or again,] someone who was imprisoned for a long time ﬁnally was able to safely come out from it. He is
overjoyed, thinking, “Previously I was conﬁned in a prison, but now I
have been delivered [from that conﬁnement]. I have no more worry and
fear like I did before.” [Or again,] someone transported his own wealth
through a great expanse of wilderness and successfully crossed through
it without encountering a bandit. With great joy, he thinks, “Having
passed through this place of great danger, I feel safe and at ease, and
have no more worry and fear like I did before.”
O Mānava, a bhikṣu has ﬁve hindrances [that obstruct the arising of
good mental elements], due to which he is perpetually haunted by a
sense of worry and fear, like those in the stories [above]—the sense of
worry and fear experienced by someone who had been heavily indebted,
someone who suffered from a lengthy illness, someone who was imprisoned for a long time, and someone who had to pass through [a dangerous]
wilderness carrying all his wealth. The bhikṣu sees in himself that his
mind is not free from the ﬁve hindrances; his mind is still covered by
these hindrances. Because of the prevailing [mental] darkness his insight
is not sufﬁciently developed to see through it. He makes effort to eradicate
the desires that incline toward evil and anything that is not good (i.e.,
contrary to good) from his mind. This eradication of desires concurs

85b

160

Sutra 20: Ambaṭṭha

with the mental function of seeking an object and that of examining it
in meditation. Thus he is able to enter the initial state of meditative
absorption accompanied by the sense of delight and bliss, [while the
twofold mental function continues]. Permeated with delight and bliss,
he is totally immersed in a state of trance, just as someone who applies
various medicinal substances skillfully in their bathwater and thus saturates it thoroughly in the middle as well as in the outer edges. It is the
same with the bhikṣu who has entered the initial state of meditatiove
absorption and is entirely permeated by the sense of delight and bliss.
It is like this, O Mānava. This is called the initial realization of bliss in
one’s present body. Why? Because he has acquired the state of bliss,
quiescence, and seclusion where confusion is eliminated due to his efforts
without slackening.
He [now] forsakes the [mental] function of seeking and examining
and gives rise to tranquil faith or self-conﬁdence. With one-pointed concentration he experiences neither awareness of an object nor the subjective
act of examining, but abides in the constant presence of delight and bliss,
and thus enters the second state of meditative absorption. He is already
saturated with delight and bliss in his entire being and is totally immersed
in the state of delight and trance. It is like the water of a deep spring
located on the summit of a mountain. The water springs up from within,
it does not ﬂow into [the spring] from outside. The [mental] state in
question is like being immersed in a pond of pure springwater. O Mānava,
the experience of the bhikṣu is like this. He enters the second state of
meditative absorption and never fails to experience the permeation of a
perpetually arising sense of delight and bliss in himself. This is called
the second realization of bliss in one’s present body.
The bhikṣu [now] has already forsaken the sense of delight and abides
[solely in bliss], his mind protected from falling into confusion. He experiences a blissful state just as described by the [ancient] sages. Abiding
in this state of bliss that protects one’s mind from confusion, the bhikṣu
enters the third state of meditative absorption, in which even though the
sense of delight is absent he is immersed in a state of bliss that permeates
the entirety of his being. For instance, it is like the case of the varieties
of lotuses, such as utpala (blue), padma (pink), kumuda (red), and

161

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

puṇḍarīka (white), grow up from the mud below the surface of the water,
and yet their roots, stalks, branches, and leaves are all immersed totally
in the water. The experience of the bhikṣu is like this. Entering the third
state of meditative absorption, the bhikṣu discards delight but abides in
bliss and is totally immersed in that state. This is called the third realization of bliss in one’s present body.
The bhikṣu has now abandoned not only the sense of delight but also
that of bliss. With the sense of afﬂiction and delight already equally
abandoned, the sense of neither suffering nor happiness should be upheld
as purely and genuinely as possible. Through this practice he enters the
fourth state of meditative absorption. His body and mind are equally
pure and genuine throughout his entire being, just as the entire body is
totally pure and clean after someone has bathed and cleansed it and put
on a clean, white garment. O Mānava, the experience of the bhikṣu is
like this when he enters the fourth state of meditative absorption. While
his mind is puriﬁed and totally permeating his body, every part of it
without fail, he enters the fourth state of meditative absorption; the mind
neither increases nor decreases, nor does it incline or move. His mind
abides on the ground of neither love or hatred, nor motion. For instance,
when a well-insulated room is tightly sealed with additional plaster on
the inside [walls] as well as the outside [walls], and the window is closed,
neither wind nor ﬂying dirt [can enter] and nothing can disturb the candlelight. The ﬂame of the candle constantly burns upward but does not
appear to move or ﬂicker at all. O Mānava, the experience of the bhikṣu
is like this when he enters the fourth state of meditative absorption. His
mind neither increases nor decreases, nor does it incline or move. His
mind abides on the ground of neither love or hatred, nor motion. This
is called the fourth realization of bliss in one’s present body. Why?
Because due to his efforts without slackening he has acquired the state
of bliss, quiescence, and seclusion in which confusion is eliminated.
Having perfected concentration, with a pure and spotless mind the
bhikṣu now has self-control and gently and patiently abides in the
immovable state. He creates another mind [with supernormal power]
and also another body that is perfectly endowed with all the limbs and
senses, none lacking. He [then] visualizes, “This body [of mine] consists

85c

162

Sutra 20: Ambaṭṭha

of four gross elements that have created that body. This body of mine is
different [from that created body], and that body [is different from mine].
Due to this body, this mind [of mine] arises and has created the body
itself as equipped with all its senses and limbs, none lacking.” This is
like when someone pulls a sword from its sheath and thinks, “The sheath
is different [from the sword], and the sword [is different from the sheath].
Yet the sword is drawn from the sheath.” Again, it is like when someone
makes a rope by braiding together a number of hemp ﬁbers and thinks,
“The hemp ﬁbers are different [from the rope], and the rope [is also different from the hemp ﬁbers]. Yet the rope is made out of these hemp
ﬁbers.” Again it is like when someone pulls a snake out of a box and
thinks, “This box is different from the snake, and the snake is different
from the box. Yet the snake comes out of the box.” Again it is like when
someone takes a garment out of a bamboo basket and thinks, “The bamboo
basket is different from the garment, and the garment is different from
the bamboo basket. Yet the garment comes out of the basket.” O Mānava,
[these examples] are like the case of the bhikṣu. This is the ﬁrst superior
insight initially acquired by the bhikṣu. Why? Because due to his efforts
without slackening he has acquired the state of bliss, quiescence, and
seclusion in which confusion is eliminated.
Having perfected his concentration, with a pure and spotless mind,
the bhikṣu has self-control and gently and patiently abides in the immovable state. He has already given rise to another mind out of his body to
create another body that is perfectly endowed with all its senses and
limbs. He [then] visualizes, “This body is composed out of the four gross
elements. The body [that is different from mine] has come into being
[through magical power]. This body [of mine] is different from that
body, and that body [is different from this body of mine]. This mind of
mine abides in this body of mine. While abiding in this body, it reaches
to that magically created body. This is like the luster of gems such as
lapis lazuli and maṇi, which are clearly seen to be pure and spotless.
When such gems are pierced with a blue, yellow, or red thread, an expert
examiner, placing them on his palm, thinks, “The gems are different
from the thread, and the thread is different from the gems. Yet each bead
is linked with the other beads by means of the thread.” O Mānava, the

163

86a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

bhikṣu envisions his mind as abiding in the body, and so his mind reaches
[to abide in] that [magically] created body. This is the second superior
power acquired by the bhikṣu. Why? Because due to his efforts without
slackening he has acquired the state of bliss, quiescence, and seclusion
in which confusion is eliminated.
Having perfected his concentration, with a pure and spotless mind,
the bhikṣu has self-control and gently and patiently abides in the immovable state. Through mental concentration he acquires the supernormal
power that enables him to change his physical form into various other
forms. He may multiply his single physical form into innumerable identical ones or reverse the many [forms] to his original form. Flying through
space, he can pass through even a stone wall without obstruction. He
can ﬂy in the air like a bird, walk on the surface of water just as on the
ground, blast ﬁery ﬂames out of his body like a huge bonﬁre, grasp the
sun and moon in his hand, and reach the height of the Brahmā heaven.
This is like a potter who can mix various types of clay and produce, as
he wishes, a variety of vessels that are beneﬁcial to many; also, it is like
a wood craftsman who handles wooden materials and produces, as he
wishes, any kind of object that may beneﬁt many others; again, it is also
like an ivory craftsman who works with the material of elephant tusks,
or like a goldsmith works real gold to produce various things that are
beneﬁcial to many. O Mānava, the bhikṣu is also like this. With his mind
in concentration, pure and spotless, abiding in the immovable ground,
the bhikṣu transﬁgures his own physical form into another as he wishes,
and so forth, up to grasping the sun and moon in his hand, and stands
as tall as to reach the Brahmā heaven. This is the third superior power
acquired by the bhikṣu.
Having perfected his concentration, with a pure and spotless mind, the
bhikṣu has self-control and gently and patiently abides in the immovable
state. Through mental concentration he acquires supernormal [power of]
auditory capacity, surpassing that of an ordinary human being, and is capable of hearing two kinds of voices, those of a god and of a human being.
Suppose there is a lecture hall in a city, whose structure is tall, grand, and
of preeminent scale. Wise people who reside in this hall can hear distinctly
and understand everything spoken within the hall without relying on any

164

Sutra 20: Ambaṭṭha

auditory device. The supernormal auditory capacity acquired by the bhikṣu
is like this. As his mind is well concentrated, his auditory capacity is pure
and genuine and he is capable of hearing those two kinds of voices. O
Mānava, this is the fourth superior power acquired by the bhikṣu.
Having perfected his concentration, with a pure and spotless mind,
the bhikṣu has self-control and gently and patiently abides in the immovable state. Through mental concentration he acquires the supernormal
power of reading others’ minds. He knows, without exception, everything
regarding the mind of another person: whether that person’s mind has
desire or no desire, whether his or her mind is deﬁled or free from delusion, whether that person is broadminded or narrowminded, whether or
not that person’s mind abides in concentration, if it is bound by or free
from bondage, whether it is upright or downward, or if it has reached
the highest state. This is like someone who gazes at his reﬂection on the
surface of clear water to see whether he is handsome or ugly, and thus
necessarily cognizes it. The power of the bhikṣu is also like this. Because
his mind is pure and genuine [through concentration], he is able to know
the mind of another person. O Mānava, this is the ﬁfth superior power
acquired by the bhikṣu.
Having perfected his concentration, with a pure and spotless mind,
the bhikṣu has self-control and gently and patiently abides in the immovable state. Through mental concentration he recollects and records in
his mind innumerable and various kinds of past events [of his own as
well as those of others]. He remembers one life and so forth, up to incalculable past lives, the numbers of eons with evolving or devolving periods, where he died and where he was born, his own name and the names
of his family, clans, and races; [he remembers his own] preferences of
food and drink, whether he had a long or short life span, the happiness
and suffering he experienced, his physical and facial features and characteristics, and so on—everything without exception. Suppose someone
travels from his own village to another village in a different country. He
remembers all things and recollects them instantly, without any mental
effort: whatever he did, where he stayed, what he said or did not say;
also, again, whether he traveled on from that country to another, and so
on, one after another, until he returned to his homeland, as well as the

165

86b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

names of all the countries through which he passed, without exception.
It is like the case of such a traveler who remembers everything, not only
the place he left from to travel to another place, and from that place traveled on to another place, and so on, but also [remembers] what he did,
where he stayed, what he said and when he remained silent, and so on,
entirely without exception. O Mānava, the supernormal power of the
bhikṣu is also like this. With a well-concentrated mind, a pure and spotless
mind, he abides in the immovable state and able to recollect and know
through the supernormal power innumerable past lives throughout innumerable eons. This is called the ﬁrst insight of great knowledge acquired
by the bhikṣu. The cause of ignorance is once for all brought to cessation
for the bhikṣu, in whom there arises the insight of great knowledge.
When the darkness disappears the insight of bright illumination prevails.
This insight means the bhikṣu’s knowledge of past lives. Why? Because
due to his effort without slackening he has acquired the state of bliss,
quiescence, and seclusion in which confusion is eliminated.
Having perfected his concentration, with a pure and spotless mind,
the bhikṣu has self-control and gently and patiently abides in the immovable state. Through his exertion in practice he realizes the supernormal
power of knowing the future destinies of others’ lives and deaths. Through
this supernormal power, he sees not only how sentient beings die here
and are reborn there, then die there to be reborn here, but also their physical features and complexions, their appearance as either handsome or
ugly, the good and bad retributions [of their actions], their births into
either noble or humble [families], and all the causal contexts through
which they receive the appropriate retributions according to their deeds,
entirely without exception. He is equipped to see that when someone
commits wrong acts of body, speech, and mind, slanders wise and saintly
disciples, and expresses perverse views, when that person’s body dissolves
at the end of his life he will fall into the three evil destinies. The bhikṣu
is also equipped to see that when someone does good acts of body,
speech, and mind, does not slander wise and saintly disciples, and upholds
right views, faith, and devotion, when his body dissolves at the end of
his life he will be reborn among gods and human beings. Through his
supernormal power of vision, the bhikṣu thus sees all sentient beings

166

Sutra 20: Ambaṭṭha

coming and going between the ﬁve destinies of the life cycle according
to the causal contexts created by their deeds. For instance, suppose there
is a city enclosed by high, wide, and even walls. At every intersection
there is a high tower, and there is a knowledgeable person up in the
tower. Looking over the streets in all directions, east, west, south, and
north, this man can see all the citizens’ movements and observe their
behavior, entirely without exception. O Mānava, the bhikṣu’s supernormal
power is like this. Through a mind of concentration, pure and spotless,
abiding in the immovable state, he acquires the supernormal power of
vision, and through this power he knows all the movements of sentient
beings through the ﬁve destinies of the life cycle according to the causal
contexts created by their deeds, entirely without exception. This is the
second insight of great knowledge acquired by the bhikṣu. The cause of
ignorance is once and for all brought to cessation for the bhikṣu, in whom
arises the insight of great knowledge. When the darkness disappears the
insight of bright illumination prevails. This insight is the bhikṣu’s knowledge of the future destinies of life and death of sentient beings. Why?
Because due to his exertion without slackening he has acquired the state
of bliss, quiescence, and seclusion in which confusion is eliminated.
Having perfected his concentration, with a pure and spotless mind,
the bhikṣu has self-control and gently and patiently abides in the immovable state. Through exertion in practice he realizes the supernormal
power of knowing the truth of suffering as it really is, the truth of the
causal aggregates under the inﬂuence of deﬁlement as they really are,
the truth of cessation of the deﬁled causal aggregates as it really is, and
the truth of the path for eradicating the deﬁled causal aggregates as it
really is. The bhikṣu knows that the inﬂuence of deﬁlements in carnal
desire, in the will to becoming, and in the force of ignorance should all
equally be seen according to these four truths. He has realized liberation
and acquired the knowledge of his liberation, namely, “Whoever has
exhausted [the cause of] birth and death, accomplished the goal of the
practice of austerity, and completed what should be done, for that person
there will be no further rebirth after this lifetime.” For instance, in clear
water there are various kinds of things, such as pieces of wood or rocks,
or ﬁsh and turtles, which are moving about, to and fro. Someone who

167

86c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

has the real power of vision can clearly distinguish these things: “This
is a piece of wood or a rock” or “That is a ﬁsh or a turtle.” O Mānava,
the capacity of the bhikṣu is like this. Through a mind of concentration,
pure and spotless, abiding in the immovable state, he acquires the supernormal power of transcendent knowledge free from the inﬂuence of
deﬁlement, and so on, up to liberation from further rebirth after this life.
This is the third insight of great knowledge acquired by the bhikṣu. The
cause of ignorance is once and for all brought to cessation for the bhikṣu,
in whom there arises the insight of great knowledge. When darkness
disappears the insight of bright illumination prevails. This insight is the
bhikṣu’s knowledge of his eradication of the inﬂuence of deﬁlement.
Why? Because due to his exertion without slackening he has acquired
the state of bliss, quiescence, and seclusion in which confusion is eliminated. O Mānava, this is called the unsurpassable endowment of knowledge and practice. What do you think? Is this excellent combination of
knowledge and practice acceptable to you as the [supreme] good?

The Buddha continued, saying to Mānava:

When one cannot realize the unsurpassable endowment of knowledge
and practice he adheres to four expedient practices [as an alternative
course of practice]. What are these four? First, suppose there is someone
who has not been able to realize the unsurpassable endowment of knowledge and practice. He carries a cutting tool and a basket on his back,
enters the mountains, seeks medicinal herbs, and partakes of tree roots.
O Mānava, this is called adherence to the ﬁrst alternative practice (i.e.,
a diet of tree roots), as he is unable to realize the unsurpassable endowment of knowledge and practice. What do you think? O Mānava, do
you and your teacher practice this discipline?27

Mānava replied, “No, sir.”
The Buddha continued:

You have degraded yourself without knowing what is true and what is
not. You have accused the sons of the Śākya sage (i.e., followers of the
Buddha) and verbally abused them. Because you have planted the root
of this offense you will suffer in hell for a long time.

168

Sutra 20: Ambaṭṭha

Again, O Mānava, suppose someone cannot realize the unsurpassable
endowment of knowledge and practice. He carries a water pitcher and
a pole, enters the mountains, and partakes of fruits that have fallen to
the ground. O Mānava, this is called adherence to the second alternative
practice (i.e., a diet of seed fruits), unable to realize the unsurpassable
endowment of knowledge and practice. What do you think? O Mānava,
do you and your teacher practice this discipline?

Mānava replied, “No, sir.”
The Buddha continued:

You have degraded yourself without knowing what is true and what is
not. You have accused the sons of the Śākya sage, the followers of the
Buddha and verbally abused them. Because you have planted the root
of this offense you will suffer in hell for a long time.
Again, O Mānava, suppose someone cannot realize the unsurpassable
endowment of knowledge and practice. He abandons the foregoing two
alternative practices and, returning to the village, he relies on other
people, builds a hermitage thatched with grass, and partakes of plants
and leaves. O Mānava, this is called adherence to the third alternative
practice (i.e., a diet of plants and leaves), unable to realize the unsurpassable endowment of knowledge and practice. What do you think? O
Mānava, do you and your teacher practice this discipline?

Mānava replied, “No, sir.”
The Buddha continued:

You have degraded yourself without knowing what is true and what is
not. You have accused the sons of the Śākya sage, the followers of the
Buddha, and verbally abused them. Because you have planted the root
of this offense you will suffer in hell for a long time. This is the third
expedient means.
Again, O Mānava, suppose someone cannot realize the unsurpassable
endowment of knowledge and practice, but neither partakes of herbal
roots nor fallen fruit nor plants and leaves. He erects a great building
either in a village or town and from every person that passes by, whether
they are going east, west, south, or north, he receives provisions [from

169

87a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

them] according to their capacity. This is called adherence to the fourth
alternative practice (i.e., begging alms), as he is unable to realize the
unsurpassable endowment of knowledge and practice. What do you think?
O Mānava, do you and your teacher practice this discipline?

Mānava replied, “No, sir.”
The Buddha continued:

You have degraded yourself without knowing what is true and what is
false. You have accused the sons of the Śākya sage, the followers of the
Buddha, and verbally abused them. Because you have planted the root
of this offense you will suffer in hell for a long time.
What do you think, O Mānava? Many skills have been transmitted
from the ancient brāhmaṇas and the wise compilers of the sacred hymns
(i.e., Vedas). They praised and propagated the hymns that were originally
recited through the practice of chanting, in a similar way to how contemporary brāhmaṇas chant and propagate these hymns. These brāhmaṇas
descended from (1) Aṭṭhaka, (2) Vāmaka, (3) Vāmadeva, (4) Vessāmitta,
(5) Aṅgirasa, (6) Yamataggi, (7) Bhāradvāja-Vāseṭṭha, (8) Kāśyapa, (9)
Alouna, (10) Gautama, (11) Shouyipo, and (12) Suntuoluo.28 These great
sages and brāhmaṇas all dug moats and built grand pavilions and buildings.
Are the residences of your teacher and colleagues like those of the ancients?

[Mānava] replied, “No, sir.”
[The Buddha continued:]

When one of the great sages and brāhmaṇas built a residence, he also
built various houses and living quarters [for his people] around it, with
his residence in the center. Do your teacher and colleagues reside in similar residential estates such as those of the ancients?

[Mānava] replied, “No, sir.”
[The Buddha continued:]

Those great sages and brāhmaṇas used as seats elevated comfortable
couches and thick cushions made of delicate and smooth thread and ﬁne
and soft cloth. Do your teacher and colleagues use anything similar to
these items that were used by the ancients?

170

Sutra 20: Ambaṭṭha

[Mānava] replied, “No, sir.”
[The Buddha continued:]

The great sages and brāhmaṇas enjoyed many luxurious things, such
as gold and silver necklaces, variegated ﬂower garlands, and beautiful
women. Do your teacher and colleagues enjoy such luxuries like the
ancients did?

[Mānava] replied, “No, sir.”
[The Buddha continued:]

When one of the great sages and brāhmaṇas made an excursion, he rode
on a well-embellished carriage, accompanied by attendants carrying halberds. He was shaded by a white canopy, and held a duster in his hand,
wore variegated sandals, and also a golden hat and white garments. Do
your teacher and colleagues also equip themselves with such items like
the ancients when they go on an excursion?

[Mānava] replied: “No, sir.”
[The Buddha continued:]

O Mānava, you have degraded yourself without knowing what is true
and what is not. You have accused the sons of the Śākya, the followers
of the Buddha, and verbally abused them. Because you have planted the
root of this offense you will suffer in hell for a long time.
What do you think, O Mānava? The ancient great sages and brāhmaṇas praised and propagated the hymns that were originally spontaneously composed and sung, in a similar way to how contemporary
brāhmaṇas follow the tradition. Yet there seems to be no one today who,
by transmitting these hymns composed originally by Aṭṭhaka, and so
on, inspire and motivate others to wish to be reborn in the Brahmā heaven.
This state of affairs, O Mānava, can be compared with a situation in
which King Prasenajit consults and discusses matters with which he is
concerned either with other kings or ministers, or brāhmaṇas and wealthy
householders. Suppose a common person, having heard discussion of a
matter, goes to the capital city of Śrāvastī and passes it on to other people
he meets, saying, “King Prasenajit said such-and-such.” What do you

171

87b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

think, O Mānava? Has the king consulted with that person about the
matters with which he is concerned?

[Mānava replied,] “No, sir.”
[The Buddha continued:]

O Mānava, when this person repeats the words of the king and thereby
conveys them to the people, would the king himself appoint this person
as his minister?”

[Mānava replied,] “Such is impossible, sir.”
[The Buddha continued:]

O Mānava, this means that even though today you and others are engaged
in transmitting and teaching people the hymns composed by the ancient
sages and brāhmaṇas, it is impossible to expect that people will wish
to be born in the Brahmā heaven. What do you think, Mānava, have you
and others, having received support and care from others, been practicing
according to the norms?

[Mānava replied,] “Yes, sir. As Gautama says, when one receives another’s
support, he should practice according to the norms, sir.”
[The Buddha continued:]

Yet your teacher, the brāhmaṇa Puṣkarasārin, despite having received
the king’s ﬁef, when consulted by the king replied to him with unnecessary
opinions and meaningless words, and thus he did not seriously advise
him by showing what is proper. You are now seeing your own faults and
those of your teacher. Put this matter aside for a moment; now you should
ﬁnd out whatever it is that you have been sent [by your teacher] to do.

Mānava at once raised his eyes to look at the Tathāgata’s body, seeking
the eminent signs of the great person. He could see all the marks except for
two, and immediately fell into doubt.
At that moment, the World-honored One quietly thought to himself, “Now
this fellow Mānava does not see two of the eminent marks and immediately
felt doubt.” At once, [the Buddha] stuck out his tongue and displayed the
mark in question, and licked his [own] ears with his wide, long tongue that
covered his entire forehead.
172

Sutra 20: Ambaṭṭha

Mānava still felt doubt about the last mark of the great being. The Worldhonored One once again thought to himself, “Now this fellow Mānava is still
concerned with the ﬁnal mark that he has not seen.” By means of supernormal
power, [the Buddha] then allowed Mānava to see the mark of the genital organ
hidden within folds, like that of a horse. Thereupon Mānava, having seen all
the eminent marks of the Tathāgata, had no more doubt in his mind. At once
he stood up from his seat and, after circumambulating the Buddha, departed.
The brāhmaṇa Puṣkarasārin came out to the gate of his residence and saw
his disciple returning from a distance. He went forward to meet him and
asked him:
Have you seen Gautama to examine whether he really has the eminent
marks? And does he have all the meritorious supernormal powers, as
we have been told?

Mānava replied to his teacher:

The śramaṇa Gautama possesses all of the thirty-two eminent marks
without exception, sir. And it is exactly as we have been informed that
he has all the meritorious supernormal powers, sir.

The teacher again questioned him, “Did you discuss anything with him?”
Mānava replied, “Yes, sir. I exchanged words with Gautama.”
The teacher again asked, “What did you discuss with him?”
Mānava then reported to his teacher in detail exactly how he had encountered the Buddha and what he had discussed with him.
[Puṣkarasārin] said:

I thought that I had ﬁnally gotten a sharp-minded disciple, but as you
behaved in my proxy so poorly like that, it will not be long before your
deeds will cause me to fall into hell. Why? Because you desired so eagerly
to accuse Gautama, making him displeased with the fact that [initially]
I avoided seeing him. Because you, my ablest disciple, acted so poorly
in representing me, you will surely cause me to fall into hell before long.

Thereupon, out of his anger and dissatisfaction the teacher kicked Mānava
out of his carriage. [Puṣkarasārin] then took his seat in the carriage, while
Mānava, falling to the ground, immediately contracted leprosy.

173

87c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

The brāhmaṇa Puṣkarasārin looked up at the position of the sun and
quietly thought to himself, “It is not the right time to go see the śramaṇa
Gautama. I should wait until tomorrow to visit him.”
The next morning, the brāhmaṇa had his carriage prepared and, accompanied by ﬁve hundred disciples, he proceeded to the Icchānaṅkala Grove.
Reaching the forest, he dismounted from the carriage and went on foot toward
the World-honored One. Upon arrival, he exchanged respectful greetings
with a bow and sat down to one side. He then looked at the Tathāgata, examining the eminent marks. Having observed all the marks satisfactorily except
for the two that he could not see, the brāhmaṇa fell into doubt as to whether
the Tathāgata really had [these two marks]. The Buddha, immediately knowing
[Puṣkarasārin’s] mind, at once stuck out his wide and long tongue and licked
his ears and covered his forehead with it. The brāhmaṇa still hesitated, in
doubt about the last remaining mark. The Buddha, again knowing his thought,
applied his supernormal power so that brāhmaṇa could see the mark of the
genital organ hidden within folds, like that of a horse. The brāhmaṇa at last
witnessed all the thirty-two eminent marks of the Tathāgata and was thereby
totally freed from his presumption and doubt.
The brāhmaṇa made a special request to the Buddha:

When I am on the way, driving a carriage, if I meet the Buddha on the
road I will stop my carriage for a short while. May Your Holiness know
that, by doing so, I have already paid respect to the Buddha. Why is
this so, sir? Because when I am going to receive the ﬁef of a village, if
I dismount from the carriage I will lose the ﬁef and a rumor against me
will surely spread, sir.

Again, he said to the Buddha:

If I dismount from the carriage I will remove my sword and put away
my umbrella, as well as remove my ﬂag, pitcher, and sandals, sir. May
Your Holiness know that, by doing so, I have already venerated the
Tathāgata. Why is this so, sir? I am obliged to uphold the ﬁve symbols
of authority for the ﬁef I am to receive. If I venerate anyone, [letting go
of any of the ﬁve symbols of authority,] I will lose that ﬁef and a bad
rumor against me will surely spread, sir.

174

Sutra 20: Ambaṭṭha

Again the brāhmaṇa said to the Buddha:

If I see the Buddha while among a group of people, I will stand up and
expose my right elbow and announce my family name. May Your Holiness know that, by doing so, I have already venerated and paid my respect
to the Tathāgata. Why is this so, sir? When I am to receive a ﬁef, if I
venerate anyone I will immediately lose that ﬁef and a bad rumor against
me will surely spread, sir.

Again he said to the Buddha:

I will take refuge in the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha. May Your Holiness
permit me to become a lay devotee according to the right Dharma. From
now on I shall adhere to the ﬁve precepts, namely, abstinence from taking
life, from taking what is not given, from sexual misconduct, from speaking falsehoods, and from the state of indolence arising from [the use of]
intoxicants. May I request that the World-honored One as well as the
members of the sangha accept my invitation for almsfood, sir.

The World-honored One, remaining silent, thus granted the brāhmaṇa’s
wish. Having understood that because the World-honored One had remained
silent his wish had been granted, [Puṣkarasārin] immediately arose from his
seat, venerated the Buddha without awareness, circumambulated him three
times, and departed.
Returning to his residence, the brāhmaṇa prepared food and drink and, having completed the preparations, he notiﬁed that everything was ready for the
sangha to receive the meal. Thereupon the World-honored One, putting on his
outer robe and with his almsbowl in hand, accompanied by one thousand two
hundred ﬁfty bhikṣus, arrived at the residence and took their seats at the places
prepared for them. The brāhmaṇa then served varieties of delicious food for
the Buddha and the members of the sangha with his own hands. After the meal
was over, the bowls were set aside and water for rinsing was brought.
Thereupon, [Puṣkarasārin], holding the elbow of his disciple Ambaṭṭha
with his right hand, went before the World-honored One and said to him, “I
earnestly entreat of you, O Tathāgata, may Your Holiness graciously pardon
this student on account of his repentance, sir.”

175

88a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume II

In this manner, he repeated these words three times, and then said to the
Buddha:

It is like a well-trained elephant or horse. Even though such an animal
may stumble and fall, it may yet return to the right course, sir. This man
is also like that. Although he committed a ﬂaw and an offense, may Your
Holiness pardon him on account of his repentance.

The Buddha replied to the brāhmaṇa, “I will pardon him, O brāhmaṇa.
May you live a long life, free from troubles, and may your disciple be freed
from his leprosy.
No sooner than the Buddha had spoken these words, the brāhmaṇa’s disciple was cured from the illness of leprosy.
Thereupon, the brāhmaṇa brought out a small cushion and sat before the
Buddha. The World-honored One began to teach the Dharma for the sake of
[Puṣkarasārin]. He encouraged him, beneﬁted him, and delighted him by
teaching the doctrines of charity, of morality, and of rebirth in heaven. He
also taught that desires are unclean and impure, that the inﬂuences of deﬁlements that bind one to the rūpa realm of existence (i.e., the realm of form)
are dangerous, and that the essential method of distancing oneself from both
pleasure and pain is superior [as the goal of religious salvation], and then
concluded by emphasizing [the qualities of] purity and genuineness.
At that time, the World-honored One observed that the mind of the brāhmaṇa
had become receptive, pure and spotless, and he knew that he was ready to
accept the teaching of the path. Following the norms of the buddhas, the Worldhonored One introduced the doctrine of the noble truth of suffering, the noble
truth of the cause of suffering, the noble truth of the cessation of suffering, and
the noble truth of the path of cessation (i.e., the Four Noble Truths).
The brāhmaṇa then, at that single session, exhausted all of the deﬁlements
and thus acquired genuine insight into the nature of the Dharma, just as a white
cloth can easily be dyed any color. The brāhmaṇa Puṣkarasārin was also like
this. Having seen the Dharma he acquired it, and was destined to realize the
fruit of the path. He did not believe any other doctrine and thus realized the
state of fearlessness (i.e., absolute conﬁdence). He then said to the Buddha:
I now would like to repeat my statement: I take refuge in the Buddha,
Dharma, and Sangha. May Your Holiness permit me to become a lay

176

Sutra 20: Ambaṭṭha

devotee in the right Dharma. Until the end of my body and life I will
adhere to the [ﬁve] precepts of not taking life, not taking what is not
given, not committing sexual misconduct, not speaking falsehoods, and
not ingesting intoxicants. May I request that the World-honored One as
well as the members of the sangha show compassion toward me by
accepting my invitation for almsfood for seven days, sir.

The World-honored One, remaining silent, thus granted his wish. The
brāhmaṇa then served the Buddha and the members of the sangha for seven
days with almsfood and offerings.
After the seven days had passed, the World-honored One departed to travel
through various communities. Not long after the Buddha left the Icchānaṅkala
Grove, the brāhmaṇa Puṣkarasārin became ill and passed away. The bhikṣus
then were informed that after serving the Buddha with almsfood and offerings
for seven days, the brāhmaṇa had passed away. They all wondered where the
brāhmaṇa would be reborn. Some of the bhikṣus visited the World-honored
One and, after venerating the Buddha, they sat down to one side and asked him:
The brāhmaṇa [Puṣkarasārin] completed his service to the Buddha of
almsfood and offerings for seven days. After his body dissolves at the
end of his life, where indeed will he be reborn, sir?

The Buddha replied to them:

That son of good family [Puṣkarasārin], endowed with the meticulous
discipline of collecting all good actions universally, never committed an
error regarding the practice of the disciplines and thus terminated the ﬁve
kinds of deﬁlement that bind sentient beings to the lower realm of desire
(i.e., kāmadhātu). He will be reborn among the gods, and from there he
will enter ﬁnal nirvana and will not return to this world.

Having heard the Buddha’s answer, the bhikṣus were delighted, received
the teaching, and carried out what the Buddha taught.
[End of Sutra 20: Ambaṭṭha]

177

88b

Notes
1
2

3
4

5

6
7
8

Étienne Lamotte, History of Indian Buddhism from the Origins to the Śaka Era, trans.
Sara Webb-Boin (Louvain-la-Neue: Institut Orientaliste, 1988), p. 272.
The ninefold or twelvefold categories of scriptures in which the Buddha’s discourses
were grouped as an aid for memorization. The Tripiṭaka categories of Sutra, Vinaya,
and Abhidharma were a later development.
Cf. Dīpavaṃsa VII, 34–43; Mahāvaṃsa V, 267–282.

The Abhidharmamahāvibhāṣā-śāśtra; the Sanskrit original is lost, and there is no
Tibetan translation of this text. There is a Chinese translation by Xuanzang, the Apidamo da pibosha lun in two hundred fascicles (Taishō 1545). Xuanzang concludes
his epilogue: “Four hundred years after [the Buddha’s] nirvana, King Kaniṣka called
an assembly of ﬁve hundred arhats and Kāśmīri Tripiṭaka masters to discuss the analyses of Abhidharma study.” Canonical revision was accomplished on all three divisions
in chapter 3 of Xuanzang’s Xi you ji (Record of the Western Regions, Taishō 2087);
see Lamotte, History of Indian Buddhism, p. 586. An English translation of Xuanzang’s
text by Li Rongxi is published under the title The Great Tang Dynasty Record of the
Western Regions (Berkeley: Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research,
1996).

According to Satis Chandra Vidyabhusana, in his renowned work A History of Indian
Logic: Ancient, Mediaeval, and Modern Schools (Calcutta: Calcutta University Press,
1931), pp. 49–50; p. 49, n. 2, the Hindu literature, the Purāṇas and Śāstras, were
compiled by the brāhmaṇa assemblies in the region of Vidarbha under the leadership
of Jātūkarṇya Vyāsa. This movement was inspired by the Fourth Buddhist Council
that had been held in Kāśmīra half a century earlier.
See Franklin Edgerton, Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit Grammar and Dictionary (New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1953), esp. Ch. 1, Introduction.

Chizen Akanuma, Kanpashibushi agon goshōroku (The Comparative Catalogue of
Chinese Āgamas and Pāli Nikāyas) (Nagoya: Hajinkaku-shobō, 1929), pp. 3–6.

The missing seven texts are: DN 6, Mahalī Suttanta; DN 7, Jāliya Suttanta; DN 10,
Subha Suttanta; DN 22, Mahā-Satīpaṭṭhāna Suttanta; DN 30, Lakkhaṇa Suttanta;
and DN 32, Āṭānāṭiya Suttanta; and “The Sutra on Buddhist Cosmology,” not found
in the Dīgha Nikāya.

179

Notes

9
10

11

12

13

14
15
16

17
18
19
20
21

22

See Kaijō Ishikawa, Agon-kyō seiritsu no kenkyū (A Study on the Establishment of
Āgama Sūtras (Tokyo: Gendaisha, 1982), especially the Conclusion, pp. 246–247.

Kumārajīva had been the king’s counselor in his native land, Kuccha. General Lüguang
destroyed the state in 383 C.E. and brought Kumārajīva as a captive to the neighboring
city of Liangzhou. In 401 Kumārajīva was invited to Chang’an to serve as the religious
counselor to Yaoxing.

Genmyō Ono, et al., eds., Bussho kaisetsu daijiten (The Expositional Dictionary of
Buddhist Texts in the Chinese Tripiṭaka Collection) (Tokyo: Daitō Shuppansha, 1933),
Fascicle 6, pp. 45–46.

Faxian left Chang’an with a few co-travelers in 399 and returned alone by the sea
route in 413, bringing with him copies of the Mahāsāṃghika-vinaya, the Saṃyukta
Āgama, and the Mahāparinirvāṇa-sūtra, among other texts.

The section of doctrinal commentaries: vols. 33–39; the section of Vinaya commentaries,
vol. 40; the section of treatise commentaries, partially sectarian: vols. 41–44; the
section of Chinese and Japanese sectarian schools, vols. 45–48; the section of historical
traditions, vols. 49–52; the section of incidental and non-Buddhist texts, vols. 53–54
(which comprises both); and the section of textual catalogues, vol. 55.
T. W. and C. A. F. Rhys Davids, The Dialogues of the Buddha, 3 vols. (London: Pali
Text Society, 1899, 1910, 1921).
“Proper region” here means the Gangetic basin in north-central India, where Śākyamuni
Buddha lived and taught.

The term “mental and physical process” (Skt. nāmarūpa) describes the functioning
of the four mental aggregates (skandhas) of sensation (vedanā), perception (saṃjñā),
dispositional forces (saṃskāra), and consciousness (vijñāna) and the physical aggregate
of form or materiality (rūpa).

This phrase is adopted from the Pāli text; the Chinese text has “Your father’s secret
method.”

The phase “the beginning of things” that occurs in this section is from the Pāli text.
Śuklabhūmi is referred to as Uttarakā in the Pāli text.

Kalyāṇa-jātika is rendered as “One Who Has a Favorable Birth” in the Chinese text.

The ﬁve kinds of deﬁlement that bind sentient beings to the lower realm of desire are
(1) the heretical belief in a self, (2) attachment to practices and observances other
than those approved by the Buddha, (3) doubt, (4) sexual desire, and (5) malice.

According to Max Weber, world religions can be grouped into four types of religion
by cross-tabulating the types of asceticism, mysticism, other-worldliness, and innerworldliness. Weber put ancient Buddhism into the category of “otherworldly mysticism.” While I do not agree with the term “mysticism,” I conditionally agree with

180

Notes

23
24

another term Weber uses, characterizing early Buddhism as a type of “otherworldly
asceticism” on the grounds that Buddhism was committed to moral and religious disciplines that sought to avoid subjective desires, and to the complete dissociation of
the individual self from worldly concerns for the sake of religious emancipation. See
Max Weber, The Sociology of Religion (Boston: Beacon Press, 1863), p. 51; see especially T. Parson’s Introduction, pp. xlvi-lii.
The Ambaṭṭha Sutta is one of the most important sources of Buddhist critical thought
on the Brahmanical caste system. The legend narrated by the Buddha attests the theory
that the system of class divisions in ancient India fundamentally evolved on the principle
of endogamy (rules of marriage), and the Buddha’s critical instruction is aimed at
Ambaṭṭha’s caste-bound self-esteem as a brāhmaṇa, highest among the four castes, in
abusing the Śākyas, kinsmen of the Buddha, as being rude and uncivilized toward him.
The Buddha’s response is threefold: First, he made Ambaṭṭha recognize a Brahmanical legend explaining that brāhmaṇas were descended from the family of Kanhāyana (“black-skinned”), whose mother was a brāhmaṇa woman in servitude who had
been impregnated by the legendary Indo-Arian ruler Okkāka, while the Śākyas are
descended directly from the four princes of that king. When they were exiled to the
northeastern Himalayan region, they successfully built their colony as a Śākyan republic.
Second, the Buddha directly referred to the family laws on which Ambaṭṭha claims
his status, bringing him to recognize that these laws do not support his claim as being
of the highest caste. Third, the Buddha let Ambaṭṭha know that the Śākyas renounced
their status in the familial system to seek religious liberation for the goal of the unsurpassable endowment of knowledge and practice. He then questioned Ambaṭṭha as to
whether his teacher as well as himself have renounced their social status in the practice
of any of the four dietary disciplines.
Śākyamuni’s renunciation and eventual formation of his sangha cannot be fully
understood without taking into account the tragic ordeal of Śākya society and the
destruction of their state. Descriptions of Śākya society and its tragic history were,
however, preserved only in the form of legendary Jātaka (biographical) stories. Just
as the present chapter of the Dīrgha Āgama, the ofﬁcial literature does not reveal the
historical background of the Śākya republic, whereas the collection of Jātakas, especially Bhaddasālajātaka no. 465, IV, 144–153, relates it as historical fact. Arnold
Toynbee, in his theory of “historical challenge and response,” was convinced that,
just like any other world religion, the beginning of Buddhism was a deliberate conﬁguration of social problem solutions; see Arnold Toynbee and Jane Caplan, A Study
of History: The First Abridged One-Volume Edition (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1972), p. 44; Shohei Ichimura, “Revisiting the Times of Śākyamuni Buddha,” in
Radhavallabh Tripathi, ed., Srutimahati Glory of Sanskrit Tradition: Prof. Ram Karan
Sharma Felicitation Volume, vol. 2 (Delhi: Pratibha Prakashan, 2008), and “Śākyamuni’s Critical Spirituality and India’s Crisis,” in Shohei Ichimura, Buddhist Critical
Spirituality: Prajñā and Śūnyatā (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 2001).
The family name Kaṅhāyana is given in the Pāli text as “Dark.”

The name Okkāka (Pāli, “Whose Voice Emits Light) is rendered as “Shengmo” in
the Chinese text and in Sanskrit as “Ikṣvāku.”
181

Notes

25
26
27

28

“Śākya” in Sanskrit also means “residents of the sāka tree forest.”

The ﬁve obstacles that prevent the arising of good mental elements are desire, anger,
torpor and drowsiness, frivolity and mental disturbance, and doubt.

In the Buddha’s time it was a general custom that those who gave up their class status
to seek different goals in life had a choice of one of four dietary methods or practices.
When the Buddha himself renounced his Śākya clan membership, he is said to have
traded his princely clothing for the clothes of a poor woodcutter outside the border of
the Śākya teritory. It is likely that he himself followed strict dietary practices before
his realization of enlightenment. In the narrative of the Buddha’s attainment of supreme
enlightenment he is said to have bathed in the Nairañjana River. It happened that a
village girl saw him bathing, his body emaciated from long fasting, at the river and
offered rice gruel to him. Thus refreshed, he sat under the bodhi tree in the practice
of austerity, seeking the ﬁnal moment of realization. The Buddha initiated almsrounds
for his initial ﬁve disciples when he ﬁrst taught them at the Deer Park, near Benares,
because it was possible for a few bhikṣus to collect enough alms to provide for a larger
group, thus saving time for more individuals to engage in ascetic practice and study.
The Buddha asks Ambaṭṭha if his teacher Puṣkarasārin, who, despite having been
granted a ﬁef, had failed in his duty to counsel King Prasenajit, was engaged in the
proper practice of austerity to meet the king’s expectation, and he also asks Ambaṭṭha
if he himself was trying to do his best in the practice of austerity in order to be worthy
of respect not simply on the basis of his birth as a brāhmaṇa. See Ichimura, “Revisiting
the Times of Śākyamuni Buddha.”
In the Pāli text the seventh name, Bhāradvāja-Vāseṭṭha, is divided into two, and Bhagu
appears as the tenth name; the ninth to twelfth names, Alouna, Gautama, Shouyipo,
and Suntuoluo, are not given in the Pāli text.

182

Bibliography
Primary Sources

Abhidharmamahāvibhāṣā-śāstra (nonextant Sanskrit original; no Tibetan translation);
Apidamo dapibosha lun (T. 1545), in two hundred fascicles. Translated by Xuanzang.
Chu sanzang ji ji (Collection of the Tripiṭaka Textual Records) (T. 405) by Sengyou
(445–518). An expanded version of Dao’an’s Zhongjing mulu.
Datang Xi yu ji (T. 2087). Translated by Xuanzang. English translation in Li Rongxi,
The Great Tang Dynasty Record of the Western Regions (Berkeley: Numata Center
for Buddhist Translation and Research, 1996).
Dharmaguptaka-vinaya; Sifen lü (Vinaya in Four Divisions) (T. 1428), in sixty fascicles.
Translated by Buddhayaśas and Zhu Fonian.
Dīrgha Āgama (Pāli: Dīgha Nikāya); Chang ahan jing (Canonical Collection of Lengthy
Discourses) (T. 1), in twenty-two fascicles. Translated by Buddhayaśas and Zhu
Fonian. English translation in T. W. and C. A. F. Rhys Davids, The Dialogues of
the Buddha, 3 vols. (London: Pali Text Society, 1899, 1910, 1921).
Dīpavaṃsa (Chronicle of the Island). English translation in B. C. Law, “Chronicle of
the Island of Ceylon or the Dīpavaṃsa,” Ceylon Historical Journal 7 (1958): 1–266.
Dvādaśamukha-śāstra; Shiermun lun (T. 1568), in one fascicle. Translated by Kumārajīva
in 409.
Fochui ban lüeshuo jiaojie jing (T. 389), in one fascicle. Translated by Kumārajīva in
402–412.
Gaoseng faxian zhuan (Biography of Faxian) (T. 2085), in one fascicle. English translatiion
in Li Rongxi, The Journey of the Eminent Monk Faxian, in Lives of Great Monks
and Nuns (Berkeley: Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research, 2002),
pp. 155–214.
Gezhong qinding zhongjing mulu (Buddhist Canonical Textual Catalogues) compiled
by four northern dynasties: (1) Liang in 519, (2) Northern Wei in 532; (3) Northern
Qi in 570–578, and (4) Northern Chou in 563.
Jātakas (Birth Stories), e.g., Bhaddasālajātaka no. 465, IV, 144–153.
Kaiyuan shijiao mulu (Kaiyuan Record of Buddhist Textual Catalogues) (T. 2154). Compiled in 731.
Mahāprajñāpāramitōpadeśa-śāstra; Dazhidu lun (T. 1509), in one hundred fascicles,
by Nāgārjuna (ca. 50–150). Translated by Kumārajīva.

183

Bibliography
Mahāvaṃsa (Great Chronicle). English translation in Wilhelm Geiger and Mabel Haynes
Bode, The Mahāvaṃsa, Or, the Great Chronicle of Ceylon (London: Published for
the Pali Text Society by Luzac & Co, 1964).
Mūlamadhyamakākarikā-śāstra; Zhong lun (T. 1564), in four fascicles. By Nāgārjuna
with commentary by Piṅgala. Translated by Kumārajīva in 409.
Pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikā-prajñāpāramitā-sutra; Mohe banruo boluomi jing (Sutra of the
Perfection of Wisdom in Twenty-ﬁve Thousand Verses) (T. 221), in twenty-seven
fascicles. Translated by Kumārajīva in 404. Generally known in China as the Dapin
banruo jing (Larger Prajñāpāramitā Sutra) together with its voluminous commentary.
Renshou zhongjing mulu (Renshou Record of Textual Catalogues), revised upon the
Kaiyuan shijiao mulu in 602.
Saddharmapuṇḍarīka-sūtra; Miaofa lianhuajing (Sutra of the Lotus Blossom of the Fine
Dharma) (T. 262), in seven fascicles. Translated by Kumārajīva in 408–409. Commonly known as the Lotus Sutra; English translation in Tsugunari Kubo and Akira
Yuyama, The Lotus Sutra (Berkeley: Numata Center For Buddhist Translation and
Research, 2007, rev. second ed.)
Sui Kaihuang lidai sanbao ji (Sui Kaiyuan Record of the Threefold Buddhist Treasures
of the Successive Dynasties) (T. 2034), 598.
Vimalakīrtinirdeśa-sūtra; Weimojie suoshuo jing (T. 475), in three fascicles. Translated
by Kumārajīva. English translation in John R. McRae in The Sutra of Queen Srimala
of the Lion’s Roar/The Vimalakirti Sutra (Berkeley: Numata Center For Buddhist
Translation and Research, 2004), pp. 63–199.
Xiaopin banruo boluomi jing (Smaller Prajñāpāramitā-sutra) (T. 227), in ten fascicles.
Translated by Kumārajīva in 406.
Zhaolun (T. 1858), by Sengzhao (374–414), comprising four essays and two epistles.
Zhongjing mulu (Comprehensive Record of the Textual Catalogues) (T. 2145) by Dao’an
(314–385), included in Sengyou’s Chu sanzang ji.

Secondary Sources

Akanuma, Chizen. Kanpashibushi agon goshōroku (Comparative Catalogue of Chinese
Āgamas and Pāli Nikāyas). Nagoya: Hajinkaku shobō, 1929.
Edgerton, Franklin. Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit Grammar and Dictionary. New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press, 1953.
Ichimura, Shohei. “Revisiting the Times of Śākyamuni Buddha,” in Radhavallabh Tripathi
ed., Srutimahati Glory of Sanskrit Tradition: Prof. Ram Karan Sharma Felicitation
Volume, vol. 2. Delhi: Pratibha Prakashan, 2008.
—. “Śākyamuni’s Critical Spirituality and India’s Crisis” and “The Chinese Mādhyamika
Sengzhao’s Paradoxical Method of Argument,” in Shohei Ichimura, Buddhist Critical
Spirituality: Prajñā and Śūnyatā. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 2001.
Ishikawa, Kaijō. Agon-kyō seiritsu no kenkyū (A Study on How Sutras were Assembled
into the Āgama Collections). Tokyo: Gendaisha, 1982.

184

Bibliography
Lamotte, Étienne. History of Indian Buddhism from the Origins to the Śaka Era. Sara
Webb-Boin, trans. Louvain-la-Neue: Institut Orientaliste, 1988.
Malalasekera, G. P. Dictionary of Pāli Proper Names, 2 vols. London and Boston: Pali
Text Society, 1974.
Mettanando Bhikkhu. “After the Buddha.” Unpublished monograph.
Ono, Gemmyō, et al., eds. Bussho kaisetsu daijiten (Expositional Dictionary of Buddhist
Texts in the Chinese Tripiṭaka Collection). Tokyo: Daitō Shuppansha, 1933.
Toynbee, Arnold, and Jane Caplan. A Study of History: The First Abridged One-Volume
Edition. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1972.
Vidyabhusana, Satis Chandra. A History of Indian Logic: Ancient, Mediaeval, and Modern
Schools. Calcutta: Calcutta University Press, 1931.
Weber, Max. The Sociology of Religion. Ephraim Fischoff, trans. Boston: Beacon Press,
1863. See especially the Introduction by Talcott Parsons, pp. xlvi–lii.

185

Index
A

Abhidharma, xiv, xviii, 179n4
categorized in the Tripiṭaka, xiv, xx–
xxiii, 179n2
Mahayana and Hinayana, xx, xxii
See also commentaries/treatises,
Abhidharmamahāvibhāśā-śāśtra;
Tripiṭaka
Āgama(s), xiii, xv, xxiv
four/fourfold, xiv, xv, xxiii,
Hinayana, xxiv
See also Dīrgha Āgama; Ekkotarīka
Āgama; Madhyama Āgama; Saṃyukta Āgama
alms/almsfood, 45, 159, 170, 175, 177,
182n27
almsbowl/almsround(s), 7, 59, 62, 64,
67, 69, 79, 93, 94, 104, 159, 175,
182n27
Alouna, 170, 182n28
Ambaṭṭha, xvii, 141, 143–145, 147–150,
176, 178, 180–181n22, 182n27
See also Mānava
anāgāmin, 6, 12, 14, 108, 114
See also nonreturner
Ānanda, 23–38, 93– 94, 114–115
Anāthapiṇḍika, monastery built by, 3, 17
See also forest/grove, Jetavana Forest
Aṅgirasa, 170
Aṅguttara Nikāya, xv
See also Ekottarika Āgama; Nikāyas,
ﬁvefold

animal(s), 40, 63, 72–73, 154, 155, 176
bird(s), xvii, 40, 129, 144, 152, 156, 164
bulls/cow, 64, 65, 152, 154, 159
camels, 154
dog, 152, 154
elephant(s), 40, 41, 45, 134, 139, 143,
152, 154, 164, 176
ﬁeld mice, 73
goats, 154
hen/roosters, 152, 154
horse(s), 143, 152, 153, 154, 157, 173,
174, 176
jackal, 63, 72–73
lion, 72
pig(s), 152, 154
sheep, 152
anuttara samyaksaṃbodhi. See enlightenment, supreme
arhat(s), 7, 15, 40, 41, 63, 64, 65, 127,
128, 133, 179n4
arhatship, 6, 65
ārūpyadhātu. See realm, formless
ascetic(s)/asceticism, xvii, 63–72,
180–181n22
practice, 64, 65, 155, 182n27
seven kinds of, 63
See also austerity; mendicant
Aśoka, xiv
asura(s), xvii, 43, 44, 47, 55, 137, 140,
Aṭṭhaka, 170, 171
austerity, 3, 7, 10, 11, 14, 17, 41, 42, 44,
45, 50, 53, 56, 59, 60–61, 62, 96–101,

187

Index
austerity (continued):
105, 106, 107, 109, 121, 126, 142,
151, 157, 167, 182n27
See also ascetic, practice

B

Bhagu, 182n28
Bhāradvāja-Vāseṭṭha, 170, 182n28
bhikṣu(s), xix, 3, 5, 7–15, 17, 19, 22, 23,
32–33, 35–38, 44, 46, 51–54, 59,
62, 64, 66–67, 98–106, 108–109,
113–114, 129, 132, 133–136, 137,
139, 141, 150, 152–168, 175, 177
See also disciple(s); monk(s); śramaṇa(s); śrāvaka
bhikṣuṇī(s), 98, 99, 132
birth(s), 224, 25, 32, 107, 113, 121, 126,
146, 166, 182n27
See also rebirth(s)
birth and death, cause of, 121, 126, 167
bodhisattva, xxiii, 103
Brahmā, xvii, 23, 73–75, 139, 149, 150
birth, in Ābhāsvara Heaven, 9, 12, 37
in the guise of a youth, 57
brāhmaṇa(s), xvii, 23, 36, 37, 50, 51,
53–54, 59, 62, 63–67, 69–70, 73,
75–78, 87, 89, 90, 112, 113, 117–132,
138, 141–144, 146, 147, 148–149,
150, 152–156, 170–177, 179n5,
180–181n22, 182n27
ascetic(s), xvii, 67, 69, 70, 71
class/lineage, 146, 148, 149
heretic(s), 104, 106, 107, 109, 110
scriptures, 141, 142
See also caste(s)/class(es), four
Brhamanical, 180–181n22
buddha(s), 118, 131, 176
future, 118, 131, 134
marks, 142
past, 117, 118, 131, 134

188

Buddha, xix, 6, 8, 75–76, 77, 107, 110,
112, 139–140, 141, 180n21,
180–181n22, 182n27
and Ambaṭṭha/Mānava, 143–173,
180–181n22, 182n27
and Ānanda, 23–38, 114–115
and Bhārgava, 59–78
and bhikṣus, 3–15, 17–22, 100–114,
134–138, 139–140
and brāhmaṇa(s), 63–78
and Cunda, 94–100
demise/nirvana, xiii, 179n4
disciples/followers, 44, 54, 169
discourses/teaching(s) of, xiv, xvi, 45,
46, 48, 50, 179n2
and the Evil One/Māra, 139
and Indra/Śakra, 39, 43–57
and Kalyāṇa-jātika, 79–92
marks of, 172–173, 174
and Pañcaśika, 42–43, 57
and Pāṭikāputra, 67, 69–72, 73
and Puṣkarasārin, 174–177
and Śāriputra, 117–131, 132
and Sunakṣatra, 59–66, 67
and the gods, 133–134, 136–138, 140
and Udāyin, 131–132
See also Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha;
Gautama; Śākyamuni; Tathāgata;
World-honored One
Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha, 19, 61,
91, 132, 175, 176
See also Three Treasures
Buddhayaśas, xvii–xviii, xix, xxi
Buddhist(s), xiii, xiv, xv, xvi, xviii, xx,
xxi, xxiv, 109, 128, 180–181n22
canon/canonical tradition, xiv, xx
Chinese, xviii, xix
communities, xiii, xx, xxiv
Japanese, xx, xxiv
literature/scriptures/texts, xiv, xvi, xx,
xxi, xxii, xxv

Index
studies, xviii, xxiv
Tripiṭaka, xxi, xxii, xxiv
Buddhist councils, four, xiii–xiv
First Council, xiii
Second Council, xiii
Third Council, xiii, xiv, xv
Fourth Council, xiv
Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit, xv

C

cakravartin. See universal ruler
caste(s)/class(es), 150, 180–181n22,
182n27
four, 144, 145, 180–181n22
See also brāhmaṇa(s); kṣatriya(s);
śūdra(s); vaiśya(s)
catalogues/collections, xiii, xv, xvi, xx,
xxi–xxii, xxiv, 180n13
Chu sanzang ji ji (Collection of the
Tripiṭaka Textual Records), xx
Gezhong qinding zhongjing mulu
(Buddhist Canonical Textual Catalogues/Complete Buddhist Tripiṭaka
Library), xxi
Kaiyuan shijiao lu (Kaiyuan Record of
Buddhist Textual Catalogues), xxi
Renshou zhongjing mulu (Renshou
Record of Textual Catalogues), xxi
Sui Kaihuang lidai sanbao ji (Sui Kaihuang Record of the Threefold
Buddhist Treasures of the Successive
Dynasties), xxi
Taishō shinshū daizōkyō (Taishō New
Tripiṭaka Edition), xx
Zhongjing mulu (Comprehensive Record of the Textual Catalogues), xx
See also scriptures/sutras/texts
causal, 9, 11
aggregates, 25, 167
concatenation/linkages/relation/series,
9, 30, 32, 35, 75–77

condition(s), 24, 127
contexts, 166, 167
dependence, 25–32
factors, eight kinds of, 10–11
origin, 36, 37
See also causality; dependent origination
causality, 23–35, 39, 57, 113, 118
greater, xvi, 23–38
lesser, xvi
original, xxiii
twelve-limbed, 23
See also causal; dependent origination
Chang ahan jing (Canonical Collection
of Lengthy Discourses), xiii, xxi,
xxiii–xxv
categorized in the Taishō shinshū
daizōkyō, xx–xxi
and the Dharmaguptaka school, xix
“Sutra on Buddhist Cosmology,” xv,
xvii, xix, 179n8
sutras of, correlated to the Pāli Dīgha
Nikāya suttantas, xv–xvii
See also Dīgha Nikāya; Dīrgha Āgama
China, xiv, xviii, xx, xxiv, 180n13
dynasty/period:
Han/Late Han, xiv, xviii
Jing, xxii
Ming, xxii
Northern Song/Song, xxii
Sixteen States, xviii
Sui, xxi
Tang, xviii, xxii
Yuan, xxii
Chinese, xix, xx, xxii
Buddhists, xviii, xix
language, xxiv, xxv, xviii
texts/translations, xv, xx, xxv, 46,
179n4, 180nn17, 20, 181n24
city(ies)/town(s)/village(s), 59, 64, 67, 69,
79, 143, 160, 164, 165, 167, 169,
174, 182

189

Index
city(ies)/town(s)/village(s) (continued):
Āmra, 39
Anupiya, xvii, 59, 78
Chang’an, xviii, xix, xx, xxi, xxiv,
180nn10, 12
Icchānaṅkala, 141
Liangzhou, xviii xx, 180n10
Louyang, xviii
Lushan, xix
Nālandā, 117
Pāṭaliputra (Patna), xiv
Pāvā, 93, 94
Puṣkarasvādi, 141
Rājagṛha (Rājgīr), xiii, 79, 136
Śuklabhūmi (Uttarakā), 64, 180n19
Vaiśālī (Vesālī), xiii, 60, 61, 62, 63, 67,
68–69
commemorative tower(s), xix, 91, 94, 95,
96
commentaries/treatises, xviii, xxiii, xxxii,
180n13
Abhidharmamahāvibhāṣā-śāśtra/Mahāvibhāṣā-śāstra, xiv, 179n4
Apidamo da pibosha lun, 179n4
Satyasiddhi-śāstra (Cheng shi lun;
Treatise on the Establishment of
Truth), xix
Zhao lun, xxi
See also scriptures/sutras/texts
Confucian, xviii, xx
contemplation, xix, xxiv, 3, 14, 22, 55,
129, 130, 158
contemplative recollection, xxiv
See also incantation, esoteric/magical
country(ies)/region(s), xviii, 5, 90, 93,
94, 156, 165–166, 180n15
Aśvaka, 136
Central Asia(n), xvii, xviii, xix
India, vii, xix, 180–181nn22
Gangetic basin, 180n15

190

D

Himalayan region, 180–181n22
Northern/north-central, xv, 180n15
Kapilavastu, 93, 133, 136, 139, 140
Kāśmīra, xiv, xviii, xviii, xix, 179n5
Kauśala, 141
Khotan, xviii, xix
Kuccha (Eastern Turkestan), xviii,
180n10
Kuru, 23
Kuṣāṇa, xiv
Magadha, 39, 46, 57
Malla/Mallan, 59, 64
Mauryan, xiv
Southeast Asia, xiv
Burma, xiv
Indochina, xiv
Thailand, xiv
Śrāvastī, 43, 171
Sri Lanka, xiv
Vidarbha, 179n5
Vṛji, 61

Dao’an, xx–xxi
Daoist, xviii, xx, xxi
deﬁlement(s), 8, 12, 21, 36, 37, 38, 39,
46, 55, 57, 81, 107, 108, 109, 114,
120, 134, 140, 157, 176
action, four kinds of, 80
ﬁve kinds of, 108, 126, 177, 180n21
inﬂuence of, 3, 4, 5, 9–10, 32, 33, 35,
36, 75, 76, 77, 78, 121, 125, 129,
167, 168, 176
seven kinds of, 9
dependent origination, 34, 35, 113
See also causal; causality
desire(s), 4, 5, 8, 9–10, 12, 13, 21,
26–29, 32, 35, 41, 42, 45, 46, 48,
49–50, 53, 54, 109, 120, 129, 131,
132, 134, 140, 151, 159, 160, 165,
176, 180–181n22, 182n26

Index
carnal/sexual, 6, 9, 108, 126, 130, 151,
167, 180n21
cause of, 27–28
ﬁve kinds of, 105–106
realm of, 25, 108, 126, 177, 180n21
worldly, 5, 114, 158
desire, anger, and delusion, 80, 81, 126
devas, 140
See also god(s)
dhāraṇī. See contemplative recollection;
incantation, esoteric/magical
Dharma, xvi, 4, 8, 14, 56, 57, 73, 88, 118,
119, 131, 133, 139, 140, 150, 176
great/highest/supreme, 3, 17
right, 91, 139, 150, 175, 177
See also Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha
Dharmaguptaka school, xiii, xiv, xv, xix
See also Vinaya texts, Dharmaguptakavinaya
Dīgha Nikāya (Lengthy Discourses), xix,
xxv, 23, 39, 59, 79, 93, 117, 133, 141
and the Dīrgha Āgama, xiv–xvii
suttantas of, correlated with Dīrgha
Āgama sutras, xv–xvi
and the “Sutra of Buddhist Cosmology”
in the Chang ahan jing, xvi, xix,
179n8
See also Chang ahan jing; Dīrgha
Āgama; Nikāyas, ﬁvefold
Dīrgha Āgama (Lengthy Discourses),
xiii, xviii, 180–181n22
and the Dīgha Nikāya, xiv–xvii
See also Āgamas, four/fourfold;
Chang ahan jing; Dīgha Nikāya
disciple(s), xiii, xix, xxi, 15, 22, 44, 46,
54, 60, 62, 64, 77–78, 79, 88, 93,
95–100, 117, 126, 133, 139, 140,
141, 142, 152, 153–157, 173, 174,
175, 176, 182n27
female, 98, 99, 100

E

lay, 99, 100
saintly, 6, 14, 128, 129, 166
See also bhikṣu(s); bhikṣuṇī(s);
monk(s)

eightfold noble path, 10, 11, 20, 101, 119
Ekkotarika Āgama (Gradually Increased
Discourses), xv
emptiness, xxi, 74
of the self, 4, 18
enlightenment, 100, 109, 110, 141, 158,
159, 182n27
seven auxiliary disciplines/practices
of, 8, 10, 19, 101, 108, 119, 120,
supreme, 40, 110, 182n27
eon(s), xiii, 123–124, 127, 128, 165, 166
evil(s), 11, 23, 27, 84, 130, 152, 155, 160
action(s)/conduct, 80–81, 84, 128
four bases of, 80–81
course of existence/life course, 17–21,
126, 128, 134
destinies, three, 166
inﬂuence(s), 32, 33, 35–36, 121, 125,
129, 134, 157
psychophysical elements, 10, 82
Evil One. See Māra
evil ones (deva-māras), 139, 140, 142,
150, 142
See also Māra
expediency/expedient means, 147, 152,
153, 154, 168–169

F

Faxian, xix, 180n12
ﬁve aggregates, 5, 11
See also psychophysical elements
ﬁve spiritual faculties, 6, 10
ﬂower(s), 41, 91, 139, 153, 171
See also lotuses

191

Index
forest/grove, 59, 70–73, 79, 93, 133, 135,
136, 137, 139, 140, 143, 144, 145,
152, 154, 159, 174, 182n25
Icchānaṅkala Grove, 141, 143, 174, 177
Jetavana Forest, 3, 17
Pāvārika’s Mango Forest, 117
four applications of mental awareness, 18
four guardians/guardian gods, xvii, 136,
150
Dhṛtarāṣṭra, 136
Vaiśravaṇa, 136
Virūḍhaka, 43, 136
Virūpākṣa, 136
Four Noble Truths, 4, 176
four quarters of the earth, 131, 132, 143
four shrines: Bahuputraka, Gautamaka,
Saptāmra, Udena, 63
Fujian, xviii, xx, xxi

G

gandharva(s), 39, 42, 44, 46, 47, 57, 137,
140
Gautama, 59, 65–71, 74, 76, 77– 78, 106,
109, 130, 141–143, 145, 147, 150,
170, 172, 173–174, 182n28
See also Buddha; Śākyamuni
god(s), 23, 39–40, 42–44, 47–57, 68–69,
125, 126, 128, 133, 134, 135, 138,
139–140, 142, 149, 150, 164, 166,
177
Brahmā, 138
of the earth, 135
gandharva, 39, 42, 46
heavenly/of the heavens, 46, 134, 137,
140, 150
of Mt. Śairagiri, 135
of the Snow Mountains (Himalayas),
135
of the Śuddhāvāsa heavens, 133–134
Trāyastriṃśa, 39, 41, 42, 43, 44, 46, 54,
56, 57

192

See also four guardians/guardian gods;
heavenly, beings/spirits/gods
Gopaka/Gopikā, 44, 46
Great Yüeji. See Kaniṣka, King

H

happiness, xvii, 11, 12, 20, 21, 53, 55,
56, 78, 86, 105, 106–108, 110, 112,
117, 127, 132, 165
heaven(s), xii, 43, 56, 80, 81, 82, 86, 140
Ābhāsvara, 9, 12, 13, 37, 46, 74, 75
Akaniṣṭha, 56, 108
Āsaṃjñika, 13
Brahmā, 74, 129, 135, 164, 171, 172
Subhakṛtsna, 9, 13, 37
Śuddhāvāsa, 133–134
Trāyastriṃśa, xvii, 39, 41, 61, 43, 44,
45, 46, 54, 57, 69
heavenly, 143
beings/spirits/gods, 8, 9, 12, 36, 46,
57, 121, 133, 134, 137, 150
body, 56, 134
maiden/nymph, 42, 43–44
See also god(s)
hell(s), xvii, 168, 169, 170, 171, 173
heretic(s), 104, 106, 109, 110, 130
See also Hindu; non-Buddhist
heretical practices/belief, 105, 106, 107,
126, 180n21
Hinayana, xiv, xv, xx, xxi, xxii, xxiv
See also Theravāda
Hindu, xiv, xvi
literature:
Purāṇas and Śāstras, 179n5
Three Vedas, xvii
See also heretic(s); heretical practices/
belief; non-Buddhist
householder(s), 43, 104, 142, 143, 144,
150, 154, 171
See also lay
Huibian, xix

Index
Huiyüen, xix

I

ignorance, 4, 9, 24, 91, 119, 121, 124,
125, 134, 166, 167
cause of, 166, 167, 168
impermanence/impermanent, 34, 75, 76,
109
incantation, 128, 155, 156
esoteric/magical, 136–138, 155
See also contemplative recollection
Indra, xvi, 39, 42–47, 54, 57, 136, 139
See also Śakra
Īśvara, 73–74

J

Jain. See Nirgrantha
Jātūkarṇya Vyāsa, 179n5
Jñātiputra, 93

K

kalpa. See eon
Kalyāṇa-jātika, xvii, 79–82, 84–89, 91–92,
180n20
kāmadhātu. See realm, of desire
Kaniṣka, King, xiv, 179n4
Kāśyapa, 170
Kaura, 64–66
Khuddaka Nikāya (Short Discourses), xv
See also Nikāyas, ﬁvefold
kṣatriya(s), 64–66, 144, 148–149
See also caste(s)/class(es), four
Kumārajīva, xviii, xix, xx–xxi, 180n10
Kumbhīra, 136

L

lay, 43, 44
devotee(s)/disciple(s)/followers, 70,
71, 89, 91, 93, 94, 99, 100, 175,
176–177
See also householder(s)

layman/laymen, 93, 132
laywomen, 132
Licchavi clanspeople, 50, 70–73
lion’s roar, 72, 73, 117, 118
Lotus Association, xix
lotuses, 161–162
See also ﬂower(s)
lotus posture, 129, 158
Lüguang, General, xviii, 180n10

M

Madhyama Āgama (Middle-length Discourses), xv
See also Āgamas, four/fourfold;
Majjhima Nikāya
Madhyamaka, xxiii
Mahayana, xvi, xxiii
sutras/texts, xx–xxiv
Tripiṭaka, xv, xix, xx–xxi, xxiv
Majjhima Nikāya (Middle-length Discourses), xv
See also Nikāyas, ﬁvefold; Madhyama
Āgama
Mānava, 143–150, 152–173
See also Ambaṭṭha
Māra, 139, 142
See also evil ones (deva-māras)
meditation, 14, 15, 23, 117, 127, 161
four kinds of, 40
meditative absorption, four kinds/states,
13, 101, 107, 119, 130, 161–162
mendicant, 6, 83, 150
See also ascetic(s); śramaṇa(s)
mindful/mindfulness, 3, 5, 6, 8, 14, 19–20,
46, 107, 114, 158–159
four kinds of, 120
right, 11, 15, 20, 21
six kinds of, 8
six objects of, 19
wrong, 11, 15, 20

193

Index
monk(s), xiii, xiv, xix, 7, 10
See also bhikṣu(s); disciple(s); śramaṇa(s); śravaka
mountains/peaks:
Himalayas/Snow Mountains, 134, 145,
146, 180–181n22
Mount Vediya/Vediyaka, 39
Vepulla, 136
Vulture Peak, 79

N

Nikāyas, ﬁvefold, xiv–xv
See also Aṅguttara Nikāya; Dīgha
Nikāya; Khuddaka Nikāya;
Majjhima Nikāya; Saṃyutta Nikāya
Nirgrantha, 62–65, 93, 94
nirvana, 17, 40, 42, 96, 108, 126, 179n4
doctrinal items leading to, 18–22
ﬁnal, 53, 177
ﬁve kinds of, 108
goal of, 41, 179n4
path toward, 6, 17
See also parinirvāṇa
non-Buddhist, xvi, 180n13
nonreturner, 6, 108, 126, 127,
See also anāgāmin
Numata, Dr. Yehan, xxiv

O

obsessive conception(s)/conceptualization,
49–51, 159
Okkāka, King, 145–146, 148, 180–181n22,
181n24
four sons of (Okkāmukha, Hatthinīya,
Karaṇḍu, and Sīnipura), 145–146
once-returner, 6, 54, 126, 127

P

Pāli, xiv, xv, xvi, xix, xxiv, xxv, 141,
180nn17, 18; 181nn23, 24; 182n28
Pali Text Society, xxv

194

Pañcasikha, 39–43, 57
parinirvāṇa, 110
See also nirvana, ﬁnal
path(s), 17, 22, 40, 42, 46, 50, 54, 56, 64,
67, 68, 69, 75, 86, 95, 96–97, 109,
167, 176
authentic/right/true/ultimate, 12, 56,
95, 108, 155, 156
to enlightenment/nirvana, 6, 17, 40, 96
of practice/practice of, 61–62, 64, 132,
150
of religion/religious, 74, 75, 76, 120,
142, 143, 155, 156
ten direct, 21
of transcendence, 67–69
wrong, 12, 155, 156
ten kinds of, 15
See also eightfold noble path
Pāṭikāputra, 67–73
Pāyāsi, xvi
pond(s), 41, 154, 161
eight qualities of, 61
Markaṭa Pond, 60, 62, 67
practice(s), xvi, xvii, xxiii, xxv, 5, 6, 7,
11, 17, 22, 40, 45, 46, 55, 56, 57, 61,
64, 77, 78, 80, 91, 93, 94, 95–96, 97,
114, 119, 120, 129, 132, 141, 150,
152–156, 157, 162, 166–170, 177
ascetic/of austerity, 3, 7, 10, 11, 17,
41, 42, 53, 62–65, 96–101, 105,
106, 107, 109, 121, 126, 142, 150,
155, 157, 167, 182n27
attachment to, 126, 180n21
of calming the mind and of analytical
introspection/insight, 4, 18
of concentration/threefold concentration, 4, 9, 18, 20, 121
of contemplation/introspection/mindfulness, 10, 22, 46, 130
four alternative/dietary/expedient,
168–170, 180–181n22, 182n27

Index
harmonious/six principles of harmony
in, 7, 149
heretical, 106, 107
moral, xviii, 108
right/of the right doctrine/ten right,15,
95, 106
three forms/ways of, 114
See also enlightenment, seven auxiliary
practices of
Prasenajit, King, 141, 171, 182n27
pratītyasamutpāda. See causality, twelvelimbed; dependent origination
precept(s), 5, 7, 8, 12, 18, 19, 62, 69, 87,
150–151, 156, 177
ﬁve, 19, 175
psychophysical elements, xix, 5, 6, 9, 10,
14, 18, 20, 53, 75, 76, 77, 82, 114,
120, 158, 159
See also ﬁve aggregates
Pure Land, xix

Q

quiescence, 8, 9, 20, 100, 157, 161, 162,
163, 164, 166, 167, 168

R

rākṣasa, 137
realm(s), 4, 38, 59, 114
of desire, 25, 108, 126, 177, 180n21
of form, 25, 56, 108, 176
formless, 25, 108
of inﬁnite consciousness, 38, 114
of inﬁnite space, 38, 114
of neither ideation nor nonideation, 38,
114
of nothingness or nonutility, 38, 114
supramundane, 107, 121, 125
rebirth(s), 54, 120, 167, 168
among the gods/in heaven(s), 56, 86,
176
in the Pure Land, xix

river(s), 91, 134, 182n27
Nairañjanā, 42, 182n27
Yangzi, xviii
robe(s), 45, 71, 93, 94, 104, 159
outer, 115, 131, 159, 175
saṃghāṭī, 59, 62, 64, 67, 69, 79
three, ix, 74, 75, 76, 77, 150
rūpadhātu. See realm, of form

S

Śakra, 39, 41–42, 46–57
See also Indra
sakṛdāgāmin. See once-returner
Śākya(s), 40, 44, 46, 54, 62, 64, 104,
106, 109, 133, 141, 144–145, 146,
147, 171, 180–181n22, 182nn25, 27
sage, 168, 169, 170
See also Śākyamuni
Śākyamuni, xiii, xvi, xix, xxiii–xxiv, xxv,
40, 46, 180n15, 180–181n22
See also Bodhisattva; Buddha; Gautama
Saṃyukta Āgama (Mixed Discourses), xv
See also Āgamas, four/fourfold; Saṃyutta Nikāya
Saṃyutta Nikāya (Mixed Discourses), xv
See also Nikāyas, ﬁvefold; Saṃyukta
Āgama
Sandhāna, xvi
sangha, xx, 7, 8, 175, 177, 180–181n22
See also Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha
Śāriputra, 117–132
śāstra. See commentaries/treatises
Sengyou, xx, xxi
Sengzhao, xxi, xxiv, xxv
sensation(s), 6, 14, 18, 24, 26, 27, 30, 32,
33–35, 106, 113, 119, 158, 180n16
ﬁve kinds of, 125
three kinds of, 4, 33–34
See also sense(s)

195

Index
sense(s), 12, 14, 38, 113, 114, 134, 162,
163
contact, 24, 30–31, 32, 33–34, 113,
115
six kinds of, 157ﬁve, 54
faculties, 3, 8, 33, 34, 52, 113, 157
ﬁve, 15
six, 113, 157
inner and outer, 5, 17, 18, 114, 158
object, 34, 113
operation, six/sixfold, 24, 32, 113
organs, 31
perception(s), 5, 158
See also sensation(s)
scripture(s)/sutra(s), xiii– xvii, xix, xxii–
xxv, 6, 22, 115
brāhmaṇa, 141, 142
doctrinal, xxi, 22
esoteric, xxiii
Hinayana, xxii, xxiii
Mahayana, xxii, xxiii
Prajñāpāramitā/Wisdom, xx, xxi, xxiii,
xxiv
twelve categories of/twelvefold, 103–
104, 179n2
See also catalogues/collections; commentaries/treatises; Sutra, Vinaya,
and Abhidharma; Vinaya texts
scriptures/sutras/texts:
Jātakas, 103, 180–181n22
Bhaddasālajātaka, 180–181n22
Daśabhūmika-sūtra (Sutra on the Ten
Stages of the Bodhisattva Career),
xviii
Datang Xi yu ji (Record of the Western
Regions), 179n4
Dīpavaṃsa, 179n3
Mahāparinirvāṇa-sūtra, 180n12
Mahāprajñāpāramitā-sūtra, xxiv
Mahāsaṃnipāta-sūtra (Great Collection Sutra), xxiii

196

Mahāvaṃsa, 179n3
Xukongyun pusa jing (Ākāśagarbhasūtra; Sutra on Ākāśagarbha Bodhisattva), xx
Shouyipo, 170, 182n28
Sikhaddi, 42
skandhas. See ﬁve aggregates; psychophysical elements
śramaṇa(s), xvii, xviii, xix, 23, 36, 37,
41, 42, 50, 51, 53–54, 67–68, 69–70,
71, 73, 75–78, 87–90, 104, 106, 106,
112, 113, 117–129, 130–132, 142,
144, 150, 152–156
See also ascetic(s); mendicant; monk(s)
śrāvaka, 128
See also bhikśu(s); disciple(s); monk(s)
srotaāpanna. See stream-winner
Sthāvira/Sthāvira-Sarvāstivāda school,
xiii, xiv, xv
stream-winner, 6, 54, 126, 127
stupa. See commemorative tower(s)
Sudharma Hall, 42, 44, 46, 54, 60, 62, 67
See also heaven(s), Trāyastriṃśa
śūdra(s), 144, 145, 147, 148
See also caste(s)/class(es), four
Suntuoluo, 170, 182n28
śūnyatā. See emptiness
supernormal knowledge, 5, 127
supernormal power(s), 60, 64, 66–71,
98–101, 109, 110, 117–129, 131,
132, 135–136, 139, 140, 162,
164–168, 173, 174
ﬁve kinds of, 138
four kinds of, 119
six kinds of, 8
Sutra, Vinaya, and Abhidharma, xx, 179n2
See also Tripiṭaka

T

tathāgata, 15, 22, 150

Index
Tathāgata, 6, 33, 34, 39, 41, 42, 44, 45,
52–54, 57, 60–61, 68, 72, 73,
75–77, 91, 100, 106, 109–111,
117–128, 131, 133, 134, 141, 143,
149, 150, 172–176
See also Buddha; World-honored One
Theravāda, xiv, xv
See also Hinayana
Three Treasures. See Buddha, Dharma,
and Sangha
Tibetan language, xxiv, 179n4
Tipiṭaka. See Tripiṭaka
transcendent insight/knowledge/faculties,
14, 32, 33, 35, 36, 56, 108, 109,
117, 118, 121, 125, 159, 168
treasure(s), 8, 43, 153
seven, 143
tree(s), 15, 22, 104, 159, 168
bodhi, 182n27
nyagrodha, 42
śaka/sākasaṇda, 145, 182n25
tinduka, 70
Tripiṭaka, xiii, xiv, xv, xix, xxxxiv,
179nn2, 3

Vāmaka, 170
Vāmadeva, 170
Vessāmitta, 170
Vinaya, xiii, xxi, 52, 103, 151, 157
Vinaya texts, xvii–xix, xxii, xxiii, xxiv,
180n13
Daśabhāṇavāra-vinaya, xviii
Dharmaguptaka-vinaya (Sifen lü/
Vinaya in Four Divisions), xviii–xix
Mahāsāṃghika-vinaya, 180n12
See also Sutra, Vinaya, and Abhidharma

universal ruler, xvi, xvii, 142–143
upāsaka. See layman/laymen
upāsikā. See laywomen

yakṣa(s), 135, 136, 140, 147
Yamataggi, 170
Yaoxing, xviii, xix, xx, xxi, 180n10
Yogācāra, xxii

Vaibhāṣika. See Buddhayaśas
vaiśya(s), 144
See also caste(s)/class(es), four

Zhi Faling, xix
Zhu Fonian, xviii

U
V

W

World-honored One, 3, 10, 17, 23, 39–44,
46–47, 50, 52–55, 57, 59–62, 64–66,
68, 71–73, 78, 79–81, 85, 86, 89, 91,
93–94, 100–101, 114–115, 117,
119–129, 131–132, 133, 136–139,
143–145, 147, 148, 150, 172–177
See also Buddha; Tathāgata

X

Xuanzang, xiv, xxiv, 179n4

Y

Z

197

BDK English Tripiṭaka
(First Series)

Title

Abbreviations
Ch.: Chinese
Skt.: Sanskrit
Jp.: Japanese
Eng.: Published title

Ch. Chang ahan jing (長阿含經)
Skt. Dīrghāgama
Eng. The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses
(Volume I, 2015)
The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses
(Volume II, 2016)

Taishō No.

Ch. Zhong ahan jing (中阿含經)
Skt. Madhyamāgama
Eng. The Madhyama Āgama (Middle-length Discourses),
(Volume I, 2013)

1

26

Ch. Dasheng bensheng xindi guan jing (大乘本生心地觀經)

159

Ch. Zabao zang jing (雜寶藏經)
Eng. The Storehouse of Sundry Valuables (1994)

203

Ch. Xiaopin banruo boluomi jing (小品般若波羅蜜經)
Skt. Aṣṭasāhasrikā-prajñāpāramitā-sutra

227

Ch. Fo suoxing zan (佛所行讃)
Skt. Buddhacarita
Eng. Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts (2009)

Ch. Faju piyu jing (法句譬喩經)
Eng. The Scriptural Text: Verses of the Doctrine, with Parables (1999)

199

192

211

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Jingang banruo boluomi jing (金剛般若波羅蜜經)
Skt. Vajracchedikā-prajñāpāramitā-sutra

Taishō No.

Ch. Daluo jingang bukong zhenshi sanmoye jing
(大樂金剛不空眞實三麼耶經)
Skt. Adhyardhaśatikā-prajñāpāramitā-sutra
Eng. The Sutra of the Vow of Fulﬁlling the Great Perpetual
Enjoyment and Beneﬁting All Sentient Beings Without
Exception (in Esoteric Texts, 2015)

235

243

Ch. Renwang banruo boluomi jing (仁王般若波羅蜜經)
Skt. *Kāruṇikārājā-prajñāpāramitā-sutra

245

Ch. Miaofa lianhua jing (妙法蓮華經)
Skt. Saddharmapuṇḍarīka-sutra
Eng. The Lotus Sutra (Revised Second Edition, 2007)

262

Ch. Guan Puxian pusa xingfa jing (觀普賢菩薩行法經)
Eng. The Sutra Expounded by the Buddha on Practice of the Way
through Contemplation of the Bodhisattva All-embracing
Goodness (in Tiantai Lotus Texts, 2013)

277

Ch. Banruo boluomiduo xin jing (般若波羅蜜多心經)
Skt. Prajñāpāramitāhṛdaya-sutra

251

Ch. Wuliangyi jing (無量義經)
Eng. The Inﬁnite Meanings Sutra (in Tiantai Lotus Texts, 2013)

276

Ch. Dafangguang fo huayan jing (大方廣佛華嚴經)
Skt. Avataṃsaka-sutra

279

Ch. Shengman shizihou yisheng defang bianfang guang jing
(勝鬘師子吼一乘大方便方廣經)
Skt. Śrīmālādevīsiṃhanāda-sutra
Eng. The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of the Lion’s Roar (2004)

353

Ch. Guan wuliangshou fo jing (觀無量壽佛經)
Skt. *Amitāyurdhyāna-sutra
Eng. The Sutra on Contemplation of Amitāyus
(in The Three Pure Land Sutras, Revised Second Edition, 2003)

365

Ch. Wuliangshou jing (無量壽經)
Skt. Sukhāvatīvyūha
Eng. The Larger Sutra on Amitāyus (in The Three Pure Land Sutras,
Revised Second Edition, 2003)

200

360

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Taishō No.

Ch. Amituo jing (阿彌陀經)
Skt. Sukhāvatīvyūha
Eng. The Smaller Sutra on Amitāyus (in The Three Pure Land Sutras,
Revised Second Edition, 2003)

366

Ch. Fochuibo niepan lüeshuo jiaojie jing (佛垂般涅槃略説教誡經)
Eng. The Bequeathed Teaching Sutra (in Apocryphal Scriptures, 2005)

389

Ch. Da banniepan jing (大般涅槃經)
Skt. Mahāparinirvana-sutra
Eng. The Nirvana Sutra (Volume I, 2013)

374

Ch. Dizang pusa benyuan jing (地藏菩薩本願經)
Skt. *Kṣitigarbhapraṇidhāna-sutra

412

Ch. Yaoshi liuli guang rulai benyuan gongde jing
(藥師琉璃光如來本願功徳經)
Skt. Bhaiṣajyaguru-vaiḍūrya-prabhāsa-pūrvapraṇidhāna-viśeṣavistara

450

Ch. Wenshushili wen jing (文殊師利問經)
Skt. *Mañjuśrīparipṛcchā
Eng. The Sutra of Mañjuśrī’s Questions (2015)

468

Ch. Banzhou sanmei jing (般舟三昧經)
Skt. Pratyutpanna-buddhasammukhāvasthita-samādhi-sutra
Eng. The Pratyutpanna Samādhi Sutra (1998)

Ch. Mile xiasheng chengfo jing (彌勒下生成佛經)
Skt. *Maitreyavyākaraṇa
Eng. The Sutra that Expounds the Descent of Maitreya Buddha
and His Enlightenment (2015)

Ch. Weimojie suoshuo jing (維摩詰所説經)
Skt. Vimalakīrtinirdeśa-sutra
Eng. The Vimalakīrti Sutra (2004)

418

454

475

Ch. Yueshangnü jing (月上女經)
Skt. Candrottarādārikā-paripṛcchā

480

Ch. Damoduoluo chan jing (達磨多羅禪經)

618

Ch. Zuochan sanmei jing (坐禪三昧經)
Eng. The Sutra on the Concentration of Sitting Meditation (2009)

614

Ch. Yuedeng sanmei jing (月燈三昧經)
Skt. Samādhirāja-candrapradīpa-sutra

639

201

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Shoulengyan sanmei jing (首楞嚴三昧經)
Skt. Śūraṅgamasamādhi-sutra
Eng. The Śūraṅgama Samādhi Sutra (1998)

Taishō No.
642

Ch. Jinguang ming zuishengwang jing (金光明最勝王經)
Skt. Suvarṇaprabhāsa-sutra

665

Ch. Jie shenmi jing (解深密經)
Skt. Saṃdhinirmocana-sutra
Eng. The Scripture on the Explication of Underlying Meaning (2000)

676

Ch. Sishierzhang jing (四十二章經)
Eng. The Sutra of Forty-two Sections (in Apocryphal Scriptures, 2005)

784

Ch. Dasheng rulengqie jing (大乘入楞伽經)
Skt. Laṅkāvatāra-sutra

672

Ch. Yulanpen jing (盂蘭盆經)
Skt. *Ullambana-sutra
Eng. The Ullambana Sutra (in Apocryphal Scriptures, 2005)

685

Ch. Dafangguang yuanjue xiuduoluo liaoyi jing
(大方廣圓覺修多羅了義經)
Eng. The Sutra of Perfect Enlightenment
(in Apocryphal Scriptures, 2005)

842

Ch. Da Biluzhena chengfo shenbian jiachi jing
848
(大毘盧遮那成佛神變加持經)
Skt. Mahāvairocanābhisambodhi-vikurvitādhiṣṭhāna-vaipulyasūtrendrarājanāma-dharmaparyāya
Eng. The Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi Sutra (2005)

Ch. Jinggangding yiqie rulai zhenshi she dasheng xianzheng dajiao
865
wang jing (金剛頂一切如來眞實攝大乘現證大教王經)
Skt. Sarvatathāgata-tattvasaṃgraha-mahāyānā-bhisamaya-mahākalparāja
Eng. The Adamantine Pinnacle Sutra (in Two Esoteric Sutras, 2001)

Ch. Suxidi jieluo jing (蘇悉地羯囉經)
Skt. Susiddhikara-mahātantra-sādhanopāyika-paṭala
Eng. The Susiddhikara Sutra (in Two Esoteric Sutras, 2001)
Ch. Modengqie jing (摩登伽經)
Skt. *Mātaṅgī-sutra
Eng. The Mātaṅga Sutra (in Esoteric Texts, 2015)

202

893

1300

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Mohe sengqi lü (摩訶僧祇律)
Skt. *Mahāsāṃghika-vinaya

Taishō No.
1425

Ch. Sifen lü (四分律)
Skt. *Dharmaguptaka-vinaya

1428

Ch. Fanwang jing (梵網經)
Skt. *Brahmajāla-sutra

1484

Ch. Shanjianlü piposha (善見律毘婆沙)
Pāli Samantapāsādikā

1462

Ch. Youposaijie jing (優婆塞戒經)
Skt. Upāsakaśīla-sutra
Eng. The Sutra on Upāsaka Precepts (1994)

1488

Ch. Shizha biposha lun (十住毘婆沙論)
Skt. *Daśabhūmika-vibhāṣā

1521

Ch. Apidamojushe lun (阿毘達磨倶舍論)
Skt. Abhidharmakośa-bhāṣya

1558

Ch. Miaofa lianhua jing youbotishe (妙法蓮華經憂波提舍)
1519
Skt. Saddharmapuṇḍarīka-upadeśa
Eng. The Commentary on the Lotus Sutra (in Tiantai Lotus Texts, 2013)

Ch. Fodijing lun (佛地經論)
Skt. *Buddhabhūmisutra-śāstra
Eng. The Interpretation of the Buddha Land (2002)

1530

Ch. Zhonglun (中論)
Skt. Madhyamaka-śāstra

1564

Ch. Cheng weishi lun (成唯識論)
Eng. Demonstration of Consciousness Only
(in Three Texts on Consciousness Only, 1999)

1585

Ch. Yüqie shidilun (瑜伽師地論)
Skt. Yogācārabhūmi-śāstra

1579

Ch. Weishi sanshilun song (唯識三十論頌)
Skt. Triṃśikā
Eng. The Thirty Verses on Consciousness Only
(in Three Texts on Consciousness Only, 1999)

1586

203

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Weishi ershi lun (唯識二十論)
Skt. Viṃśatikā
Eng. The Treatise in Twenty Verses on Consciousness Only
(in Three Texts on Consciousness Only, 1999)

Taishō No.
1590

Ch. She dasheng lun (攝大乘論)
1593
Skt. Mahāyānasaṃgraha
Eng. The Summary of the Great Vehicle (Revised Second Edition, 2003)
Ch. Bian zhongbian lun (辯中邊論)
Skt. Madhyāntavibhāga

1600

Ch. Dasheng chengye lun (大乘成業論)
Skt. Karmasiddhiprakaraṇa

1609

Ch. Yinming ruzheng li lun (因明入正理論)
Skt. Nyāyapraveśa

1630

Ch. Jingangzhen lun (金剛針論)
Skt. Vajrasūcī

1642

Ch. Dasheng zhuangyanjing lun (大乘莊嚴經論)
Skt. Mahāyānasūtrālaṃkāra

1604

Ch. Jiujing yisheng baoxing lun (究竟一乘寳性論)
Skt. Ratnagotravibhāga-mahāyānottaratantra-śāstra

1611

Ch. Dasheng ji pusa xue lun (大乘集菩薩學論)
Skt. Śikṣāsamuccaya

1636

Ch. Zhang suozhi lun (彰所知論)
Eng. The Treatise on the Elucidation of the Knowable (2004)

1645

Ch. Jingangding yuqie zhongfa anouduoluo sanmiao sanputi xin lun
(金剛頂瑜伽中發阿耨多羅三藐三菩提心論)
Eng. The Bodhicitta Śāstra (in Esoteric Texts, 2015)

1665

Ch. Putixing jing (菩提行經)
Skt. Bodhicaryāvatāra

1662

Ch. Dasheng qixin lun (大乘起信論)
Skt. *Mahāyānaśraddhotpāda-śāstra
Eng. The Awakening of Faith (2005)

1666

Ch. Shimoheyan lun (釋摩訶衍論)

204

1668

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Naxian biqiu jing (那先比丘經)
Pāli Milindapañhā

Taishō No.

1670

Ch. Banruo boluomiduo xin jing yuzan (般若波羅蜜多心經幽賛)
Eng. A Comprehensive Commentary on the Heart Sutra
(Prajñāpāramitā-hṛdaya-sutra) (2001)

1710

Ch. Guan wuliangshou fo jing shu (觀無量壽佛經疏)

1753

Ch. Miaofalianhua jing xuanyi (妙法蓮華經玄義)

1716

Ch. Sanlun xuanyi (三論玄義)

1852

Ch. Zhao lun (肇論)

1858

Ch. Dasheng xuan lun (大乘玄論)
Ch. Huayan yisheng jiaoyi fenqi zhang (華嚴一乘教義分齊章)

Ch. Yuanren lun (原人論)

Ch. Mohe zhiguan (摩訶止觀)

1853
1866
1886
1911

Ch. Xiuxi zhiguan zuochan fayao (修習止觀坐禪法要)

1915

Ch. Guoqing bai lu (國清百録)

1934

Ch. Foguo Yuanwu chanshi biyan lu (佛果圜悟禪師碧巖録)
Eng. The Blue Cliff Record (1998)

2003

Ch. Liuzu dashi fabao tan jing (六祖大師法寶壇經)
Eng. The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch (2000)

2008

Ch. Tiantai sijiao yi (天台四教儀)
Eng. A Guide to the Tiantai Fourfold Teachings
(in Tiantai Lotus Texts, 2013)

Ch. Zhenzhou Linji Huizhao chanshi wulu (鎭州臨濟慧照禪師語録)
Eng. The Recorded Sayings of Linji (in Three Chan Classics, 1999)

Ch. Wumen guan (無門關)
Eng. Wumen’s Gate (in Three Chan Classics, 1999)

Ch. Xinxin ming (信心銘)
Eng. The Faith-Mind Maxim (in Three Chan Classics, 1999)

Ch. Huangboshan Duanji chanshi chuanxin fayao
(黄檗山斷際禪師傳心法要)
Eng. Essentials of the Transmission of Mind (in Zen Texts, 2005)

1931

1985

2005

2010
2012A

205

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Yongjia Zhengdao ge (永嘉證道歌)

Taishō No.

Ch. Chixiu Baizhang qinggui (勅修百丈清規)
Eng. The Baizhang Zen Monastic Regulations (2007)

2014

2025

Ch. Yibuzonglun lun (異部宗輪論)
Skt. Samayabhedoparacanacakra
Eng. The Cycle of the Formation of the Schismatic Doctrines (2004)

2031

Ch. Maming pusa zhuan (馬鳴菩薩傳)
Eng. The Life of Aśvaghoṣa Bodhisattva
(in Lives of Great Monks and Nuns, 2002)

2046

Ch. Ayuwang jing (阿育王經)
Skt. Aśokāvadāna
Eng. The Biographical Scripture of King Aśoka (1993)

2043

Ch. Longshu pusa zhuan (龍樹菩薩傳)
Eng. The Life of Nāgārjuna Bodhisattva
(in Lives of Great Monks and Nuns, 2002)

2047

Ch. Posoupandou fashi zhuan (婆藪槃豆法師傳)
Eng. Biography of Dharma Master Vasubandhu
(in Lives of Great Monks and Nuns, 2002)

2049

Ch. Gaoseng zhuan (高僧傳)

2059

Ch. Datang Daciensi Zanzang fashi zhuan (大唐大慈恩寺三藏法師傳) 2053
Eng. A Biography of the Tripiṭaka Master of the Great Ci’en
Monastery of the Great Tang Dynasty (1995)

Ch. Biqiuni zhuan (比丘尼傳)
Eng. Biographies of Buddhist Nuns
(in Lives of Great Monks and Nuns, 2002)

2063

Ch. Datang xiyu ji (大唐西域記)
Eng. The Great Tang Dynasty Record of the Western Regions (1996)

2087

Ch. Gaoseng Faxian zhuan (高僧法顯傳)
Eng. The Journey of the Eminent Monk Faxian
(in Lives of Great Monks and Nuns, 2002)

Ch. Youfangjichao: Tangdaheshangdongzheng zhuan
(遊方記抄: 唐大和上東征傳)

206

2085

2089-(7)

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Hongming ji (弘明集)
Eng. The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation
of Buddhism (Volume I, 2015)

Taishō No.
2102

Ch. Fayuan zhulin (法苑珠林)

2122

Ch. Fanyu zaming (梵語雑名)

2135

Jp. Yuimakyō gisho (維摩經義疏)
Eng. The Expository Commentary on the Vimalakīrti Sutra (2012)

2186

Jp.

2203

Ch. Nanhai jigui neifa zhuan (南海寄歸内法傳)
Eng. Buddhist Monastic Traditions of Southern Asia (2000)
Jp. Shōmangyō gisho (勝鬘經義疏)
Eng. Prince Shōtoku’s Commentary on the Śrīmālā Sutra (2011)

2125

2185

Jp.

Hokke gisho (法華義疏)

2187

Jp.

Daijō hossō kenjin shō (大乘法相研神章)

2309

Jp. Risshū kōyō (律宗綱要)
Eng. The Essentials of the Vinaya Tradition (1995)

2348

Jp.

Hannya shingyō hiken (般若心經秘鍵)

Kanjin kakumu shō (觀心覺夢鈔)

2312

Jp. Tendai hokke shūgi shū (天台法華宗義集)
Eng. The Collected Teachings of the Tendai Lotus School (1995)

2366

Jp.

2377

Jp.

Kenkairon (顯戒論)

Sange gakushō shiki (山家學生式)

Jp. Hizōhōyaku (秘藏寶鑰)
Eng. The Precious Key to the Secret Treasury (in Shingon Texts, 2004)

Jp. Benkenmitsu nikyō ron (辨顯密二教論)
Eng. On the Differences between the Exoteric and Esoteric
Teachings (in Shingon Texts, 2004)

Jp. Sokushin jōbutsu gi (即身成佛義)
Eng. The Meaning of Becoming a Buddha in This Very Body
(in Shingon Texts, 2004)

2376

2426

2427
2428

207

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Taishō No.

Jp. Shōji jissōgi (聲字實相義)
2429
Eng. The Meanings of Sound, Sign, and Reality (in Shingon Texts, 2004)

Jp. Unjigi (吽字義)
Eng. The Meanings of the Word Hūṃ (in Shingon Texts, 2004)
Jp. Gorin kuji myōhimitsu shaku (五輪九字明秘密釋)
Eng. The Illuminating Secret Commentary on the Five Cakras
and the Nine Syllables (in Shingon Texts, 2004)

2430

2514

Jp. Mitsugonin hotsuro sange mon (密嚴院發露懺悔文)
Eng. The Mitsugonin Confession (in Shingon Texts, 2004)

2527

Jp. Fukan zazengi (普勧坐禪儀)
Eng. A Universal Recommendation for True Zazen
(in Zen Texts, 2005)

2580

Jp. Zazen yōjin ki (坐禪用心記)
Eng. Advice on the Practice of Zazen (in Zen Texts, 2005)

2586

Jp. Kenjōdo shinjitsu kyōgyō shōmon rui (顯淨土眞實教行証文類)
Eng. Kyōgyōshinshō: On Teaching, Practice, Faith, and
Enlightenment (2003)

2646

Jp. Kōzen gokoku ron (興禪護國論)
Eng. A Treatise on Letting Zen Flourish to Protect the State
(in Zen Texts, 2005)

2543

Jp. Shōbōgenzō (正法眼藏)
Eng. Shōbōgenzō: The True Dharma-eye Treasury (Volume I, 2007)
Shōbōgenzō: The True Dharma-eye Treasury (Volume II, 2008)
Shōbōgenzō: The True Dharma-eye Treasury (Volume III, 2008)
Shōbōgenzō: The True Dharma-eye Treasury (Volume IV, 2008)

2582

Jp. Senchaku hongan nenbutsu shū (選擇本願念佛集)
Eng. Senchaku Hongan Nembutsu Shū: A Collection of Passages
on the Nembutsu Chosen in the Original Vow (1997)

2608

Jp. Tannishō (歎異抄)
Eng. Tannishō: Passages Deploring Deviations of Faith (1996)

2661

Jp.

2682

Jp. Rennyo shōnin ofumi (蓮如上人御文)
Eng. Rennyo Shōnin Ofumi: The Letters of Rennyo (1996)

208

Ōjōyōshū (往生要集)

2668

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Taishō No.

Jp. Risshō ankoku ron (立正安國論)
Eng. Risshōankokuron or The Treatise on the Establishment
of the Orthodox Teaching and the Peace of the Nation
(in Two Nichiren Texts, 2003)

2688

Jp. Kaimokushō (開目抄)
Eng. Kaimokushō or Liberation from Blindness (2000)

2689

Ch. Fumu enzhong jing (父母恩重經)
Eng. The Sutra on the Profundity of Filial Love
(in Apocryphal Scriptures, 2005)

2887

Jp. Kanjin honzon shō (觀心本尊抄)
Eng. Kanjinhonzonshō or The Most Venerable One Revealed
by Introspecting Our Minds for the First Time at the
Beginning of the Fifth of the Five Five Hundred-year Ages
(in Two Nichiren Texts, 2003)

Jp. Hasshūkōyō (八宗綱要)
Eng. The Essentials of the Eight Traditions (1994)

2692

extracanonical

Jp.

Sangō shīki (三教指帰)

extracanonical

Jp.

Jūshichijō kenpō (十七條憲法)

extracanonical

Jp. Mappō tōmyō ki (末法燈明記)
Eng. The Candle of the Latter Dharma (1994)

extracanonical

209

