THE CANONICAL BOOK OF THE
BUDDHA’S LENGTHY DISCOURSES
VOLUME I

dBET PDF Version
© 2017
All Rights Reserved

BDK English Tripiṭaka Series

THE CANONICAL BOOK
OF THE BUDDHA’S
LENGTHY DISCOURSES
VOLUME I
(Taishō Volume 1, Number 1)

Translated from the Chinese
by

Shohei Ichimura

Bukkyo Dendo Kyokai America, Inc.
2015

Copyright © 2015 by Bukkyō Dendō Kyōkai and
BDK America, Inc.

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored
in a retrieval system, or transcribed in any form or by any means
—electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise—
without the prior written permission of the publisher.
First Printing, 2015
ISBN: 978-1-886439-55-9
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 2015943478
Published by
BDK America, Inc.
1675 School Street
Moraga, California 94556

Printed in the United States of America

A Message on the Publication of the
English Tripiṭaka
The Buddhist canon is said to contain eighty-four thousand different teachings.
I believe that this is because the Buddha’s basic approach was to prescribe a
different treatment for every spiritual ailment, much as a doctor prescribes a
different medicine for every medical ailment. Thus his teachings were always
appropriate for the particular suffering individual and for the time at which the
teaching was given, and over the ages not one of his prescriptions has failed to
relieve the suffering to which it was addressed.
Ever since the Buddha’s Great Demise over twenty-ﬁve hundred years ago,
his message of wisdom and compassion has spread throughout the world. Yet
no one has ever attempted to translate the entire Buddhist canon into English
throughout the history of Japan. It is my greatest wish to see this done and to
make the translations available to the many English-speaking people who have
never had the opportunity to learn about the Buddha’s teachings.
Of course, it would be impossible to translate all of the Buddha’s eighty-four
thousand teachings in a few years. I have, therefore, had one hundred thirty-nine
of the scriptural texts in the prodigious Taishō edition of the Chinese Buddhist
canon selected for inclusion in the First Series of this translation project.
It is in the nature of this undertaking that the results are bound to be criticized.
Nonetheless, I am convinced that unless someone takes it upon himself or herself
to initiate this project, it will never be done. At the same time, I hope that an
improved, revised edition will appear in the future.
It is most gratifying that, thanks to the efforts of more than a hundred Buddhist
scholars from the East and the West, this monumental project has ﬁnally gotten
off the ground. May the rays of the Wisdom of the Compassionate One reach
each and every person in the world.
NUMATA Yehan
Founder of the English
Tripiṭaka Project

August 7, 1991
v

Editorial Foreword
In January 1982, Dr. NUMATA Yehan, the founder of Bukkyō Dendō Kyōkai
(Society for the Promotion of Buddhism), decided to begin the monumental
task of translating the complete Taishō edition of the Chinese Tripiṭaka (Buddhist
canon) into the English language. Under his leadership, a special preparatory
committee was organized in April 1982. By July of the same year, the Translation
Committee of the English Tripiṭaka was ofﬁcially convened.
The initial Committee consisted of the following members: (late) HANAYAMA
Shōyū (Chairperson), (late) BANDŌ Shōjun, ISHIGAMI Zennō, (late) KAMATA
Shigeo, (late) KANAOKA Shūyū, MAYEDA Sengaku, NARA Yasuaki, (late) SAYEKI
Shinkō, (late) SHIOIRI Ryōtatsu, TAMARU Noriyoshi, (late) TAMURA Kwansei,
URYŪZU Ryūshin, and YUYAMA Akira. Assistant members of the Committee
were as follows: KANAZAWA Atsushi, WATANABE Shōgo, Rolf Giebel of New
Zealand, and Rudy Smet of Belgium.
After holding planning meetings on a monthly basis, the Committee selected
one hundred thirty-nine texts for the First Series of translations, an estimated
one hundred printed volumes in all. The texts selected are not necessarily limited
to those originally written in India but also include works written or composed
in China and Japan. While the publication of the First Series proceeds, the texts
for the Second Series will be selected from among the remaining works; this
process will continue until all the texts, in Japanese as well as in Chinese, have
been published.
Frankly speaking, it will take perhaps one hundred years or more to accomplish
the English translation of the complete Chinese and Japanese texts, for they
consist of thousands of works. Nevertheless, as Dr. NUMATA wished, it is the
sincere hope of the Committee that this project will continue unto completion,
even after all its present members have passed away.
Dr. NUMATA passed away on May 5, 1994, at the age of ninety-seven, entrusting
his son, Mr. NUMATA Toshihide, with the continuation and completion of the
Translation Project. The Committee also lost its able and devoted Chairperson,

vii

Editorial Foreword

Professor HANAYAMA Shōyū, on June 16, 1995, at the age of sixty-three. After
these severe blows, the Committee elected me, then Vice President of Musashino
Women’s College, to be the Chair in October 1995. The Committee has renewed
its determination to carry out the noble intention of Dr. NUMATA, under the leadership of Mr. NUMATA Toshihide.
The present members of the Committee are MAYEDA Sengaku (Chairperson),
ICHISHIMA Shōshin, ISHIGAMI Zennō, KATSURA Shōryū, NAMAI Chishō, NARA
Yasuaki, SAITŌ Akira, SHIMODA Masahiro, Kenneth K. Tanaka, WATANABE Shōgo,
and YONEZAWA Yoshiyasu.
The Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research was established in
November 1984, in Berkeley, California, U.S.A., to assist in the publication of
the BDK English Tripiṭaka First Series. The Publication Committee was organized
at the Numata Center in December 1991. In 2010, the Numata Center’s operations
were merged into Bukkyō Dendō Kyōkai America, Inc. (BDK America) and
BDK America continues to oversee the English Tripiṭaka project in close cooperation with the Editorial Committee in Tokyo.
MAYEDA Sengaku

Chairperson
Editorial Committee of
BDK English Tripiṭaka

viii

Publisher’s Foreword
On behalf of the members of the Publication Committee, I am happy to present
this volume as the latest contribution to the BDK English Tripiṭaka Series. The
Publication Committee members have worked to ensure that this volume, as all
other volumes in the series, has gone through a rigorous process of editorial efforts.
The initial translation and editing of the Buddhist scriptures found in this
and other BDK English Tripiṭaka volumes are performed under the direction of
the Editorial Committee in Tokyo, Japan. Both the Editorial Committee in Tokyo
and the Publication Committee, headquartered in Moraga, California, are dedicated to the production of accurate and readable English translations of the
Buddhist canon. In doing so, the members of both committees and associated
staff work to honor the deep faith, spirit, and concern of the late Reverend Dr.
Yehan Numata, who founded the BDK English Tripiṭaka Series in order to disseminate the Buddhist teachings throughout the world.
The long-term goal of our project is the translation and publication of the
texts in the one hundred-volume Taishō edition of the Chinese Buddhist canon,
along with a number of influential extracanonical Japanese Buddhist texts. The
list of texts selected for the First Series of this translation project may be found
at the end of each volume in the series.
As Chair of the Publication Committee, I am deeply honored to serve as the
fifth person in a post previously held by leading figures in the field of Buddhist
studies, most recently by my predecessor, John R. McRae.
In conclusion, I wish to thank the members of the Publication Committee for
their dedicated and expert work undertaken in the course of preparing this volume
for publication: Senior Editor Marianne Dresser, Dr. Hudaya Kandahjaya, Dr.
Carl Bielefeldt, Dr. Robert Sharf, and Rev. Brian Kensho Nagata, Director of the
BDK America English Tripiṭaka Project.
A. Charles Muller

Chairperson
Publication Committee

ix

Contents
A Message on the Publication of the English Tripiṭaka
NUMATA Yehan

v

Editorial Foreword

MAYEDA Sengaku

vii

Translator’s Introduction

Shohei Ichimura

xiii

A. Charles Muller

Publisher’s Foreword

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

Preface
Sutra 1. The Great Origin
Sutra 2. Last Journey and Sojourns
First Episode
Second Episode
Third Episode
Sutra 3. A Great Treasury Councilor

ix

3
7
63
63
94
133
173

Sutra 4. Janavasabha’s Exhortation
Sutra 5. Lesser Causality
Sutra 6. The Universal Ruler’s Practice
Sutra 7. Pāyāsi’s Dialogue
Sutra 8. Sandhāna
Sutra 9. Numerically Assembled Doctrines
Sutra 10. Ten Progressively Classiﬁed Doctrines

197
211
225
245
269
283
307

Bibliography

345

A List of the Volumes of the BDK English Tripiṭaka (First Series)

365

Notes
Index

xi

341

349

Translator’s Introduction
The Textual Origin and Contents of the
Canonical Lengthy Discourses

The complex historical context in which the textual translation of the Dīrgha
Āgama took place is beyond the scope of this brief introduction. I attempt to
provide here, however, an evaluation of three major features of this canonical
tradition: the nature of this sutra collection and its contents, the translators and
the times of translation, and the canonical legacy from the point of view of the
premodern and modern contemporary Tripiṭaka Buddhist library.
The Chang ahan jing (Skt. Dīrgha Āgama), or the Canonical Collection of
Lengthy Discourses, is one of the four canonical collections that were upheld
by the orthodox Dharmaguptaka school. Since this school descended from the
Sthāvira orthodoxy that had a prominent position in the few centuries around
the Third Buddhist Council, held around 250 to 236 B.C.E.,1 centuries after the
Buddha’s demise, the origin of this school’s canonical tradition (Āgamas) may
be traced back to some scriptural matrix2 whose contents had been compiled
and authenticated by the time of the Third Council.
There were three or four general councils during Buddhism’s early centuries.
The First Council was held at Rājagṛha (present-day Rājgīr, Bihar) immediately
after Śākyamuni’s passing (485 or 486 B.C.E.) in order to assure the oral preservation of the core teachings Śākyamuni Buddha taught directly to his disciples.
The Second Council was held at Vaiśālī (Vesālī) a century later to settle some
controversies on the Vinaya rules and disciplines set forth by Śākyamuni as the
moral and spiritual codes for Buddhist monks and their communities. This
council contributed to the ascertainment of legality on the nature of Vinaya
codes, despite some challenges and disputes raised by changing historical and
social contexts. At that time, it is said that some elder monks still remembered
how some of the ﬁrst-generation disciples had upheld the discipline while remaining active in daily life.

xiii

Translator’s Introduction

Though our knowledge of it is conﬁned to Theravāda documents,3 the Third
Council was held under the auspices of the Mauryan Buddhist ruler Aśoka in
the seventeenth year of his reign (251 B.C.E.) at the capital city Pāṭaliputra (Patna,
Bihar). Although this council failed in its intended goal of preventing schism
from sectarian movements, the Third Council was pivotal to the subsequent
history of the Buddhist canonical tradition for two reasons. First, since the
Buddha’s teaching and organization evolved in various forms during the initial
two and a half centuries of its development, Buddhist leaders were compelled
to reexamine their canonical traditions and establish an authenticated standard
to prevent sectarian diversion and doctrinal variation. Second, it was during this
council that Buddhist scriptures were formally classiﬁed into the threefold categories of Sutra (teaching), Vinaya (discipline), and Abhidharma (doctrine), i.e.,
the threefold canonical baskets (Skt. Tripiṭaka; Pāli Tipiṭaka). From that time on,
the Tripiṭaka served as the basic categorization of Buddhist literature.
The last general conference was held in Kāśmīra under the auspices of King
Kaniṣka, the Kuṣāṇa ruler (known in China as Great Yüeji), toward the end of
the ﬁrst century C.E., and it centered on the Hinayana orthodoxy, the SthāviraSarvāstivāda school. Though the historical veracity of this conference is not
conclusive, the likelihood of its occurrence can be argued based on the detailed
Abhidharma discussions recorded in the Mahāvibhāṣā-śāstra,4 and especially
in the epilogue left by its translator Xuanzang, as well as the historical fact of
the massive Hindu reaction which spurred efforts to compile their literary legacy
in the early second century C.E.5 In any case, after the Fourth Council meeting
in Kāśmīra, Kuṣāṇa monks began to reach the Chinese continent during the Late
Han period.

The Synopsis between the Sanskrit Dīrgha
Āgama and the Pāli Dīgha Nikāya

The Canonical Collection of Lengthy Discourses was one of the four Āgamas
essential to the Sutra-piṭaka that was preserved by the Dharmaguptaka school.
To explain the nature of this Āgama, it is best to show the synopsis between the
content of the Dīrgha Āgama and that of the Dīgha Nikāya (DN), upheld by the
Theravāda school as part of the ﬁvefold sutta-piṭaka. The Theravāda school
prospered in Sri Lanka and its descendants in Southeast Asia (Burma, Thailand,

xiv

Translator’s Introduction

and Indochina), preserved the ﬁvefold Nikāyas through the Pāli canonical language. The Dharmaguptaka school, one of the descendants of the SthāviraSarvāstivāda school that prospered in Northern India, inherited the Dīrgha Āgama
as part of their Sutra-piṭaka through the canonical language of Sanskrit or, more
precisely, Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit.6
The fourfold Āgamas that constitute the Sutra-piṭaka of the Hinayana orthodoxy were preserved throughout the medieval period as part of the Mahayana
Tripiṭaka corpus through the Chinese versions since the ﬁfth century C.E. The
following is a chart of the synopsis between the four Dharmaguptaka Āgamas
originally in Sanskrit and the ﬁve Nikāyas (Pāli sutta collections) preserved by
the Theravāda school.

Four Sanskrit Āgamas
(Dharmaguptaka)
1. Dirgha Āgama (Lengthy
Discourses)
2. Madhyama Āgama (Middle-length
Discourses)
3. Saṃyukta Āgama (Mixed
Discourses)
4. Ekottarikā Āgama (Gradually
Increased Discourses)

Five Pāli Nikāyas
(Theravāda)
1. Dīgha Nikāya (Lengthy Discourses)

2. Majjhima Nikāya (Middle-length
Discourses)
3. Saṃyutta Nikāya (Mixed Discourses)
4. Aṅguttara Nikāya (Increasing Each
by a Doctrine)
5. Khuddaka Nikāya (Short
Discourses)

As can be inferred from this table, the Sanskrit Dīrgha Āgama and the Pāli Dīgha
Nikāya have many synoptic parallels in their respective content, namely, between
the thirty sutras of the Chang ahan jing and the thirty-four suttantas of the Pāli
Dīgha Nikāya.7 There are twenty-seven sutras that are identiﬁed with the twentyseven suttantas, but differences in their respective ordering and arrangement of
scriptures must be recognized. Seven suttantas8 are omitted in the Chang ahan
jing, but this includes a sutra that is not found in the Dīgha Nikāya. Because of
this close synoptic correlations, it is reasonable to assume that the Sanskrit
Dīrgha Āgama and the Pāli Dīgha Nikāya had a common canonical matrix that
could have been determined as standard during the Third Buddhist Council.

xv

Translator’s Introduction

The Chang ahan jing is unique in two ways. First, the editors of the Āgama
in organizing the sutras set forth four major sections, reﬂecting their major concerns: (1) the centrality of Śākyamuni Buddha as the primary subject, (2) the
importance of the Dharma and doctrine, (3) the resultant practice, discipline,
and advanced spiritual states, and (4) a record of the cosmological origins of
the world. Second, the “Sutra of Cosmology,” which is totally absent in the
Dīgha Nikāya of the Pāli canon, was added as the last text in the collection in
order to present the Buddha’s teaching more effectively and attractively to a
non-Buddhist Hindu audience. According to some scholars, the underlying principle of the Chang ahan jing reﬂects a conciliatory impulse that was intended
to bridge the original Buddha’s teaching (the ninefold or twelvefold categories
of discourses) on the one hand, and early Mahayana Buddhist teaching and
scriptures on the other.9
The correlations between the two scriptural traditions, the sutras of the Chang
ahan jing and the suttantas of the Pāli Dīgha Nikāya, are presented below. In
addition, the corresponding texts are noted at the beginning of each sutra in this
translation.
Four Sutras on the Subject of Śakyamuni Buddha
1. The Great Origin (Daban jing)
DN 14: Mahāpadāna Suttanta
2. Last Journey and Sojourns,
DN 16: Mahāpariṇibbāna Suttanta
Parts 1, 2, 3
3. A Great treasury councilor
DN 19: Mahāgovinda Suttanta
4. Janavasabha’s Exhortation
DN 18: Janavasabha Suttanta

Fifteen Sutras on the Subject of Dharma and Doctrine
5. Lesser Causality
DN 27: Aggañña Suttanta
6. Universal Ruler (Cakravartin)’s
DN 26: Cakkavatti-sīhanāda Suttanta
Practice
7. Pāyāsi[’s Dialogue]
DN 23: Pāyāsi Suttanta
8. Sandhāna
DN 25: Udumbarika-sīhanāda Suttanta
9. Numerically Assembled Doctrines DN 33: Saṅgīti Suttanta
10. Ten Progressively Classiﬁed
DN 34: Dasuttara-Suttanta
Doctrines
11. Gradual Increase of Doctrines
No Parallel in DN
by One
xvi

Translator’s Introduction

12. Doctrines in Groups of Three
13. Greater Causality
14. Indra’s Question on Causality
15. Anupiya Episode
16. Kalyāṇa-jātika
17. Purity
18. Happiness Caused by Oneself
19. Great Assembly

No Parallel in DN
DN 15: Mahānidāna Suttanta
DN 21: Sakkapañha Suttanta
DN 24: Pāṭika Suttanta
DN 31: Sīṇgālovāda Suttanta
DN 29: Pāsādika Suttanta
DN 28: Saṃpasānīya Suttanta
DN 20: Mahāsamaya Suttanta

Ten Sutras on the Subject of Practice and Resulting Spiritual States
20. Ambaṭṭha
DN 3: Ambaṭṭha Suttanta
21. Brahmā’s [Net]
DN 1: Brahmajāla Suttanta
22. One Who Cultivates Virtues
DN 4: Soṇadaṇḍa Suttanta
23. Brāhmaṇa Kūṭadanta
DN 5: Kūṭadanta Suttanta
24. Kevaddha
DN 11: Kevaṭṭa Suttanta
25. A Naked Brāhmaṇa Ascetic
DN 8: Kassapa-sīhanāda Suttanta
26. Knowledge of Three Vedas
DN 13: Tevijja Suttanta
27. The Rewards of the Life of a
DN 2: Sāmañña-phala Suttanta
Śramaṇa
28. Poṭṭhapāda
DN 9: Poṭṭhapāda Suttanta
29. Lohitya
DN 12: Lohicca Suttanta

Sutra 30 on the Subject of Cosmology (No Parallel in DN)
A 1. The Land of Jambudvīpa
2. The Land of Uttarakuru
3. The Universal Ruler (Cakravartin)
B 4. The Worlds of the Hells
5. Dragons and Birds
C 6. The Asura Demigods
7. The Four Guardian Gods of Heaven
8. The Trāyastriṃśa Heavens
D 9. Three Kinds of Disasters
10. The Asura Demigods
11. Three Kinds of Intermediate Eons

xvii

Translator’s Introduction

Translators and Historical
Times

The translator of the Chang ahan jing was the śramaṇa Buddhayaśas, a native
of Kāśmīra who moved to Khotan in Central Asia, where he resided for some
time before he was invited to Chang’an speciﬁcally to engage in scriptural translation. There are two stories of how Buddhayaśas was invited to Chang’an and
what contribution his translation was to accomplish.
Fifth-century China was divided into northern and southern political regions
separated by the Yangzi River. In the north were Louyang and Chang’an, which
were the two major government seats of the Han and Tang dynasties, as well as
several other political and cultural centers. Since the north was dominated by
the descendants of the ﬁve racially foreign regimes, resulting in the short-lived
period of sixteen states, Buddhism had a fair chance to develop its inﬂuence
despite competition from indigenous Confucian and Daoist traditions. Two centuries from the initial introduction of Buddhism to China during the Late Han
period, Chinese Buddhists began to be aware that they needed more scriptural
sources for deeper understanding as well as for consolidating their communities
through Buddhist ethical and moral practice.
According to one story, Buddhayaśas was invited to the capital by the ruler
of the Late Qin, Yaoxing (r. 394–415 C.E.), with the assistance of Kumārajīva,
his religious counselor. Kumārajīva (344–413) was a scholar-monk from the
country of Kuccha in Eastern Turkestan. Born to Indian and Central Asian
parents, he excelled in training in Buddhist studies in Kāśmīra and acquired linguistic skill in Chinese. He had been brought to Liangzhou as the captive of
Fujian’s general, Lüguang, and was subsequently invited to Chang’an in 401 to
serve as Yaoxing’s religious counselor and lead the government’s Buddhist translation project. Buddhayaśas had been Kumārajīva’s teacher on the Sarvāstivāda
Vinaya (the Daśabhāṇavāra-vinaya, the subject of Abhidharma treatises) more
than two decades previously.10 Because he had once been Kumārajīva’s teacher,
Buddhayaśas was reverentially nicknamed the “red-bearded professor” or the
“senior doctrinal professor” (Vaibhāṣika) in Chang’an.
It is said that, in part, Kumārajīva needed Buddhayaśas’ help in collaborating
on completing the translation of the Daśabhūmika-sūtra (Sutra on the Ten Stages
of the Bodhisattva Career), and that the ruler Yaoxing also requested the śramaṇa

xviii

Translator’s Introduction

in 410 C.E. to translate both the Dharmaguptaka Vinaya (Dharmaguptaka-vinaya;
Sifen lü; Vinaya in Four Divisions) and the Dīrgha Āgama of the same school.
The Vinaya translation was completed 412 C.E. The next year, 413, Buddhayaśas began to translate the Dīrgha Āgama with Zhu Fonian, a śramaṇa of
Liangzhou, as co-translator, and the translation was completed that same year.
As for the reasons the Chang ahan jing originally belonged to the Dharmaguptaka school, we have four indirect proofs. First, the editorial point of view of
the Chang ahan jing itself coincides with the Dharmaguptaka tradition in which
the principle of the centrality of the Buddha is emphasized in terms of veneration
for Śākyamuni as founder of the religion. Second, the text displays a great emphasis
on the merit to be accrued by the cult worship of the sacred relics enshrined in
stupas (commemorative towers). Third, the text’s translator, Buddhayaśas, who
also translated the Dharmaguptaka Vinaya, was a bhikṣu afﬁliated with the Dharmaguptaka school. Finally, the Vinaya text, especially its ﬁfty-fourth chapter, refers
to seven sutras that were included in the Chang ahan jing, including the “Sutra
of Buddhist Cosmology” that is not found in the Pāli Dīgha Nikāya.11
The second story comes from the introduction to the Dharmaguptaka-vinaya,
which gives a somewhat different version. Zhi Faling, a Chinese śramaṇa, traveled to the Central Asia on the instructions of his master, Huiyüen, to search for
Vinaya texts, and happened to meet Buddhayaśas in Khotan, where he was
already renowned as a Mahayana Tripiṭaka master. With due respect, Faling
requested him to visit Chang’an and accompanied him there, transporting Uighur
textual sources. Faling’s master Huiyüen was a close friend of Kumarajīva, and
is known to have organized the Lotus Association at Lushan in the Pure Land
sectarian faith, whose adherents devoted their lives to the ideal of rebirth in the
Pure Land. There was a growing concern among Chinese Buddhists at the time
to consolidate their growing communities and regulate the conduct of their followers, and so there was a need for the Vinaya-piṭaka. As requested, Buddhayaśas
immediately began to translate the Dharmaguptaka-vinaya with the assistance
of three hundred monks and scholars involved in the project. Zhi Faling is said
to have had his own disciple, Huibian, participate in the sessions as he had excellent knowledge of Central Asian languages. The fact that active pursuit of Vinaya
texts was the major trend of the time can be attested by the independent case of
the monk Faxian’s (339–420) risky journey to India in search of Vinaya texts.12

xix

Translator’s Introduction

Buddhayaśas did not extend his stay in Chang’an upon completion of the
translation project and soon returned to Kāśmīra. Kumārajīva likely suffered an
illness (Huangshi, thirteenth year) soon after completing the translation of the
Satyasiddhi-śāstra (Cheng shi lun; Treatise on the Establishment of Truth) and
passed away in 413 (Huangshi, ﬁfteenth year). Yaoxing abdicated his rule in the
seventeenth year of Huangshi (415 C.E.). Buddhayaśas is said to have sent the
Xukongyun pusa jing (Ākāśagarbha-sūtra; Sutra on Ākāśagarbha Bodhisattva)
as a gift to the sangha of Liangzhou through a traveling messenger. In fact, the
translation of this text ascribed to him is recorded in the Chu sanzang ji ji (Collection of the Tripiṭaka Textual Records) (Taishō vol. 13, no. 405) compiled by
Sengyou (445–518).

The Significance of the Text in the New
Taishō Tripitaka Edition

The Chang ahan jing is placed at the very beginning of the ﬁrst volume of the
Taishō shinshū daizōkyō (Taishō New Tripiṭaka Edition) compiled by Japanese
Buddhists from 1924–1934 (Taishō 13 to Shōwa 9). This may represent an
entirely different reorganization of the Buddhist canon from all of the preceding
Tripiṭaka editions. The format of the preceding editions were based on the classiﬁcation order of Mahayana ﬁrst, Hinayana second, each of which was again
divided into the order of Sutra, Vinaya, and Abhidharma texts. The historical
legacy of the Chang ahan jing should be examined as to what the text is meant
to represent in the modern Taishō edition.
The earliest reliable catalogue of Buddhist texts was due to the work of
Dao’an (314–385), author of the Zhongjing mulu (Comprehensive Record of
the Textual Catalogues), and Sengyou, author of the Chu sanzang ji ji. Of the
two, Dao’an’s catalogues formed the core foundation of Sengyou’s enlarged
record of textual catalogues. These two sets of catalogues thus mark the reliable
beginning of all subsequent Chinese Tripiṭaka editions.
By the turn of the ﬁfth century, Buddhist communities in Chang’an began
to exercise their own choices in the history of Buddhist affairs. This change was
a natural development, because Buddhist leaders were more or less trained in
Confucian academism or Daoist philosophical training. Dao’an was invited to
Chang’an to serve as the religious counselor of Fujian (Yaoxing’s predecessor)
from the capital of a southern state. Dao’an profoundly regretted that the Buddhist

xx

Translator’s Introduction

communities in China had not been properly equipped with the Tripiṭaka divisions
of Sutra, Vinaya, and Abhidharma. He actively promoted study on the Mahayana
Wisdom sutras, especially the Prajñāpāramitā sutras, and he recruited talented
young Buddhist converts to engage in exploration of their philosophical and
spiritual meaning. It is within this historical circumstance that Kumārajīva was
invited to Chang’an in 401 by Yaoxing (Fujian’s successor) as his religious counselor. Sengzhao (374–414), a young Buddhist convert from a Daoist background,
became Kumārajīva’s dedicated disciple and quickly proved himself to be an
excellent scholar-monk among the Chang’an academic community. His monograph,
the Zhao lun, was praised as exhibiting superb comprehension of prajñā insight
and the philosophy of emptiness (śūnyatā),second only to that of his master.
Sengzhao’s introduction to the Chang ahan jing reﬂects Dao’an’s cherished
objective. At the outset he calls attention to the Tripiṭaka canonical tradition:
The great teaching consisted of three [basic] divisions. For regulating
physical and verbal behavior there is the collection of injunctive disciplines
(Vinaya). For guiding human conduct by distinguishing good and bad
there is the collection of doctrinal scriptures (Sutra). For differentiating
subtle and delicate subject matter, there is the collection of analytical characteristics of the mental and conscious elements (Abhidharma). Thus,
there came to be the three baskets of scriptures (Tripiṭaka).

Buddhayaśas’ translation of the Chang ahan jing was perhaps partial fulﬁllment of the goal sought by Dao’an.
Following Dao’an’s and Sengyou’s catalogues, a series of records of Buddhist
textual catalogues was compiled in the Gezhong qinding zhongjing mulu (Buddhist
Canonical Textual Catalogues or Complete Buddhist Tripiṭaka Library, literally,
“Great Textual Storehouse”). During the sixth century, the four catalogues came
to exist under the auspices of four different regimes. Unlike Dao’an’s and Sengyou’s catalogues, which placed the texts by the translators’ names in chronological
order, these state-supported enterprises adopted the new order of classiﬁcation
by placing the Mahayana Tripiṭaka catalogues ﬁrst, followed by those of the
Hinayana Tripiṭaka. The short-lived Sui dynasty (which dissolved at the uniﬁcation
of north and south into an empire in 589), twice supported the compilation of
the entire inclusive catalogues of the Tripiṭaka library: ﬁrst, the Sui Kaihuang
lidai sanbao ji (Sui Kaihuang Record of the Threefold Buddhist Treasures of the

xxi

Translator’s Introduction

Successive Dynasties) in 598, followed by its revised edition, the Renshou
zhongjing mulu (Renshou Record of Textual Catalogues) in 602, which streamlined the preexistent catalogues and scrutinized the authenticity of each text.
The Renshou zhongjing mulu became the basic model of all subsequent Buddhist
Tripiṭaka libraries.
The ﬁling of the catalogues of the Tripiṭaka library reached its apex during
the Tang period. The dynastic enterprises successfully compiled seven major
editions together with their respective records of catalogues. Any record of catalogues is supposed to provide not only the basic principles of textual classiﬁcation and those texts already catalogued as authentic, but also include new
translations and new discoveries as well as exclude suspicious and fraudulent
texts. For instance, the Kaiyuan shijiao lu (Kaiyuan Record of Buddhist Textual
Catalogues), compiled in 731, is said to have represented the best model format,
so that all subsequent editions followed it in recording catalogues of hand-copied
texts as well as printed texts. The classiﬁcation order, however, was unchanged
from the Sui-era Renshou zhongjing mulu of 602, following the format of: (1)
Mahayana sutras, (2) Mahayana Vinaya texts, (3) Mahayana Abhidharma texts,
(4) Hinayana sutras, (5) Hinayana Vinaya texts, (6) Hinayana Abhidharma texts,
and (7) works written by the “wise and saints.” We know. therefore, that the
Renshou zhongjing mulu model and that of Kaiyuan shijiao lu together became
the standard format of the Buddhist Tripiṭaka library as a whole, of which very
little had changed until the modern Taishō Tripiṭaka edition.
This extremely conservative nature developed due to two reasons. First,
toward the end of Tang dynasty the dissemination of the complete Tripiṭaka
library was based on hand-copied texts made under government supervision.
Second, from the Northern Song period on, the dissemination of the Buddhist
Tripiṭaka was based on printed texts, for which printing blocks had to be carved,
a laborious and expensive process. In the Northern Song, for instance, a 972
decree stipulated the production of the entire set of textual woodcut prints and
the carving of one hundred and thirty thousand woodblocks by the year 983.
The dissemination of the Buddhist scriptures was under government supervision
for centuries but gradually transferred to a number of Buddhist temples. While
the main task of carving woodblocks was still carried out by dynastic enterprises,
private temple versions began to appear and the distribution of texts was soon
widely localized and even spread beyond the Chinese border. This was roughly

xxii

Translator’s Introduction

the history of the Buddhist Tripiṭaka library through the Song, Yuan, Ming, and
Jing periods.
The Taishō Tripiṭaka edition shows a striking innovation, especially in the
change of classiﬁcation order that follows the general historical development
of Buddhism. The method of detailed examination of textual contents for the
sake of new classiﬁcations also developed more precision due to modern scholarship. First, the Taishō Tripiṭaka editors changed the order by placing the
Hinayana Sutra-piṭaka before the Mahayana texts. They set the Hinayana canon
of the four Āgamas and individual texts bearing their strains in the ﬁrst two volumes, under the Āgama section. Second, they created a new classiﬁcation under
the name of “original causality” to collect those texts in which the bodhisattva
ideal and career is germinated in reference to early Mahayana history. Third,
the remaining Mahayana sutras are classiﬁed, more or less, similarly to those
of preceding editions, but each is assigned to different volumes by specifying
type or class:
1. Prajñā section: Taishō Tripiṭaka vols. 5–8;
2. Lotus and Huayan section: vol. 9 (both groups) and vol. 10 (Huayan only);
3. Ratnakūṭa and Nirvana section: vol. 11 (Ratnakūṭa only) and vol. 12 (both
groups);
4. Mahāsaṃnipāta-sūtra (Great Collection Sutra) section: vol. 13;
5. Sutra collection (Hinayana and Mahayana) section: vols. 14–17;
6. Esoteric sutras section: vols. 18–21.

Fourth, the Taishō Tripiṭaka editors also placed the Vinaya- and Abhidharmapiṭakas after the Sutra-piṭaka in the order of Hinayana ﬁrst, then Mahayana:
1. Vinaya section: vols. 22–23 (all Hinayana) and vol. 24 (both Hinayana
and Mahayana);
2. Sutra expository treatise section: vols. 25–26 (partial Abhidharma);
3. Abhidharma section: vols. 27–29;
4. Madhyamaka-Yōgācāra section: vol. 30 (Madhyamaka only), vol. 31 (partially Yogācāra), and vol. 32 (Yogācāra only);
5. Collected logical treatises section: vol. 32.
From here, the Taishō Tripiṭaka places texts written as commentaries on
sutras and treatises (śāstras),13 sectarian documents and writings, and so forth

xxiii

Translator’s Introduction

up to the one-hundredth volume, but for the purpose of evaluating the legacy
of the Chang ahan jing, these can be excluded from consideration.
Modern scholarship focuses on the fundamental spirituality of Śākyamuni
Buddha, because his spiritual insight and evangelical life were the foundation
of all the doctrines and practices that developed in the later history of Buddhism.
In medieval China, every Tripiṭaka library started with the class of Wisdom texts
(Prajñāpāramitā sutras) under the Mahayana category, beginning with the massive,
six hundred-fascicle Mahāprajñāpāramitā-sūtra (Great Perfection of Wisdom
Sutra) translated by Xuanzang. In contrast, the Hinayana Āgamas, which are
supposed to comprise the original, earliest sources and present Śākyamuni’s life
and teaching as closely as possible to his original time and social context, were
all buried amid thousands of ﬁles of textual catalogues or among the books and
fascicles in the Hinayana section. Finally, after many centuries, the Taishō edition
restored the proper place for the Hinayana Āgamas by moving this text to the
very beginning of the collection.
In his preface to the Chang ahan jing, Sengzhao deﬁnes Ahan (Āgama) as
“the authority to which the laws return” (fa-gui). The “authority to which laws
return” means, in all probability, the profound collection of all that is good upheld
by the secluded cloister of contemplative recollection (dhāraṇī). These are made
into the collection of sutras as the source of authority. It was in this sense that
Chang’an’s Buddhist communities, by the turn of the ﬁfth century, were motivated
to have the Prajñāparāmitā texts translated rapidly, within a decade, and to also
have the earliest canonical Sutra-piṭaka translated along with the Vinaya texts.
Most of all, this active motivation arose from the critical study of textual records
of translation and visually corroborated reliable textual collections.
Modern Buddhist studies began in the mid-nineteenth century, based on the
method of text criticism and aided by scholars’ knowledge of Pāli, Sanskrit,
Chinese, and Tibetan, and it has successfully promoted Buddhist studies throughout the world. It beneﬁted contemporary Japanese Buddhists in publishing the
Taishō Tripiṭaka library and its catalogue, with some success in reforming and
improving the longstanding Tripiṭaka traditions. Nearly three quarters of a
century after publication of the Taishō shinshū daizōkyō, Dr. Yehan Numata and
his associates established the project to put the entire corpus of texts collected
in the Taishō Tripiṭaka into English translation, with the global cooperation of
Buddhist scholars. When this massive project is completed, there will be a new

xxiv

Translator’s Introduction

demand to build another ediﬁce of the Buddhist Tripiṭaka library for the sake
of Buddhist and human communities worldwide. Once again, the Chang ahan
jing will be highlighted as representing the earliest phase of Buddhism that
marked its beginning.

Epilogue

I would like to make a few points regarding the way in which this translation
has been accomplished. First, since the original Sanskrit text is no longer extant,
I relied almost exclusively on the Pāli Dīgha Nikāya and its English translation,
especially that rendered by the founding members of the Pali Text Society, as
the sole corroborative references for the Chinese text.14 For instance, it is
extremely difﬁcult to identify from Chinese transliteration what a given proper
name or proper noun might be in the Sanskrit original. Second, I preferred a
straightforward style of narration to the Chinese idiomatic deﬁnitive style. As
a cognate language of Sanskrit, though to a lesser degree, Pāli has an intricate
case system to specify the contextual relationships between things that are
referred to by words through case indicatives, whereas Chinese expression often
relies on word order alone, without case indicative changes. Hence, in my English
presentation of the Chang ahan jing, I have relied on the English version of the
Dīgha Nikāya presented in scholarly translations of the text. This English version
of the Chang ahan jing may thus appear to be more like a translation made from
the Pāli Nikāya than a directly rendered English version vis-à-vis the Chinese
original. As English is not my native language, I did not consider that presenting
the textual contents only through a grammatically learned second language
would be successful. Due of the length of the original text, this translation will
be presented in three volumes, to be published in sucession. Volume I contains
sutras 1–10; Volumes II and III will contain the remaining twenty sutras, 11–30.
A glossary will be included with the third, ﬁnal volume of the translation.
I looked for a model narrative format to translate foundational Buddhist texts,
such as the Chang ahan jing. After searching for a feasible format among various
samples of translations of Buddhist texts, I ﬁnally decided that it was best to follow
the traditions established by the Pali Text Society in dealing with ancient Buddhist
literature by means of modern languages. I am, however, obliged to assert that
this translation has been produced totally based on my own understanding of
Buddhism accrued through my lifelong study and practice of the religion.

xxv

Translator’s Introduction

Śākyamuni’s religion began with a dialectical insight underling the fourfold
truths of the life process. While engaged in ﬁnal revision of this translation, I
personally encountered the messengers of old age, illness, and death, and my
attention was drawn to these messagers more acutely because of my engagement
in rereading the draft translation. It is my hope that readers of this text will
realize the fundamental wisdom of Buddhist spirituality in regard to these serious
matters. May the reader discover from this text his or her successful pathway
toward liberation.

xxvi

THE CANONICAL BOOK OF THE BUDDHA’S
LENGTHY DISCOURSES
VOLUME I

Preface to the Canonical Book
of Lengthy Discourses
Shi Sengzhao
at Chang’an

The ultimate truth of religion transcends the words of naming and describing.
It is because of this that wise and holy people remain in complaisant silence.
The subtle meaning, [however,] cannot be communicated unless it is expressed
by word. This is why Śākyamuni laid out his teaching, and the enlightened
[Tathāgata] appeared in this world. The great teaching consisted of three
[basic] divisions. For regulating physical and verbal behavior there is the
collection of injunctive disciplines (Vinaya). For guiding human conduct by
distinguishing good and bad there is the collection of doctrinal scriptures
(Sutra). For differentiating subtle and delicate subject matter, there is the collection of analytical characteristics of the mental and conscious elements
(Abhidharma). Thus, there came to be the three baskets of scriptures (Tripiṭaka). The original source accommodated the particular divisions and yet
united them in terms of the ultimate truth. Though the ways are varied, they
all have one and the same goal.
The injunctive disciplines make up the branch of Vinaya, which comprises
four major divisions and ten sections. The analyses of mental and conscious
elements (dharmas) make up the branch of Abhidharma, which comprises
four major divisions and ﬁve sections. The branch of Sutras comprises four
Āgamas: the Chang ahan (Dīrgha Āgama; Collection of Lengthy Discourse),
the Zengyi ahan (Aṅguttara Āgama; Discourses Increasing Each by One
Doctrine), which comprises four major divisions and eight sections; the
Zhong ahan (Madhyama Āgama; Middle-length Discourses), which comprises
four major divisions and ﬁve sections; and the Za ahan (Saṃyukta Āgama;
Mixed Discourses), which comprises four major divisions and ten sections.
The present Chang ahan (Dīrgha Āgama) comprises four major divisions
and four sections, altogether thirty sutras, making up one composite unit.
Ahan (Āgama) in the Qin (Chinese) language means “the authority to
which the laws return” (fa-gui). The “authority to which laws return” means,
3

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

in all probability, the profound collection of all that is good upheld by the
secluded cloister of contemplative recollection (dhāraṇī). These are made
into the collection of sutras as the source of authority. It is profoundly abundant
and liberally rich, enclosing and yet ﬁlling far and wide, intelligently declaring
the cases of fortune and misfortune by tracing [the deeds of] the wise and
the foolish, giving judgment to whatever case it may be as to its truth or
falsity, its difference or similarity, historically recording the destiny of success
and the fate of failure in ancient and present times. There is no place, [even]
in frontier regions, where the path is not followed or the law nonexistent,
just as the two primordial principles [of yin and yang] operate everywhere
with the natural relation of things classiﬁed. Like the great ocean to which
a hundred rivers return, the branch of Sutras is called the authority where all
laws return.
In exposition and analysis of the path of practice, whatever is recorded
[in the sutras of this collection] is long and detailed. Because of this, the
initial word of this collection is “Lengthy.” Whoever spends time with this
source of authority may be lost for a long time but suddenly awaken at dawn.
Right and wrong are difﬁcult to distinguish, but once revealed they are like
day and night. In announcement they are dark and vague, and under shedding
light they are revealed like anything that has a shadow or an echo. The numbers of eons (kalpas), though they indicate distance [in time], are felt to be
as near as the morning and evening, and the expanse [of space] in the six
directions, though far-reaching, is seen [to be] as close as if before one’s
eyes. This may be expressed as follows: reciting the great wisdom (the sutras)
in a dark room, one may provide many blind [people] with the ﬁve extraordinary powers of vision, so that even without opening a window of the house,
their knowledge permeates everywhere.
The emperor of the great Qin, [endowed with intelligence] in viewing the
essentials beyond peripheries, surpassing all others with his sublime deportment,
thus nurturing his quiet wisdom, governs both the religious and secular but
has been concerned with [the matter of the people’s] understanding about different customs (culture) because of the subtle language of Buddhist religion.
The duke of Jin, Yaoshuang, an ofﬁcial attached to the district subdivision as
envoy of the Junior (right) General, is by nature straightforward, pure and
gentle, endowed with a subtle mind transcending to reach anywhere, with

4

Preface

respectful concern for the great Dharma, with subtle insight arising spontaneously, and on whom the [emperor] has bestowed his [favorable] attention.
Thus the emperor appointed Duke Yaoshuang to conduct religious affairs.
In the twelfth year of Hongshi (412 C.E.), the year order of Geng (shangzhang) and Xu (yan-mao), the emperor requested the Tripiṭaka master from
Kāśmīra named Buddhayaśas to translate the Vinaya-piṭaka as one unit consisting of forty-ﬁve rolls. This was completed by the fourteenth year of Hongshi (414 C.E.). From the ﬁfteenth year (415 C.E.), the year order of Gui (zhaoyang) and Chao (chifen-ruo), the translation project of this Chang ahan jing
was completed. The śramaṇa [Zhu] Fonian from the province of Liang
assisted [with the] translation, and the Daoist Daohan, a citizen of Qin, [was]
in charge of writing it down.
At that time, those Buddhist monks (śramaṇas) who were renowned in
the capital as well as in the country of Xia (which represents Qin) were invited
to participate in a series of editorial revisions. Respectfully receiving the
statements on doctrines and conﬁrming the absence of discordance, they
made the essences illustrious, venerated the substances, and devoted their
attention to retaining the intended meaning of the emperor. I happened to
receive such auspicious opportunities and participated by listening on many
occasions. Though I did not make any merit of [providing] good assistance,
I am assigned to [conclude] this translation project. Thus I have made this
brief note about the times and events to show to those wise people who will
come to read this sutra collection.

5

Sutra 1
The Great Origin

(Dīgha Nikāya 14: Mahāpadāna Suttanta)
Thus have I heard. At one time, the Buddha was staying in the country of
Śrāvastī in the Kareri-kuṭikā quarter of Jetavana Monastery, accompanied
by one thousand two hundred and ﬁfty bhikṣus (disciples, monks).
At that time, after the morning almsround was completed, some bhikṣus
gathered at the hall adjacent to the Kareri-kuṭikā, and each engaged in discussion with others, saying:

Venerable monks, the Unsurpassed Honorable One (anuttarā) is alone
extraordinary. His supernormal power is far-reaching and has wide and
great inﬂuence. Thus he [alone] knows those innumerable past buddhas
who entered into nirvana, terminating all the deﬁlements and extinguishing obsessive conceptualization. Again, he knows the numbers
of eons ago when each of these respective buddhas appeared, their
titles and names, the families into which they were born, the kinds of
food of which they partook, whether their respective life spans were
long or short, and in what social contexts they experienced the change
between suffering and happiness. Again, he knows that each of those
buddhas upheld a certain respective precept, taught a certain doctrine,
realized a certain insight, acquired a certain understanding, and stayed
in a certain state of realization. How extraordinary is his knowledge,
venerable colleagues! The Tathāgata distinctly knows the nature of
things. Because he knows these things of the past, the heavenly gods
(devas) come to talk to him.

At that time, the World-honored One was staying at a secluded place. As
his supernormal power of hearing was crystal clear, he happened to listen to
the foregoing discussion that went on among the disciples. He arose from
his seat at once, went to the Kareri-kuṭikā hall, and took his proper seat in
the set position. Then, knowingly, the World-honored One deliberately asked

7

1b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

his disciples, “O bhikṣus, having gathered here, what have you been discussing?” The bhikṣus recounted the subject of their discussion in detail.
Thereupon the World-honored One said to them:

Very good, very good. You have renounced family life, each equally
motivated by faith, and have been engaged in the practice of the path.
Of those prescribed practices, there are two kinds in general. First, the
preaching of the wise and holy; and second, the silence of the wise
and holy. O monks, the subject of your discussion must be formulated
in the following manner: “The Tathāgata’s supernormal power has
wide and great inﬂuence. Thus, he alone knows all events of the past
through innumerable eons. As he thoroughly understands the nature
of things, and because the heavenly gods come to talk to the Buddha,
these things are known to him.”

1c

The Buddha then continued in verse:

The bhikṣus assembled in the lecture hall,
Engaged in discussion on the nature of the wise and holy.
The Thus-come One remained in a secluded room,
Knowing all through his supernormal hearing.
Like the rays of the sun, the Buddha illuminates the world,
Discriminates the spheres of elements, and
Knows all things of the past.
He knows of the ﬁnal nirvana of those perfectly enlightened [ones],
Their titles, names, ancestry, and their birthplaces.
Following their lives wherever they were in place and time,
The Buddha records everything
Through his witness by pure vision.
Heavenly gods appeared with great authority and handsomeness,
Descended to inform me of the nirvana of those three groups of
past buddhas,
Their titles and names, and the sound of mourning upon their
[entrance into] nirvana.
The Unsurpassed Honorable One above heaven [and earth]
Thus has recorded [the destinies of] the past buddhas.

8

Sutra 1: The Great Origin

The World-honored One again addressed his disciples:

O bhikṣus, do you wish [the Tathāgata] to impart my supernormal
knowledge about the destinies of the past buddhas and their causes
and conditions, or not? [If you do], I shall recount it for you.

The disciples replied:

World-honored One, this is the most opportune time, sir. We are your
joyful audience. Indulge us, World-honored One! May your reverence
transmit to us the wisdom of the past buddhas at once. We shall follow
intently the instruction that is imparted, sir.

The Buddha spoke to the bhikṣus: “Listen attentively, you should retain
and consider well the following. I shall deliver analysis and explanation for
your sake.” Thereupon the bhikṣus listened to the teaching.
The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

Ninety-one eons ago there was a buddha in this world; the Tathāgata
and Arhat, Vipaśyin by name, appeared in this world. Again, O bhikṣus,
a buddha next came forth thirty-one eons ago; the Tathāgata and Arhat
Śikhin by name appeared in this world. Again, O bhikṣus, during that
same eon, there was yet another buddha; the Tathāgata and Arhat
Viśvabhū by name appeared in this world. Again, O bhikṣus, in the
present auspicious eon (bhadrakalpa) there appeared in this world a
series of buddhas, Krakucchanda, Kanakamuni, and Kāśyapa by name,
and now again, during this same auspicious eon, I myself have realized
highest, perfect enlightenment (anuttara samyaksaṃbodhi).

The Buddha then continued in verse:

Ninety-one eons ago,
There was Vipaśyin Buddha;
Next, thirty-one eons ago,
There appeared Śikhin Buddha;
In that same eon,
There appeared Viśvabhū Tathāgata.
Now, during this present auspicious eon,

2a

9

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

A period of many innumerable nayutas of years,
There came forth four great sages,
Known for their compassion for all sentient beings:
Krakucchanda, Kanakamuni, Kāśyapa, and Śākyamuni.

You should know that when Vipaśyin Buddha appeared, human life
span was as much as eighty thousand years. When Śikhin Buddha
appeared, human life span was as much as seventy thousand years.
When Viśvabhū Buddha appeared, human life span was as much as
sixty thousand years. When Krakucchanda Buddha appeared, human
life span was as much as forty thousand years. When Kanakamuni
Buddha appeared, human life span was as much as thirty thousand
years. When Kāśyapa Buddha appeared, human life span was as much
as twenty thousand years. Now that I have appeared, human life span
is less than a hundred years for most, with only a few living longer
than that.

Then the Buddha continued in verse:

In the time of Vipaśyin,
Human life span was eighty-four thousand years;
In the time of Śikhin Buddha,
Human life span was seventy thousand years;
In the time of Viśvabhū,
Human life span was sixty thousand years;
In the time of Krakucchanda,
Human life span was forty thousand years;
In the time of Kanakamuni,
Human life span was thirty thousand years;
In the time of Kāśyapa Buddha,
Human life span was twenty thousand years;
Now, I myself do not exceed
The current human life span of a hundred years.

Vipaśyin Buddha came from the class of kṣatriyas, bearing the family
name of Kauṇḍinya (Pāli Koṇḍañña). Śikhin Buddha and Viśvabhū

10

Sutra 1: The Great Origin

Buddha also came from the same kṣatriya class, bearing the same
family name. Krakucchanda Buddha came from the brāhmaṇa class,
bearing the name of Kāśyapa. Both Kanakamuni Buddha and Kāśyapa
Buddha came from the same brāhmaṇa class, bearing the same family
name. Myself, being the highest and most honorable, come from the
kṣatriya class and bear the name of Gautama.

The Buddha then continued in verse:

The tathāgatas Vipaśyin, Śikhin, and Viśvabhū,
These three perfectly enlightened beings
Came from the kṣatriya class with the family name of Kauṇḍinya.
The next three tathāgatas
Came from the brāhmaṇa class with the name of Kāśyapa.
Myself now, the highest and most honorable,
For the purpose of guiding sentient beings,
Come from the family of courage and valor,
Primary among all heavenly gods,
With the name of Gautama.
The ﬁrst three perfectly enlightened beings
Came from the kṣatriya class,
While the second three tathāgatas
Came from the brāhmaṇa class.
Now I, myself, the highest and most honorable,
Come from the kṣatriya class with courage and valor.

Vipaśyin Buddha sat under a pippala tree and realized perfect enlightenment. Śikhin Buddha sat under a puṇḍarīka tree and realized perfect
enlightenment. Viśvabhū Buddha sat under a śāla tree and realized
perfect enlightenment. Krakucchanda Buddha sat under a śirīsā tree
and realized perfect enlightenment. Kanakamuni Buddha sat under an
udumbara tree and realized perfect enlightenment. Kāśyapa Buddha
sat under a nyagrodha tree and realized perfect enlightenment. Now
I, the Buddha and Arhat, sat under an paṭala tree and realized perfect
enlightenment.

11

2b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

The Buddha then continued in verse:

Vipaśyin Tathāgata approached a pippala tree
And under that tree he realized perfect enlightenment.
Śikhin Tathāgata extinguished deﬁlement under a puṇḍarīka tree;
Viśvabhū Tathāgata sat under a śāla tree
And there he realized the knowledge of his deliverance and
The freedom of supernormal power.
Krakucchanda Tathāgata sat under a śirīsā tree
And realized his omniscience, pure and genuine,
To be neither deﬁled nor attached.
Kanakamuni sat under an udumbara tree
And under that tree extinguished desire, sorrow, and afﬂiction.
Kāśyapa Tathāgata sat under a nyagrodha tree
And under that tree terminated the origin of varied existence.
I, now, as Śākyamuni, sat under an paṭala tree
And as the Tathāgata, I have acquired the ten powers of insight,
Terminated many deﬁlements,
Overcame the spells of [Māra], the Evil One, and
Have now been imparting great knowledge to the disciples.
The seven buddhas’ powers of exertion
Emitted rays of light that destroyed the darkness of ignorance.
Each of the buddhas sat under a tree
And there each realized perfect enlightenment.

Vipaśyin Tathāgata taught his Dharma before the assembly of disciples
on three occasions; attendance was one hundred and sixty thousand in
number at the initial assembly, one hundred thousand at the second,
and eighty thousand at the third. Śikhin Tathāgata also taught his
Dharma before the assembly of disciples on three occasions; attendance
was one hundred thousand in number at the initial assembly, eighty
thousand at the second, and seventy thousand at the third. Viśvabhū
Tathāgata taught his Dharma before the assembly of disciples on two
occasions; attendance was seventy thousand in number at the initial
assembly and sixty thousand at the second. Krakucchanda Tathāgata

12

Sutra 1: The Great Origin

taught his Dharma before the assembly of disciples on one occasion,
with an attendance of forty thousand. Kanakamuni Tathāgata taught
his Dharma before the assembly of disciples on one occasion, with an
attendance of thirty thousand. Kāśyapa Tathāgata taught his Dharma
before the assembly of disciples on one occasion, with an attendance
of twenty thousand. I now teach the Dharma before the assembly of
disciples on a single occasion, with an attendance of one thousand two
hundred and ﬁfty.

The Buddha then continued in verse:

Vipaśyin excelled in the contemplation of names;
His insight was immeasurable.
He had no fear whatsoever in lecturing
Before the assembly of his disciples on three occasions.
Śikhin’s light [of wisdom] was immovable and
Thus destroyed all deﬁlements.
No one could fathom his authority and virtue,
So immeasurable and great.
This buddha also held on three occasions
The assembly of his disciples
Gathered together from all places.
Viśvabhū terminated deﬁlements, and
Many great sages assembled for his teaching.
His name was heard in all regions, and
The great name of his Dharma arose.
The disciples of the two assemblies propagated everywhere
The profound meaning [of his teaching].
Krakucchanda taught his Dharma
Before the assembly on one occasion,
And as their guide helped, with his compassion,
The disciples thus assembled
To overcome suffering and accomplish conversion.
Kanakamuni Tathāgata
Realized highest enlightenment and

13

2c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

Likewise taught his Dharma.
His physical features looked splendid, of purplish-gold color,
Every aspect of his physical form was equally perfect.
The disciples of his assembly spread his teaching everywhere.
[When Kāśyapa taught his Dharma before the assembly,]
There was no bristling of his hair,
Nor any confusion in his thought,
Nor any word of unnecessary repetition.
The disciples of his single assembly
Revered his contemplation of compassion in [perfect] quiescence.
I, from the Śākya family,
Superior to all the śramaṇas,
Center of all heavenly quarters, most honorable,
Have the disciples of my single assembly.
It is the intention of my appearance before that assembly
To propagate the pure and genuine teaching.
With my mind ﬁlled with delight,
With all deﬁlements extinguished,
I have no subsequent existence.
Vipaśyin and Śikhin taught their Dharma before three assemblies,
Viśvabhū Buddha taught before two assemblies,
The remaining four buddhas each taught [the Dharma]
On single occasions before an assembly of sages.

Vipaśyin Buddha had two disciples, Khaṇḍa and Tiṣya; they surpassed
all the other disciples. Śikhin Buddha had two disciples, Abhibhū and
Saṃbhava; they surpassed all the other disciples. Viśvabhū Buddha
had two disciples, Soṇa (Pāli) and Uttama; they surpassed all the other
disciples. Krakucchanda Buddha had two disciples, Sañjīva and Vidhūra (Pāli); they surpassed all the other disciples. Kanakamuni Buddha
had two disciples, Bhiyyosa (Pāli) and Uttara; they surpassed all other
disciples. Kāśyapa Buddha had two disciples, Tiṣya and Bharadvāja;
they surpassed all other disciples. I have two disciples, Śāriputra and
Maudgalyāyana; they surpass all the other disciples.

3a

Then the Buddha continued in verse:

14

Sutra 1: The Great Origin

Khaṇḍa and Tiṣya were the disciples of Vipaśyin;
Abhibhū and Saṃbhava were the disciples of Śikhin Buddha;
Soṇa and Uttama surpassed all the other disciples and
Equally overcame the spells of the devil;
They were the disciples of Viśvabhū.
Sañjīva and Vidhūra were the disciples of Krakucchanda;
Bhiyyosa and Uttara were the disciples of Kanakamuni;
Tiṣya and Bharadvāja were the disciples of Kāśyapa Buddha;
Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana are my ﬁrst-rank disciples.

Vipaśyin Buddha had a disciple by the name of Aśoka, who was his chief
personal attendant. Śikhin Buddha had a disciple by the name of Kṣemakāra [as his personal attendant]. Viśvabhū Buddha had an attendant disciple, Upaśāntā by name; Krakucchanda Buddha had an attendant disciple, Buddhija by name; Kanakamuni Buddha had an attendant disciple,
Sotthija (Pāli) by name; Kāśyapa Buddha had an attendant disciple,
Sarvamitra by name. Śākyamuni Buddha has an attendant disciple,
Ānanda by name.

The Buddha then continued in verse:

Aśoka, Kṣemakāra, Upaśāntā, Buddhija,
Sotthija, Sarvamitra, and Ānanda as the seventh;
They each became personal attendants
Of their respective buddhas and
Assisted them in various roles, endowed with goals and means.
Refraining from indolence day and night,
Beneﬁting themselves as well as others,
These seven wise disciples closely attended the seven buddhas,
Dedicated their service with delight, and
Quietly entered nirvana.

Vipaśyin Buddha had a son, Fangying by name; Śikhin Buddha had a
son, Apramāṇa by name; Viśvabhū Buddha had a son, Subuddha by
name; Krakucchanda Buddha had a son, Shangsheng by name; Kanakamuni Buddha had a son, Lokanāyaka by name; Kāśyapa Buddha had
a son, Sanghasena by name; now I have a son, Rāhula by name.

15

3b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

Then the Buddha continued in verse:15

Fangying, Apramāṇa, Subuddha, Shangsheng,
Lokanāyaka, Sanghasena, and Rāhula as the seventh;
These scions, successors of the heroic lineages of the buddhas,
Dedicated themselves to morality,
Delighted in charity, and
Had no fear of conscience before the sacred Dharma.

The father of Vipaśyin Buddha was Bandhumant, from a royal family
of kṣatriyas, and his mother was Bandhumatī. The city ruled by the
king was called Bandhumatī.

The Buddha then continued in verse:

The father, perfect-eyed one,
Was Bandhumant, the mother was Bandhumatī.
The city ruled by Bandhumant was Bandhumatī,
Where the Buddha taught his Dharma.

The father of Śikhin Buddha was Aruṇa, from a royal family of kṣatriyas, and his mother was called Prabhāvatī. The city ruled by the king
was Aruṇavatī.

Then the Buddha continued in verse:

Śikhin’s father was Aruṇa, and
His mother [was] Prabhāvatī.
While Aruṇa remained in the capital
His authority and virtue vanquished his enemies.

The father of Viśvabhū Buddha was Suppatīta (Pāli), from a royal
family of kṣatriyas, and his mother was called Yaśavatī. The city ruled
by the king was called Anopama.

The Buddha then continued in verse:
The father of Viśvabhū Buddha
Was Suppatīta by name and
From the kṣatriya class, and

16

Sutra 1: The Great Origin

His mother was called Yaśavatī.
The capital was called Anopama.

The father of Krakucchanda Buddha was Agnidatta, from a brāhmaṇa
family, and his mother was called Viśākhā. The king was called Kṣema
(Pāli Khema), and the capital ruled by him was [called] Kṣema, after
the king’s name.

The Buddha then continued in verse:

The father of Krakucchanda Buddha,
Agnidatta, was a brāhmaṇa,
The mother was Viśākhā by name.
The king [of his time] was called Kṣema and
Ruled the city of Kṣema.

The father of Kanakamuni Buddha was Yajñadatta, from a brāhmaṇa
family, and his mother was Uttarā. The king of his time was Śubha,
and his capital was called Śubha after his name.

The Buddha then continued in verse:

The father of Kanakamuni Buddha,
Yajñadatta, was a brāhmaṇa, and
His mother was called Uttarā.
The king [of his time] was Śubha and
Ruled the city of Śubha.

The father of Kāśyapa Buddha was Brahmadatta, from a brāhmaṇa
family, and his mother was called Dhanavatī. The king of his time was
Kikin (Pāli) by name and the city ruled by the king was Vārāṇasī.

The Buddha then continued in verse:

The father of Kāśyapa Buddha,
Brahmadatta, was a brāhmaṇa, and
His mother was called Dhanavatī.
The king of his time was Kikin
Who ruled the city of Vārāṇasī.

17

3c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

My father was called Śuddhodana, from a royal family of the kṣatriyas,
and my mother was Mahāmāyā. The capital ruled by the king was
called Kapilavastu.

The Buddha then continued in verse:

My father was a kṣatriya,
Śuddhodana by name, and
My mother was called Mahāmāyā.
His land was vast and his people prosperous.
I was born to them.

These are the stories of the buddhas, their names, familial backgrounds,
and the places of their birth. How could a wise person, having listened
to these stories, not rejoice and give rise to a feeling of dedication?

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

Listen attentively, you should retain and consider well the following. I
shall deliver analysis and explanation for your sake. O bhikṣus, you should
know the regularity of the buddhas. The bodhisattva Vipaśyin descended
from Tuṣita Heaven to enter the womb of his heavenly mother through
her right side, and remained therein in the state of mindfulness, his mind
undisturbed. At that moment, the earth trembled and a great ray of light
illumined the entire world. The illumination reached even to the region
where the sun and the moon cannot give their great illumination to every
sentient being. Even those sentient beings of the dark underworld could
see each other and recognize the place of their destiny. At that time the
light also illuminated the palace of the Evil One. Although illumination
was extended to all the heavenly beings, with Indra as their head, the god
Brahmā, śramaṇas, brāhmaṇas, as well as other sentient beings, only the
gods were not revealed because of their own rays of light.

The Buddha then continued in verse:

While heavy clouds gathered thickly in midair,
Bolts of lightning illuminating heaven and earth,
Vipaśyin descended and entered into his mother’s womb.

18

Sutra 1: The Great Origin

The ray of light equally illuminated the regions
Where the sun and moon cannot reach.
There was hardly anyone
Who did not receive the great illumination.
The one thus impregnated is immaculate and stainless.
This is the regularity of the buddhas.

O bhikṣus, you should [further] know the regularity of the buddhas.
Being in his mother’s womb, the bodhisattva Vipaśyin was steadfast
with his concentration, his mind undisturbed. The four heavenly
guardians of the four heavenly quarters took up halberds and protected
the Bodhisattva. Neither human nor nonhuman [beings] could approach
and disturb him. This is the regularity of the buddhas.

The Buddha then continued in verse:

The four princes (guardians) of the four quarters of heaven
Were renowned for their authority and virtue.
Commanded by the god Indra,
They protected the Bodhisattva well.
They took up the arms of the halberd and
Always guarded him, without leaving his side,
Against the approach of any [evil] human or nonhuman [being].
This is the regularity of the buddhas.
The heavenly gods protected the Bodhisattva well
As though nymphs guarding a heavenly palace.
All the retainers of the gods were also thus delighted.
This is the regularity of the buddhas.

Again the Buddha spoke to the bhikṣus on the regularity of the lives of
the buddhas:

The bodhisattva Vipaśyin descended from Tuṣita Heaven to enter into
his mother’s womb and abided there in concentration, his mind undisturbed, while his mother’s body was safe and in peace with no problems. With her wisdom increased, she examined her fetus and saw
the well-developing body of the Bodhisattva endowed with limbs and

19

4a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

senses as spotless as purplish-gold. It was like a [perfect] lapis lazuli
gem; an expert on examining its [perfect] transparency within and
without would ﬁnd neither shadow nor ﬂaw. This is the regularity of
the buddhas.

At that moment the Buddha continued in verse:

As pure as a gem of lapis lazuli and
As clear as the bright sun and moon,
The Honorable One remained in his mother’s body,
Disturbing not his mother’s gestation.
With her wisdom increased,
She examined her fetus and
Saw the body of her child like a golden image.
Her pregnancy was safe and peaceful.
This is the regularity of the buddhas.

The Buddha told the bhikṣus:

The bodhisattva Vipaśyin descended from Tuṣita Heaven to enter into
his mother’s womb and abided there in concentration, his mind undisturbed. His mother’s mind was pure and genuine. She was free from
any thought of desire or from being burned by immoral desire. This is
the regularity of the buddhas.

At that time, the World-honored One continued in verse:

While the Bodhisattva abided in the mother’s womb,
Heavenly blessings increased,
Bestowed [upon the Bodhisattva] from the highest heavens.
The thoughts of the mother were pure and genuine,
With no thought of desire.
Forsaking sensual longing,
Unstained and unapproached,
She was free from the ﬂame of immoral desire.
This is the regularity of the buddhas’ life-careers.

The Buddha [again] spoke to the bhikṣus on the regularity of the buddhas:

20

Sutra 1: The Great Origin

The Bodhisattva descended from Tuṣita Heaven to enter his mother’s
womb and abided there in concentration, his mind undisturbed. His
mother upheld the ﬁve precepts (pañca-śīla) and her practice of austerity
was pure and genuine. With her sincere faith, compassion, and goodwill,
well fulﬁlled, with nothing but happiness, she was born in Trāyastriṃśa
Heaven at the time of her body’s dissolution at the end of her life. This
is the regularity of the buddhas.

At that time, the World-honored One continued in verse:

While carrying within her body
The highest, most honorable among humans,
Upholding the precepts with vigor,
She was destined to gain
A heavenly body in her future life.
Because of this she is called the mother of the buddhas.

The Buddha [again] spoke to the bhikṣus on the regularity of the lives of
the buddhas:

When the bodhisattva Vipaśyin was born, he came from his mother’s
right side. At that moment the earth trembled and a ray of light illuminated the entire world. Just as when the Bodhisattva initially entered
his mother’s womb, the illumination reached even to the dark underworld, beneﬁting every sentient being with its great illumination. This
is the regularity of the buddhas.

At that time, the World-honored One continued in verse:

When the prince was born, the earth trembled,
A ray of light illuminated everywhere without exception,
This world as well as the other worlds,
Above and below in all directions,
Thus granting the pure and genuine cause [of salvation].
Endowed with the sublime voice of rejoicing,
One after another the heavenly beings praised
The name of the Bodhisattva.

21

4b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

The Buddha [again] spoke to the bhikṣus on the regularity of the lives of
buddhas:

The bodhisattva Vipaśyin came from his mother’s right side at the time
of his birth and remained there in concentration, his mind undisturbed.
At that moment the mother of the Bodhisattva pulled down a tree branch
[to support herself], neither sitting nor lying down. Then the four heavenly guardians respectfully offered scented water and spoke to the
mother: “As was ordained, O heavenly mother, now the holy child is
born. May your ladyship be free from worry and sorrow.” This is the
regularity of the buddhas.

At that time the World-honored One continued in verse:
The mother of the Buddha
Neither took a seat nor reclined upon the ground,
But was steadfast in the precepts and
The practice of austerity.
Born in the house of nobility,
She never slackened in her exertion
While attended by heavenly beings.

The Buddha [again] spoke to the bhikṣus on the regularity of the buddhas:
The bodhisattva Vipaśyin came from his mother’s right side at the time
of his birth and abided there in concentration, his mind undisturbed.
His body was immaculate, never subjected to deﬁlement by ﬁlth or
evil thoughts. [It was] like a gem, pure and genuine, [which] when
expertly mixed with white paint neither affects nor is affected [by the
paint], because it is pure and genuine. It is the same with the Bodhisattva’s emerging from his mother’s womb. This is the regularity of
the buddhas.

At that time the World-honored One continued in verse:

Like a gem, pure and genuine,
[When] mixed with paint [it] neither affects nor [is] affected [by the
paint],

22

Sutra 1: The Great Origin

When the Bodhisattva emerged from his mother’s womb,
He was pure and spotless.

The Buddha [again] spoke to the bhikṣus on the regularity of the buddhas:

The bodhisattva Vipaśyin, at the time of his birth, came from his
mother’s right side and abided there in concentration, his mind undisturbed. Coming down to the ground from his mother’s right side, he
took seven steps and, without any help from others, glancing in all
directions, he raised his hand and declared: “Above heaven and below,
I alone am most honorable. I am here to save sentient beings from the
woes of birth, old age, sickness, and death.” This is the regularity of
the buddhas.

At that time the World-honored One continued in verse:

Just as a lion walks,
[The Bodhisattva] glanced in the four directions, and
A lionlike child, he took seven steps upon the ground.
Again, as with a great dragon’s movement,
[The Bodhisattva] glanced in the four directions, and
[Like] a dragonlike child, when born
He took seven steps on descending to the ground.
At the time of [his] birth,
The two-legged (i.e., human) Honorable One
Took seven ﬁrm steps, and
Glancing in the four directions,
Raised his voice to declare the termination of the suffering of life
and death.
At the very beginning of his birth,
He had no equal [but was] equal [only] to other buddhas.
He perceived the origination of life and death, and
That this life [would be] his last.

The Buddha [again] spoke to the bhikṣus on the regularity of the buddhas:
The bodhisattva Vipaśyin, at the time of his birth, came from his mother’s
right side and abided there in concentration, his mind undisturbed. Two

23

4c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

fountains sprang out, one warm and the other cool, as an offering for
the bathing of the Bodhisattva. This is the regularity of the buddhas.

At that time the World-honored One continued in verse:
When the two-legged Honorable One was born,
Two fountains sprang out as an offering
For the bathing of the Bodhisattva.
The infant, endowed with his perfect eyes,
Was bathed clean in [the water of] these fountains.
The two fountains sprang out naturally;
The water was very pure and clean;
One was a warm spring while the other was cool,
Both for the bathing of the Omniscient [One].

When the prince was born, his father, King Bandhumant, invited a host
of soothsayers who specialized in magical formulas to see the prince
and prophesy about his fortune or fate. The soothsayers came to see
the prince as instructed. Having noted the eminent marks the child bore
when they opened his clothing, the soothsayers told the king of his
fortune:
We have no doubt in our mind that whoever bears these marks is
bound to have one of two destinies. If he remains in household life,
he will become the universal ruler (cakravartin) who turns the sacred
wheel and will become king of all four quarters on earth. He will
acquire the four divisions of armies and will rule the land under the
right Dharma with impartiality, beneﬁting everything under the
heavens. He will spontaneously acquire the seven kinds of treasures
and, accompanied by a thousand brave and strong soldiers, he will
be able to overcome any foreign enemy [even] without [resorting
to] arms in punishment; thus he will keep the peace of all lands
under the heavens. Should he renounce household life and pursue
the path [of salvation], he is destined to realize perfect enlightenment
and be named by ten sacred titles of buddhahood.

Then the soothsayers said to the king:

24

Sutra 1: The Great Origin

Your majesty, the prince bears the thirty-two eminent marks. We
have no doubt in mind that he is bound to realize one of two destinies, sire. Should he stay in household life, he will become the
universal ruler who turns the sacred wheel. Should he renounce
household life, he will realize perfect enlightenment and be named
by ten epithets of buddhahood.

The Buddha then continued in verse:

The prince was born endowed with innumerable fortunes.
The soothsayers said:
“We have no doubt in our mind that,
Like a case predetermined in the book of legal codes,
The prince has two destinies, sire.
Should he choose household life,
He is bound to become a universal ruler
Who turns the sacred wheel.
He will spontaneously acquire
The seven kinds of treasures [that are] ordinarily difﬁcult to obtain.
He will acquire the sacred wheel
Which is made of a thousand golden spokes,
With a golden thread attached around its outer edge.
When it is turned,
It can run to any place as though ﬂying;
Hence it is called the ﬁrst treasure, the heavenly wheel.
He will acquire the well-trained elephants
Endowed with seven tusks, huge and wide, and
As white as snow, capable of ﬂying in midair.
This is called the second treasure, the elephant.
He will acquire horses that, when they run,
Can go any place under the heavens,
Leaving in the morning and
Returning in the evening for feed,
With shining hair and the voice of a peacock.
This is called the third treasure, the horse.

25

5a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

He will acquire the lapis lazuli gem, pure and genuine,
Which reﬂects a light that shines over the distance of a yojana,
Illuminating the night as brightly as the day.
This is called the fourth treasure, the divine gem (maṇi-ratna).
He will acquire the queen whose ﬁgure,
Voice, scent, taste, and touch have no equal,
Foremost among all women.
This is called the ﬁfth treasure, the queen.
He will acquire men of wealth
Who, to their hearts’ content,
Make gifts of lapis lazuli gems and
All other precious stones.
This is called the sixth treasure, the treasury household.
He will acquire bands of armies, brave and strong,
Which can swiftly move back and forth as he commands.
This is called the seventh treasure, the military commander.
These are the seven treasures of the universal ruler, sire:
The wheel, the white elephant, the horse, the gems,
The woman, the wealthy men, and the army.
The prince will like these things and
Enjoy a life of fulﬁllment
With the ﬁve kinds of desire, and yet,
Just as an elephant decisively breaks its reins,
He will renounce household life and
Realize perfect enlightenment.
Your Majesty, this is the fortune, sir,
Due to this prince, Most Honorable among Humans,
Who will turn the wheel of Dharma in this world,
Without ceasing, even after his realization of the path.”

At that moment, the father-king [again] asked the soothsayers three
times with due courtesy, “May you also examine the thirty-two marks
of the prince and, naming them, explain their respective meanings.”
Then the soothsayers at once opened the prince’s clothing and explained
the thirty-two eminent marks: (1) even and ﬂat soles of the feet, for

26

Sutra 1: The Great Origin

steady footing; (2) the two soles marked symmetrically with the symbol
of the thousand-spoked wheel; (3) webbed hands and feet like those
of a goose; (4) hands and feet as smooth and delicate as the fabric of
a heavenly robe; (5) unequaled delicate, elongated ﬁngers and toes;
(6) wide-surfaced, rounded feet of pleasant appearance; (7) rounded
heels narrowing gradually to straight calves like those of a deer; (8)
well-connected ribs like the links of a chain; (9) a genital organ hidden
within folds [of skin], like that of a horse; (10) elongated upper limbs,
hands touching the knees even in an upright position; (11) each hair
growing from its respective root, coiling to the right, the color of lapis
lazuli; (12) bodily hairs coiling to the right, the color of navy blue,
growing upward; (13) a physical body of golden complexion (suvarṇavarṇa); (14) dust-repellent, delicate, tender skin; (15) symmetrically
even and round shoulders ﬁlled with vigor; (16) a chest marked with
the auspicious sign of a mirror-image svastika; (17) physical stature
twice as tall as a normal body; (18) well-developed seven parts of the
body (hands, feet, lower shoulders, and nape); (19) a wide and grand
body like a banyan tree; (20) rounded, pronounced cheeks like those
of a lion; (21) an upper torso straight and upright, lionlike in form;
(22) a set of forty teeth; (23) teeth of neat, square form and in good
alignment (sama-danta); (24) teeth having no spaces [in between];
(25) white and clean teeth; (26) a pure throat and palate ﬁt for the best
of partaken food; (27) a wide and elongated tongue that reaches the
ears (prabhūta-tanu-jihvā); (28) a beautiful, heavenly voice; (29) darkblue eyes; (30) twinkling eyes and eyelids like those of an ox; (31) a
curl of white hair on the forehead (ūrṇā), ﬂexible and long, stretching
ten feet, coiling back to the right like a trumpet shell when stretched
and released; and (32) a protuberance on top of the head (uṣṇīṣa). These
are the thirty-two eminent marks of a buddha.”

The Buddha then continued in verse:

The steady feet, soft and pliant,
Do not leave traces of their passing on the ground.
The symbol of the wheels

27

5b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

With a thousand spokes is magniﬁcent,
Embellished with bright colors.
Like a nyagrodha tree,
His physical stature is equally wide and tall.
Marvelously hidden is the Tathāgata’s male organ
Like that of a horse.
In his body, well embellished with golden accessories,
All the other eminent marks are mutually reﬂected.
Though passing through this ordinary world,
Neither dust nor soil deﬁles his body,
Which bears the heavenly complexion,
Exceedingly soft and tender.
The royal canopy spontaneously covers his presence, and
His body, the source of the heavenly voice,
Is purplish-gold, as fresh as [lotus] ﬂowers
Blooming for the ﬁrst time on the surface of a pond.
The king asked the soothsayers, and
They respectfully replied to him,
Praising the eminent marks of the Bodhisattva.
The entirety of his body is enveloped
With bright light revealing all his limbs,
His feet and hands, externally and from within.
He tastes the essence of all foods;
His upper torso, upright without stooping,
The wheels of his soles are revealed, and
His voice sounds like that of a kalaviṅka bird.
Endowed with the form of rounded heels
Gradually narrowing toward straight calves,
This is the meritorious reward of his past destiny.
His upper arms and elbows,
Rounded and perfect, are nice to look at,
While his facial features are exceedingly handsome.
The honorable lion among humans
Surpasses all others in his might,
Both of his cheeks round and balanced,

5c

28

Sutra 1: The Great Origin

With the poise of a reclining lion.
The set of his teeth, forty in number, is regular and
Evenly aligned with no spaces in between.
His unearthly voice is marvelous and
Attracts everyone from far and near.
He stands upright without stooping,
Both hands reaching down to the knees.
His hands are evenly developed and soft.
It is the form of beauty ever endowed
To the honorable and best among all humans.
His bodily hairs each grow from respective roots,
His hands and feet are endowed with webbing.
He has a protuberance on top of his head,
Dark-blue eyes, twinkling,
Both eyelids moving,
Both shoulders bearing rounded fullness.
He is thus endowed with thirty-two eminent marks.
There is no imbalance of high or low
With his heels and straight calves,
Delicate like those of the deer.
As if the best of all heavenly beings descended to the earth,
Just as an elephant decisively tears away its reins,
He was prepared to have all sentient beings
Rescued from suffering,
Himself facing the cycle of birth,
Old age, sickness, and death.
Moved by his compassion,
He taught the Four Noble Truths,
Explained the meaning of the verses on Dharma, and
Had his disciples dedicate themselves to the Most Honorable One.

The Buddha [again] spoke to the bhikṣus:

When Vipaśyin Buddha was born, the heavenly gods hovered in midair
holding a white canopy and fans, thereby protecting him from coldness
and heat, wind and rain, dust and dirt.

29

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

The Buddha then continued in verse:

Having never before appeared among humans,
The Most Honorable One is [now] born as a two-legged being.
The gods pay him their respects
In offering the canopy and fans.

At that time the father-king provided the prince with four nursing
maids: the ﬁrst fed him milk, the second bathed him, the third applied
scented oil to his body, and the fourth accompanied him in play. Joyful
in heart, they reared him diligently.

Thus continued the Buddha in verse:

With love and affection,
The nursing maids reared the prince;
The ﬁrst feeding him milk,
The second bathing him,
The third applying scented oil to his body,
The fourth accompanying him in play.
The best of scented oils,
They applied to the Most Honorable among Humans.

6a

When he had grown to adolescence, all the maidens of the country
never tired of looking at the young prince.

Here the Buddha continued in verse:

Adored by many with much respect
Like a golden image initially cast,
Men and women watched him attentively,
Never tiring of gazing at him.

When he had grown to adolescence, all the citizens, male and female,
adored him as if embracing and savoring the scent of a precious ﬂower.

Here the Buddha continued in verse:

When the Most Honorable [One] was born,
He was adored by many with love and respect.

30

Sutra 1: The Great Origin

One after another they embraced him,
[Just as if] holding a precious ﬂower and savoring its fragrance.

When the Bodhisattva was born, he did not blink his eyes, much like
the gods of Trāyastriṃśa Heaven. Because of the absence of blinking,
he was called Vipaśyin.

Here the Buddha continued in verse:

The best of all among the heavens did not blink,
Just like the gods of Trāyastriṃśa Heaven.
Staring at an object (i.e., form),
He contemplated it with insight.
Hence he was called Vipaśyin.

When the Bodhisattva was born his voice was exceedingly clear, tender
and graceful like the voice of a kalaviṅka bird.

Here the Buddha continued in verse:

Even as a Himalayan bird enhances its voice
With a diet of fruit juice,
So was the voice of the Honorable One
Clear and penetrating like that of the bird.

When the Bodhisattva was born, his eyes were able to see across the
distance of a yojana.

Here the Buddha continued in verse:

In reward for his past deeds, pure and genuine,
He obtained the miraculous light of the heavens.
His eyes we were able to see everything
Within the radius of a yojana.

After his birth, year by year, the Bodhisattva grew up to be a young
man and took up his ofﬁce in the main hall, inculcating the path of
morality in the citizens, thus beneﬁting them. His name and virtue were
renowned even in distant regions.

31

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

The Buddha continued in verse:

While he was still a young man,
Taking up his ofﬁce at the main hall,
He beneﬁted the citizens by inculcating the path of morality and
Dealt with varieties of decision-making.
Because of this he was called Vipaśyin.
His knowledge, pure and genuine,
Is vast and detailed and
As profound as the great ocean.
He thus helped the people
To gladly accept his inculcation and
Increase and expand their wisdom.

Then the Bodhisattva, wishing to go on an excursion, ordered his attendant, “Make the chariot be ready. I wish to visit that [royal] grove to
look at things and sites.”
Having prepared the chariot, the attendant reported, “It is ready,
sir.” The prince at once boarded [the chariot] and set out on the road
toward the grove. On the roadway, however, he saw an old white-haired
man, his teeth all gone, his face wrinkled, his body bent down and supported by a cane, his steps slow and weak, his breath labored. Looking
back at that old man, the prince questioned his attendant, “What kind
of person is that?”
[The attendant] replied, “That is an old man, sir.”
The prince again asked, “What does it mean to be old?”
The attendant replied, ‘Sir, it means that the span of life is approaching its end, leaving only a limited duration of time to live. This is called
old age, sir.”
The prince asked again, “I too will become like this and am unable
to escape it, is this not so?”
The attendant replied, “Yes, sir. Whosoever is born is bound to
become old. There is no difference between rich and poor [in this
regard], sir.”
At that moment the prince lost interest [in the excursion]. He told
the attendant to turn the chariot around at once and return to the palace.

6b

32

Sutra 1: The Great Origin

While withdrawing in contemplative silence, he thought to himself,
“This suffering of old age must also be with me.”

Here the Buddha again continued in verse:
Having seen an old man
Whose life was nearing the end,
Walking with feeble steps,
Supported only by his cane,
The Bodhisattva thought to himself:
“I too cannot escape this fate.”

At that time the father-king questioned the attendant, “Did the prince
enjoy his excursion?”
[The attendant] replied, “No, sire.” The king asked why. The attendant replied, “Sire, we encountered an old man on the roadway. The
prince was not pleased because of that, sir.”
At that moment, the father-king did not say anything to the attendant
but thought to himself:

Once, when a group of soothsayers prophesied the prince’s fortune,
they told me that he was bound to renounce household life. Now
he is unhappy with his life here. Is there not some means by which
to change his feeling? I must contrive some sort of expediency, such
as to place his new quarters in the rear part of the palace. Let him
enjoy his ﬁve senses fully, distracting his mind, thereby preventing
him from leaving household life.

At once the king had the prince’s new quarters attractively decorated
and assigned selected palace ladies to entertain him.

Here the Buddha continued in verse:

Having listened to the words of the attendant,
The father-king contrived an expediency
To have the prince’s quarters decorated and
To attract his ﬁve senses with increased entertainment,
Hoping to prevent him from giving up household life.

33

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

The prince later ordered his attendant to again prepare a chariot and
visited the outside world on an excursion. [This time] he met an ailing
man. The man’s body was weakened, his belly distended, his face was
dark, he lay amid his own excrement and ﬁlth with no one attending
him, and his illness was so serious that he could not speak. The prince,
asked his attendant, “What kind of person is this?”
The attendant replied, “He is a sick man, sir.”
The prince asked again, “What is meant by ‘sick’?”
The attendant replied: “Sir, it means that many sharp pains torment
an ailing person, making it uncertain as to whether or not he may live.
Hence this is called sickness, sir.”
The prince asked, “I too will become like this and am unable to
escape it, is that not so?”
The attendant replied, “Yes, sir. Whoever is born is bound to become
sick. There is no difference between the noble and the humble [in this
regard], sir.”
At that moment, the prince lost interest [in the excursion]. He told
the attendant to turn the chariot around at once and return to the palace.
While withdrawing in contemplative silence, he thought to himself,
“This suffering of illness must also be with me.”

Here the Buddha again continued in verse:

Having seen a man with chronic illness
Whose complexion was emaciated and dark,
The Bodhisattva withdrew in silent contemplation,
Thinking to himself, “I too cannot escape this fate.”

At that time the father-king questioned the attendant, “Did the prince
enjoy his excursion?”
He replied, “No, sire.” The king asked again as to why. The attendant
replied, “Sire, we encountered an ailing man on the roadway. The
prince was not pleased because of that, sir.”
At that moment, the father-king did not question the attendant again
but thought to himself:

6c

34

Sutra 1: The Great Origin

Once when a group of soothsayers prophesied the prince’s fortune,
they told me that he was bound to renounce his household life. Now
he is unhappy with his life here. Is there not some means by which
to change his feeling? I must contrive some sort of experiency, to
increase his entertainment with music and dance, distracting his
mind, thereby preventing him from leaving household life.

At once, [the king] had the new quarters attractively decorated and
assigned selected palace ladies to entertain the prince.

Here the Buddha continued in verse:

Form, sound, smell, taste, and touch
Are delicate and pleasurable.
As the merit due to the Bodhisattva,
He thus enjoyed his life among these pleasures.

Again, on another occasion, the prince ordered his attendant to prepare
a chariot and visited the outside world on an excursion, but he encountered a dead man on the roadway. The family and relatives, lamenting
and crying loudly, went out of the city in funeral procession, with various banners to the front and rear.
The prince again questioned his attendant, “What is this man?” He
replied: “This is a dead man, sir.”
The prince asked, “What is meant by death?” The attendant replied:
Sir, it means extinction, which is preceded by the ceasing of the
breath, next the loss of warmth, and then the dissolution of the
senses. The living and the dead are in [totally] different worlds.
This [completely] separates one from his household. Hence, this is
called death, sir.

The prince once again asked, “I too will become like this and be unable
to escape it, is that not so?”
The attendant replied, “Yes, sir. Whosoever is once born is bound
to die. There is no difference between the noble and the humble [in
this regard], sir.”

35

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

At that moment, the prince lost interest [in the excursion] and told
the attendant to turn the chariot around at once and return to the palace.
Withdrawing in contemplative silence, he thought to himself, “This
suffering of death must also be with me.”

Here the Buddha again continued in verse:

Having seen a dead man for the ﬁrst time, and
Knowing the rebirth of the dead,
He withdrew in silent contemplation,
Thinking, “I too cannot escape this fate.”

At that time the father-king asked the attendant, “Did the prince enjoy
his excursion?” He replied, “No, sire.”
The king asked again as to why. The attendant replied, “Sire, we
encountered a dead man on the roadway. The prince was not pleased
because of that, sir.”
At that moment, the father-king did not question the attendant any
more but thought to himself:

Once when a group of soothsayers prophesied the prince’s fortune,
they told me that he was bound to renounce household life. Now
he is unhappy with his life here. Is there some means to change his
feeling? I must contrive some sort of expediency, to increase his
entertainment with music and dance, distracting his mind, thereby
preventing him from leaving household life.

At once, [the king] had the new quarters attractively decorated and
assigned selected palace ladies to entertain the prince.

Here the Buddha continued in verse:

The young prince, widely renowned,
Surrounded by palace ladies,
Enjoyed the pleasures of the ﬁve senses,
Just like the god Indra.

7a

Again, on another occasion, the prince ordered his attendant to prepare
a chariot and visited the outside world on an excursion. He encountered

36

Sutra 1: The Great Origin

a wandering mendicant (śramaṇa) on the roadway. He wore a bhikṣu’s
saṃghāṭī robe and with his almsbowl in hand walked with his eyes
cast down on the road.
The prince at once asked the attendant: “What is this man?” He
replied, “This is a śramaṇa, sir.”
The prince asked, “What is meant by śramaṇa?” The attendant
replied:
Sir, it means that the man has renounced his familial relations, having
gone forth from household life. He is engaged in the practice of
religion, controlling his senses and preventing himself from being
drawn to external objects of desire. Due to his compassion, he
refrains from any injurious action, neither entrapped by worries of
suffering, nor delighted in experiencing pleasure; long persevering
like the earth, hence he is called śramaṇa, sir.

The prince said:

Very good. This man’s path must be true and right, transcending
the world of dust and dirt forever. Delicate and subtle, noble and
humble, I consider it most satisfactory!

At once he instructed the attendant, “Turn the chariot around and stop
next to that man.” Thereupon he questioned the wandering mendicant,
“Having shaven your hair and beard, donned a saṃghāṭī robe, and carrying an almsbowl in your hand, what do you seek?” The śramaṇa
replied:

Whosoever has renounced family life should be concerned with
restraining his mind and will, transcending worldly things. Helping
sentient beings with compassion, yet not being drawn to them, with
an unprejudiced mind and a mind of quiescence, he concentrates
on the practice of the path.

The prince responded, “Very good. This path of yours is most true and
right.” Next he said to his attendant, “Take my garment and the chariot,
and return to convey my words to the king”:

37

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

I will shave my hair and beard in this place, wear the mendicant’s
three robes, leave household life, and practice the path of religion.
The reason [for this] is that I am concerned with restraining my
mind and will, transcending worldly things; I wish to keep my mind
pure and genuine, thereby learning the method of the path.

Thereupon the attendant turned the chariot [toward the palace] in order
to convey the prince’s message to his father, the king. Subsequently,
the prince shaved his hair and beard and donned the three mendicant
robes, thus accomplishing his renunciation of household life.

The Buddha told the bhikṣus:

The prince saw an aged and ailing person and came to realize the facts
of suffering and agony. When he saw a dead person, he lost his attachment to the ordinary world. But as soon as he saw a śramaṇa he at
once achieved a profound spiritual breakthrough. When he alighted
from his chariot he tempered his stride, proceeding at one half his regular pace, and removed his garments of bondage. This is the true renunciation of family life. This is the true withdrawal from the ordinary
world. Then, having shaved his hair and beard, he donned a saṃghāṭī
robe, and with an almsbowl in hand he went forth to practice the path.
The countrymen said to each other:

This must be the true path, because it has caused even the prince to
decide to forsake the splendor of his career and position. This resulted
in the occurrence of many similar renunciations. From throughout
the country, there then came to the prince eighty-four thousand citizens, who became his disciples, renouncing family life, and entering
into the practice of the path.

The Buddha then continued in verse:

Having heard that [the prince] chose
The profound and sublime Dharma,
Many followed his lead
In renouncing their family life.

38

Sutra 1: The Great Origin

Distancing themselves from
The bondage of indebtedness and love,
They were freed from the cause of attachment.

Thereupon, accepting these new converts and allowing them to accompany him, the prince wandered from village to village, from country
to country, promulgating his teaching wherever he happened to stop.
Wherever he sojourned, people invariably offered four kinds of support
(i.e., food and drink, robes or cloth, bedding, and medicine) out of
respect and honor. The Bodhisattva thought to himself:
I have been traveling with a host of disciples among the citizens of
various countries, but I no longer enjoy the congestion and noise.
I must ﬁnd ways to leave these crowds and seek the ultimate path
in some quiet location.

Later on, the prince accomplished his wish of solitary pursuit and concentrated on his practice in a secluded place. But again he was pressed
by a thought:

It is a pity to see that all living beings remain always in the darkness
of ignorance and face a variety of dangers, whether of birth, old
age, illness, or death; in this darkness all these forms of suffering
occur at once, with death here and rebirth there, death there and
rebirth here. Because this aggregate (i.e., physical and mental elements) is itself suffering, the cycle of sansaric life is endless. I will
someday accomplish a thorough understanding of this aggregate
that is by nature suffering, and thereby [once and for all] bring the
suffering of birth, old age, and death to total cessation.

Again the prince thought to himself:

In following or in depending upon what does the process of birth and
death arise? Examining through analytical insight the cause of this
arising, I see it this way: Following birth (jāti) there arises the process
of old age and death. Birth is the indirect causal condition of the
process of old age and death (jarāmaraṇa). Birth arises following a

39

7b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

will-to-becoming (bhava); the will-to-becoming is the condition of
birth. The will-to-becoming arises following an act of grasping
(upādāna); the act of grasping is the condition of the will-to-becoming. The act of grasping arises following attachment or thirstlike
craving (tṛṣṇā); thirstlike craving is the condition of an act of grasping. Thirstlike craving arises following sensation or feeling (vedanā);
sensation is the condition of thirstlike craving. Sensation arises following sense contact (sparśa) [with an object]; sense contact is the
condition of sensation. Sense contact arises following the operations
of the six sense faculties (āyatana) (i.e., sight, hearing, smell, taste,
touch, and thought); the sixfold sense operations are the condition
of sense contact. The sixfold sense operation arises following a
mental and physical process (nāmarūpa); a mental and physical
process is the condition of the sixfold sense operation. A mental
and physical process arises following consciousness (vijñāna); consciousness is the condition of a mental and physical process. Consciousness arises following the forces of disposition (saṃskāra);
the forces of disposition are the condition of consciousness. The
forces of disposition arise following ignorance (avidyā). In regard
to the truth of the foregoing dependent origination (pratītyasamutpāda), ignorance is the condition of the forces of disposition.
Thus, depending on the state of ignorance, there arise the forces of
disposition. Depending on the forces of disposition, there arises
consciousness. Depending on consciousness, there arises a mental
and physical process. Depending on a mental and physical process,
there arises a sixfold sense operation. Depending on the sixfold
sense operation, there arises sense contact (with an object). Depending on sense contact, there arises sensation (sense perception).
Depending on sensation, there arises thirstlike craving. Depending
on this craving, there arises the act of grasping. Depending on grasping, there arises a will-to-becoming. Depending on the will-tobecoming, there arises birth. Depending on birth, there arises the
process of old age, sickness, death, sorrow, lamentation, suffering,
and agony. This aggregate that is suffering in itself arises on the
basis of birth. This is called the causal aggregate of suffering. When

40

Sutra 1: The Great Origin

the Bodhisattva contemplated this causal aggregate of suffering,
there arose in him knowledge, vision (cakṣus), awareness, wisdom,
insight, and testimony (experience).

Then the Bodhisattva again thought to himself:

In the absence of what can I say that there is no more process of
old age and death? In the cessation of what does the process of old
age and death cease to be? Examining the cause of this cessation
through [analytical] insight, I see it this way: When birth is absent,
there is no more process of old age and death; in the cessation of
birth, the process of old age and death ceases to be. When the willto-becoming is absent, there is no more birth; in the cessation of
the will-to-becoming, birth ceases to be. When there is no act of
grasping, there is no more will-to-becoming; in the cessation of
grasping, the will-to-becoming ceases to be. When there is no thirstlike craving, there is no more act of grasping; in the cessation of
thirstlike craving, the act of grasping ceases to be. When there is
no sensation or feeling, there is no more thirstlike craving; in the
cessation of sensation, thirstlike craving ceases to be. When there
is no sense contact, there is no more sensation or feeling; in the cessation of sense contact, sensation ceases to be. When there is no
sixfold sense operation, there is no more sense contact; in the cessation of the sixfold sense operation, sense contact ceases to be.
When there is no mental and physical process, there is no more sixfold sense operation; in the cessation of the mental and physical
process, the sixfold sense operation ceases to be. When there is no
consciousness, there is no more mental and physical process; in the
cessation of consciousness, the mental and physical process ceases
to be. When there are no forces of disposition, there is no more consciousness; in the cessation of the forces of disposition, consciousness
ceases to be. When there is no ignorance, there are no more forces
of disposition; in the cessation of ignorance, the forces of disposition
cease to be.
This means that in the cessation of ignoance, the forces of disposition cease to be. In the cessation of the forces of disposition,

41

7c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

consciousness ceases to be. In the cessation of consciousness, the
mental and physical process ceases to be. In the cessation of mental
and physical process, the sixfold sense operation ceases to be. In
the cessation of the sixfold sense operation, sense contact ceases to
be. In the cessation of sense contact, sensation or feeling ceases to
be. In the cessation of sensation, thirstlike craving ceases to be. In
the cessation of thirstlike craving, the act of grasping ceases to be.
In the cessation of grasping, the will-to-becoming ceases to be. In
the cessation of the will-to-becoming, birth ceases to be. In the cessation of birth, the process of old age, death, sorrow, lamentation,
suffering, and mental agony ceases to be.

When the Bodhisattva contemplated the cessation of the causal aggregate of suffering, there arose in him knowledge, vision, awareness,
wisdom, insight, and testimony (or experience). At that time, the Bodhisattva contemplated the twelvefold chain of causation (pratītyasamutpāda) in accordance with the conformative course toward phenomenalization as well as in accordance with the opposite course
toward dephenomenalization. In these dual processes, he thus accomplished the ultimate way of knowing things as they really are and seeing
things as they really are. On that single seat where he sat, the Bodhisattva realized highest, perfect enlightenment.

The Buddha then continued in verse:

The following is the theory taught before the bhikṣus—
Listen to this very attentively.
When the Bodhisattva of olden times
Investigated the Dharma that had never before been learned,
He questioned:
“Dependent on what condition and in what cause
Does the process of old age and death arise?”
Having examined the matter in the right way,
He realized that its origin is in the [fact] of birth.
“Dependent on what condition or in what cause
Is the origin of birth?”

42

Sutra 1: The Great Origin

Having thought in such a manner,
He realized that birth arises
Depending on the will-to-becoming.
Grasping this or grasping that,
The will-to-becoming is reinforced and
Becomes stronger from one [stage] to another.
Because of this reinforcement,
The Tathāgata explained that the will-to-becoming
Arises depending on the act of grasping.
Just as a pile of ﬁlthy garbage on the surface of water (i.e., the
aggregates)
Floats on the stream driven by a gust of wind (i.e., strong desire and
attachment),
So too does the act of grasping
Reach far and wide
Through the force of strong thirstlike craving.
This thirstlike craving arises depending on feeling,
The origin of all nets of suffering,
Pain and pleasure are respectively expanded in accordance with
The force of attachment.
“Dependent on what and in what
Is the origin of sensation?”
Having thought in this way,
He realized that sensation arises depending on sense contact.
“Dependent on what and in what
Is the origin of sense contact?”
Having thought in this way,
He realized that sense contact
Arises depending on the six sense operations.
“Dependent on what and in what
Is the origin of the six sense operations?”
Having thought in this way,
He realized that the six sense operations
Arise depending on the mental and physical process.

43

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

“Dependent on what and in what
Is the origin of the mental and physical process?”
Having thought in this way,
He realized that the mental and physical process
Arises depending on consciousness.
“Dependent on what and in what
Is the origin of consciousness?”
Having thought in this way,
He realized that consciousness
Arises depending on the forces of disposition.
“Dependent on what and in what
Is the origin of the forces of disposition?”
Having thought in this way,
He realized that the forces of disposition
Arise depending on ignorance.
The foregoing dependent origination is called “true cause.”
When one examines causal relation
Through insight and expediency,
He is able to perceive the root of dependent origination.
Suffering is neither a product of the wise and holy,
Nor is it existent without cause and condition.
Because it has causes and conditions,
The phenomenon of suffering is subject to change, and
Hence it is the object that can be terminated or
Removed by the wise and holy.
When ignorance ceases,
Neither then are there the forces of disposition.
When the forces of disposition are absent,
Neither is there consciousness.
When consciousness ceases,
Neither is there mental and physical process.
When mental and physical process has already ceased,
Neither is there the sixfold sense operation.
When the sixfold sense operation ceases,
Neither is there sense contact.

8a

44

Sutra 1: The Great Origin

When sense contact ceases,
Neither is there sensation.
When feeling ceases,
Neither is there thirstlike craving.
When thirstlike craving ceases,
Neither is there grasping.
When grasping ceases,
Neither is there the will-to-becoming.
When the will-to-becoming ceases,
Neither is there birth.
When birth ceases,
Neither is there the aggregate of suffering,
Such as old age and death.
The entire mass of suffering ceases to be forever.
The causality of twelve-limbed dependent origination,
As taught by the wise, is very profound,
Difﬁcult to see, and difﬁcult to recognize.
The Buddha alone thoroughly understands
The way in which things
Arise through depending on another, and
In which things cease to be through the absence of another.
If one thoroughly investigates this causal linkage,
There arises no sixfold sense operation.
Whoever sees the causality of dependent origination thoroughly
Will not seek a teacher.
He will be thoroughly liberated
From desire and thirstlike craving in regard to the aggregates,
The sphere of realities, and the sense faculties.
He is worthy of receiving all kinds of offerings and
Repaying the donor’s charity.
If one acquires four kinds of rhetorical excellence (i.e., on rules,
meanings, interpretations, and explanations)
He will reach unshakable certainty,
Will be able to be rid of all bondage, and
While having extinguished it,

45

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

Will yet have no slackening whatsoever.
The ﬁve aggregates, namely,
Form, feeling, ideation,
Forces of disposition, and consciousness,
Are like an old cart.
When one contemplates this matter attentively,
He will be able to realize perfect enlightenment
Just as a bird ﬂies freely in midair
In accordance with the winds of east and west.
The Bodhisattva is able to terminate
The bondage of various deﬁlements
Just as the wind ﬂowing through a light robe
Sheds its dust.
Vipaśyin Buddha was staying at a secluded place and
Contemplated the foregoing matters, namely,
“Dependent on what condition
Does the process of old-age and death arise?” and
“Dependent on what cause does that process cease?”
Having successfully completed
His contemplation on these matters,
He realized the insight that is true and genuine.
He realized that the process of old age and death
Arises depending on birth.
But when birth ceases,
The process of old age and death also ceases.

8b

When Vipaśyin Buddha initially accomplished the path, he frequently
practiced two types of contemplation: ﬁrst, contemplation in the state
of peace and comfort; and second, contemplation in the state of transcendence.

Here the Buddha continued in verse:

With none as his equal,
The Tathāgata often practiced two types of contemplation:
That of peace and comfort and that of transcendence.

46

Sutra 1: The Great Origin

The Sage crossed over to the yonder shore and
Liberated his mind by terminating all deﬁlement.
Ascending the mountaintop,
He glanced in all directions.
Hence he was called Vipaśyin.
The light of great insight removes darkness
Just as a light illumines itself through a reﬂective mirror.
He removed sorrow and agony for all people
By extinguishing the suffering of birth, old age, and death.

Vipaśyin Buddha, in his secluded place, again thought to himself:

Though I have now accomplished this highest Dharma, as it is profound and subtle, it is difﬁcult for ordinary people to understand
and difﬁcult for them to perceive. This Dharma is quiescent, pure
and genuine; it can only be known by a person of insight, and hence
it cannot be attained by any common person or fool. People have
different capacities for patience, different views of things, different
responses to perceptions, and different practices. Hence, they are
oriented toward those things and goals that are in their own interest,
each devoting himself to that with which he is accustomed. Because
of this, they cannot fathom this profound truth of dependent origination, nor can they understand why nirvana increases when thirstlike
craving diminishes. Even if I try to teach this Dharma, they will
necessarily not only fail to understand it but also, to the contrary,
will be increasingly irritated through the attendant sense contact
(i.e., hearing the Dharma).

Having thought in this manner, he once again returned to his silence
and did not try to teach the Dharma to anyone.
Then the god Brahmā, knowing what Vipaśyin Tathāgata had been
thinking, immediately thought:
It is a pity that the people of this world now falter toward destruction.
Although Vipaśyin Buddha has been able to realize this profound
Dharma, he is not inclined to teach it to the people.

47

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

In an instant, as swiftly as a wrestler bends his arm and straightens it,
Brahmā descended from his heavenly palace in and stood before
[Vipaśyin] Buddha. With a reverential gesture, honoring [Vipaśyin by
lowering] his forehead [to his feet], he withdrew to one side. Then the
god Brahmā, kneeling with his right knee on the ground and with both
palms together, spoke to [Vipaśyin] Buddha:
May I make a request of you, O World-honored One? Teach the
Dharma to the world when the time comes. At this time, the people
of this world, affected by various deﬁlements, have become insincere
and frivolous, their senses drawn completely to their own proﬁt.
Their nature must be reformed and made more respectful [in regard
to religion]; [they should] fear committing grave transgressions for
which there can be no expiation even in their life to come, to thereby
restrain them from [committing] evil deeds while encouraging them
to promote good deeds.

8c

The Buddha replied to the god Brahmā:

You are right. What you have said is indeed correct. But may I tell
you what I have thought myself in my secluded place? The right
Dharma I have realized is extremely profound and subtle, difﬁcult
for ordinary people to understand and difﬁcult for them to perceive.
Even if I try to teach this Dharma to the people, they will fail to
understand it, and their irritation will increase on hearing my teaching. Because of this, I have decided to remain in silence and do not
wish to teach. Since innumerable past eons I have continued, in
exertion and without slackening, to practice the highest path, and I
have now ﬁnally accomplished this Dharma that is most difﬁcult
to realize. If I teach this Dharma to those who are consumed by
desire, hatred, and ignorance, for all practical purposes my teaching
would never be accepted by them and only leave me exhausted.
This Dharma is subtle and contradictory to the [general] characteristics of the human world. People are stained with desires, blanketed
by the darkness of ignorance, unable to believe and understand. O
Brahmā, lord of gods, this is what I have been thinking. Because

48

Sutra 1: The Great Origin

of this, I have remained in silence and have not tried to teach the
Dharma.

Then the lord of Brahmā Heaven requested the Buddha to change his
mind, repeating three times the following words:

O World-honored One, if you do not teach the Dharma to this human
world now faltering toward destruction, it will be the greatest pity.
May I request, O World-honored One, that you promulgate the teaching at some proper time, thus preventing humankind from falling
to the lesser courses of the life cycle.

At that time, having listened to the god Brahmā’s courteous request
three times, Vipaśyin Buddha observed the world, ﬁnding that some
people were less deﬁled and others more, some were better endowed
and others less, [and he then realized] that it would be easier to teach
some of them while it would be more difﬁcult to teach others. Those
to whom it is easier to teach the Dharma should instill a fear of committing transgressions that cannot be atoned for in the life to come,
and hence encourage the extinguishing of evil deeds while promoting
good deeds. For instance, among those lotuses that bloom in different
colors, such as blue, pink, red, and white, some are growing out of
dirty mud, not yet reaching the surface of the water; some are just
emerging onto the surface of the water; and some have emerged onto
the water’s surface but are not yet blooming—yet all are equally
unspoiled by the water and ready to bloom. The people of the world
are similar to these lotus plants.
At that time, the World-honored One spoke to the lord Brahmā:

As I have been moved by pity for all of you, I shall open the gate
of the Dharma, the nectar of life, and teach it to the world. But since
it is very profound and subtle, difﬁcult to fathom and know, I shall
teach only those who believe in it and listen to it with joy, [and will]
not teach those who are irritated on hearing it and hence are not
beneﬁted by it.

49

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

At that time, the lord Brahmā knew that the Buddha had accepted his
request and, delighted, joyful, and encouraged, he proceeded to walk
around the Buddha to the right, circumambulating him three times.
Having honored [the Buddha by lowering his forehead to his] feet,
[Brahmā] suddenly disappeared. Not long after Brahmā’s disappearance,
the Tathāgata quietly thought to himself, “To whom should I ﬁrst teach
the Dharma?” He made up his mind, thinking, “I should go to the city
of Bandhumatī and initially open the gate of nectar for the sake of
Prince Tiṣya and the son of the minister Khaṇḍa.” The Buddha suddenly
disappeared from his seat under the bodhi tree but in an instant, [the
length of time] it takes for a wrestler to bend his arm and straighten it,
he reached the Deer Park in the city of Bandhumatī, which belonged
to King Bandhumant and, spreading his sitting cloth there, he took his
seat on it.

Here the Buddha continued in verse:

Just as a lion wanders in the forest
As leisurely as it wishes,
So did that buddha wander in a similar manner
With no obstruction whatsoever.

9a

Vipaśyin Buddha said to the guardian of the grove,

Return to the city and speak to Prince Tiṣya and the son of the minister Khaṇḍa with the following words: “Would you like to know,
sir, that Vipaśyin Buddha has arrived in the grove of the Deer Park
and wishes to see you. It is a good opportunity, sir!”

As instructed, the grove guardian then went to see them and conveyed
the [Buddha’s] words to them in detail. Having listened to the guard,
[Prince Tiṣya and the son of the minister Khaṇḍa] immediately went
the place where the Buddha was staying, and after bowing their foreheads to his feet they withdrew and sat to one side.
Thereupon the Buddha began to teach them the Dharma, encouraging, beneﬁting, and delighting them. He taught them the doctrine of
charity, the doctrine of morality, the doctrine of birth in heaven, the

50

Sutra 1: The Great Origin

doctrine that bondage by thirstlike craving and impure deﬁlements is
dangerous, and the doctrine that renunciation of these obstacles is primary, subtle, pure, and praiseworthy.
At that time, the World-honored One observed that the minds of
these youths were receptive, ﬁlled with joy and faith, and accepting
of the right Dharma. Thereupon, he introduced (1) the doctrine of the
noble truth of suffering (ārya-duḥkha-satya), explained it in detail,
and helped them understand it. Moreover, he set forth the remaining
three truths individually and gave due commentary on these respective
doctrines, namely: (2) the noble truth of the cause of suffering, (3) the
noble truth of the cessation of suffering, and (4) the noble truth of the
path of cessation.
At that time, Prince Tiṣya and the son of the minister Khaṇḍa attained
realization in that single session [right in their seats], exhausted all the
deﬁlements, and thus acquired genuine insight into the nature of the
Dharma, just as a white cloth can be easily dyed any color.
At that moment, the god of the earth made an announcement with
the following words:
Vipaśyin Tathāgata has turned the wheel of the supreme Dharma at
the Deer Park near the city of Bandhumatī. No one whosoever,
whether a śramaṇa, a brāhmaṇa, a heavenly god, the Evil One, or
any other in the human world, has been able to turn that wheel.

In this manner, the news spread from one to another throughout the
four quarters of heaven, as well as to the gods who were capable of
assuming any shape desired, to the sixth heaven, the highest in the
realm of desire, and before too long it reached the heaven of the god
Brahmā.

Then the Buddha continued in verse:

With elation and joy, everyone praised the Tathāgata,
Who became Vipaśyin Buddha and
Turned the supreme wheel of Dharma.
Departing from under the bodhi tree,

51

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

He reached the city of Bandhumatī and
Turned the wheel of Dharma,
Teaching Khaṇḍa and Tiṣya the Four Noble Truths.
Having thus received the teaching from the Buddha,
At that ﬁrst session Khaṇḍa and Tiṣya were converted.
There is no higher practice of austerity
Than turning the sacred wheel of Dharma.
The gods of Trāyastriṃśa Heaven and their lord Indra
Spoke to each other in elation and delight,
Which all the gods surely heard:
“The Buddha appeared in the human world and
Turned the highest wheel of Dharma.
This increases the well-being of the gods but
Reduces the advantage of the asura demigods.”
The name of the one
Who accomplished highest enlightenment
Was heard everywhere, and
The insight thus reached by him is gone
Beyond the human realm.
Totally at home with all things,
His insight thus turns the wheel of Dharma.
Contemplating all things as being of equal nature,
His breath and mind were clean and spotless.
Liberated from the yoke of birth and death,
His insight turns the wheel of Dharma.
Having terminated suffering,
Freed from evil deeds, and
Liberated beyond desires and
From the bondage of worldly love and indebtedness,
His insight turns the wheel of the Dharma.
Most honorable among those enlightened,
The Honored One of the human world,
Well restrained and unencumbered by bondage,
His insight turns the wheel of Dharma.

9b

52

Sutra 1: The Great Origin

Whoever excels in teaching and guidance
Overcomes the animosity of the Evil One;
Freed from all evils,
His insight thus turns the wheel of Dharma.
The power of insight annihilates deﬁlements,
And defeats the Evil One;
Senses well controlled without slackening, terminating deﬁlements,
He liberates himself from the bondage of the Evil One,
His insight turning the wheel of Dharma.
If one studies the truth that is completely certain,
He will know that all things (dharmas) are without reality (anātman);
This is the highest among all truths.
Thus his insight turns the wheel of Dharma.
He does not turn the wheel for the sake of gain,
Nor for the sake of fame,
But out of compassion for all sentient beings;
Thus his insight turns the wheel of Dharma.
Having observed the yoke of suffering of all beings,
Oppressed by old age, sickness, and death,
It is for preventing the three evil courses of the life cycle
That his insight turns the wheel of Dharma.
Having terminated desire, hatred, and ignorance,
Removing the root of thirstlike craving,
Unshakeable and liberated,
His insight thus turns the wheel of Dharma.
Though I felt it difﬁcult to overcome,
Having won, I let the Evil One acknowledge his defeat;
The difﬁcult enemy has been defeated.
Thus, his insight turns the wheel of Dharma.
This wheel of Dharma, having nothing higher,
The Buddha alone is able to turn it.
Neither gods nor the Evil One, nor Indra, nor Brahmā,
Can turn that wheel.
Abiding closely with Dharma and turning it,
Beneﬁting gods and humans;

53

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

The master of gods and humans
Is able to cross to the yonder shore.

At that time, Prince Tiṣya and the son of the minister Khaṇḍa perceived
the Dharma with insight, realized its fruit, and, betraying no truth,
accomplished the state of certainty. At once they said to Vipaśyin
Buddha, “We wish to practice austerity under the Dharma of the Tathāgata.”
The Buddha said, “Welcome, bhikṣus. The Dharma I teach is pure
and genuine and unbounded. By practicing it, you may exhaust the
limit of the suffering.”
At that time, the two were granted higher ordination. Not too long
after the occasion of ordination, the Tathāgata demonstrated to his disciples three mysteries: (1) the supernormal power of freedom, (2) the
supernormal power of knowing the minds of others, and (3) the supernormal power of teaching to achieve the destruction of deﬁlement,
emancipation from the intoxication of mind, and insight freed from
the obstacle of birth and death.
Then, having heard that the two men had renounced household life
in order to practice the path, had donned saṃghāṭī robes and with almsbowls in hand were carrying out the practice of austerity, many citizens
of the city of Bandhumatī said to each other, “This path must surely
be true, because it has caused them to forsake the glory of their worldly
careers, the opportunity to obtain important roles in the world.”
Then the eighty-four thousand citizens of the city visited the place
where Vipaśyin Buddha was staying in the Deer Park, and after bowing
their foreheads to his feet to honor him, they withdrew and sat to one
side. Thereupon, the Buddha began to teach them the Dharma, encouraging, beneﬁting, and delighting them. He taught them the doctrine of
charity, the doctrine of morality, the doctrine of birth in heaven, the
doctrine that bondage in thirstlike desires and impure deﬁlements are
dangerous, and the doctrine that renunciation of these obstacles is primary, subtle and pure, and praiseworthy.
At that time, the World-honored One observed that the minds of
these citizens were receptive, ﬁlled with joy and faith, and accepting

9c

54

Sutra 1: The Great Origin

the right Dharma. Thereupon he introduced (1) the noble truth of suffering, explained it in detail, and had them understand it. Moreover,
he set forth separately the remaining three truths and gave due commentary on these respective doctrines, namely (2) the noble truth of
the cause of suffering, (3) the noble truth of the cessation of suffering,
and (4) the noble truth of the path of cessation.
At that time, those eighty-four thousand citizens attained realization
in that single session [at their seats], exhausted all the deﬁlements, and
thus acquired genuine insight into the nature of the Dharma, just as a
white cloth can be easily dyed any other color.
Having perceived the Dharma with insight, realized its fruit, and,
betraying no truth, accomplished the state of certainty, the citizens of
the city of Bandhumatī said to Vipaśyin Buddha, “We wish to practice
austerity under the Dharma of your tathāgatahood.”
The Buddha said: “Welcome, bhikṣus. The Dharma I teach is pure
and genuine and unbounded. By practicing it, you may exhaust the
limit of suffering.”
At that time, the eighty-four thousand citizens were granted higher
ordination. Not too long after the occasion of ordination, the Tathāgata
demonstrated to his disciples three mysteries: (1) the supernormal
power of freedom, (2) the supernormal power of knowing the minds
of others, and (3) the supernormal power of teaching to achieve the
destruction of deﬁlement, emancipation from the intoxication of mind,
and insight freed from the obstacle of birth and death. Then those
eighty-four thousand citizens who had heard the news that at the Deer
Park, near the city of Bandhumatī, Vipaśyin Tathāgata had turned the
wheel of the supreme Dharma, which no one, whether a śramaṇa, a
brāhmaṇa, a heavenly god, the Evil One, or anyone in the human world
is able to turn, at once visited the place where Vipaśyin Buddha was
staying, and after bowing their foreheads to his feet to honor him, withdrew and sat to one side.

The Buddha then continued in verse:
Just as a man tries to be rescued
From his burning mind, and

55

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

Seeks a place to extinguish that ﬁre
As quickly as possible,
These citizens have come
To see the Tathāgata in like manner.

Then the Buddha began to teach the Dharma again as before. At that
time, there were one hundred and sixty-eight thousand bhikṣus in the
city of Bandhumatī. The bhikṣus Tiṣya and Khaṇḍa both arose in midair
before the assembly of bhikṣus, demonstrating their supernormal powers
of spraying water, emitting ﬁre, and teaching the miraculous Dharma.
At that time, the Tathāgata remained silent and thought to himself:

10a

Now we have one hundred and sixty-eight thousand bhikṣus in this
city. It may be good for them to travel through various regions in
teams of two, sojourning here and there for a duration of six years.
Then, returning to this city, they may report to the sangha their
achievement of a new ordination.

Then the god Śuddhāvāsa, knowing the Tathāgata’s thoughts, appeared
before the World-honored One in an instant, as swiftly as a wrestler
bends his arm and straightens it, and, after honoring [the Buddha] by
bowing his forehead to his feet, withdrew to one side. Soon he spoke
to the Buddha:

O World-honored One, there are so many bhikṣus in this city. It
would be better for them to travel to various regions. After six years,
they may return to this city and report to the sangha how many ordinations each of them has accomplished. I shall protect each who
will be traveling, and guard [them from] anyone who might make
this an opportunity for personal advantage, sir.

Having listened to this god’s advice, the Tathāgata gave his assent by
remaining silent. Then the god Śuddhāvāsa, understanding that the
Buddha had granted permission by remaining silent, at once bowed
his forehead to [the Buddha’s] feet and suddenly disappeared, returning
to his heavenly abode. Not long after the god’s departure, the Buddha
told the bhikṣus:

56

Sutra 1: The Great Origin

Now there are many bhikṣus in this city. You are advised to travel
to various regions in order to propagate the Dharma and, after six
years’ time, return to this city and report to the sangha how many
ordinations each of you has accomplished.

Then, following the Buddha’s instruction, the bhikṣus, each carrying
his robe and bowl, left on their sojourn after venerating the Buddha.

The Buddha then continued in verse:

Neither disturbing the bhikṣus,
Nor desiring anything [for himself],
Nor having any attachment,
The Buddha abides with his authority.
Like the mythological garuḍa bird,
Like a crane leaving an empty pond,
He makes his departure.

The god Śuddhāvāsa spoke to each of the bhikṣus after one year:
Your sojourn has passed one year, and there remain ﬁve years. You
should remember that after six years you must return to the city and
report to the sangha how many ordinations each of you has accomplished.

In this manner, time passed through the sixth year. The god again said
to the bhikṣus, “A full six years have already passed. May all of you
return to the city to report on your accomplishment.”
On hearing [Śuddhāvāsa’s] words, the bhikṣus picked up their robes
and almsbowls, returned to the city of Bandhumatī, and came to the
place where Vipaśyin Buddha was staying in the Deer Park. After honoring him by bowing their foreheads to his feet, they withdrew and sat
to one side.

The Buddha then continued in verse:

Just as those well-trained elephants
Follow their riders’ commands freely,

57

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

In like manner the assembly of bhikṣus
Returned here as instructed.

At that time, the Tathāgata ascended into midair before the assembly of
bhikṣus and, while suspended in midair, cross-legged in the lotus posture,
he lectured on the book of discipline, making the virtue of perseverance primary.
The Buddha taught that nirvana is the highest goal of his Dharma, and
that even if one has a shaven hair and beard (i.e., a monk), if he injures others
he is no longer a śramaṇa.
Then the god Śuddhāvāsa, abiding not too far from the Buddha, praised
him by reciting the following verse:
The great insight of the Tathāgata
Is [extremely] subtle and
It alone is most honorable.
Endowed with both the practice of calming the mind (śamatha) and
That of analytical insight (vipaśyanā),
He realized highest, perfect enlightenment.
Because he had compassion for sentient beings,
He stayed in the human world and realized that goal.
He taught the four veritable truths to his disciples (śrāvakas):
The [truths of] suffering, of the cause of suffering,
Of the cessation of suffering, and
The eightfold path of the wise and holy
That leads to the place of peace and comfort.
Vipaśyin Buddha appeared in the human world,
Surrounded by his disciples,
Like the brightly shining sun.

10b

Having recited these verses, the god suddenly disappeared.
At that time, the World-honored One spoke to the bhikṣus:

I recollect that at one time in the past, when I was at Vulture Peak
(Gṛdhrakūṭa) in the city of Rājagṛha, I happened to think to myself
like this:

58

Sutra 1: The Great Origin

There is no place in all the world where my birth has never taken
place, except one place, Śuddhāvāsa Heaven. If I were born in that
heaven I would not have returned to this world.

O bhikṣus, again I thought myself, “I wish to visit Avṛhā Heaven.”
Then, in an instant, as swiftly as a wrestler bends his arm and straightens
it, I left this world and appeared in that heaven. The residents of that
heaven, having seen me approaching, honored me [by bowing] their
foreheads, withdrew to one side, and said to me, “We are the disciples
of Vipaśyin Tathāgata. Because we followed his teaching, we have
been born into this heaven, sir.” Thus they told me the stories of that
buddha from beginning to end.
Some of them also claimed, “The buddhas Śikhin, Viśvabhū, Krakucchanda, Kanakamuni, Kāśyapa, and Śākyamuni are equally our masters, sir. Because we followed their teaching, we have been born here,
sir.” Again they explained to me the stories of these buddhas from
beginning to end. When I was born in Akaniṣṭha Heaven (the highest
of the ﬁve Śuddhāvāsa heavens), the same event was repeated.

The Buddha then continued in verse:

In an instant, as swiftly as a wrestler
Bends his arm and straightens it,
Through my supernormal power,
I reached Śuddhāvāsa Heaven, Avṛhā Heaven, and
Defeated two evil ones.
Then the god Atapā (“one who torments no one”) approached and
Greeted me with his palms together like a pārichattaka tree.
The name of the Śākya master is renowned
Even in distant regions.
Well endowed in his features and appearance,
He has reached Sudṛśa Heaven.
Just as a lotus untouched by water, free from stains,
The World-honored One has reached Sudṛśa Heaven,
Like the sun that initially arises,
Pure, spotless, and without shade,

10c

59

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

Like a clear autumnal moon, reaching the ultimate goal.
These ﬁve residences are the place
Where all beings are sanctiﬁed.
Because of purity of their minds,
They arrive here and reach the state
Of the total absence of deﬁlements.
With minds pure and genuine,
They arrive here and become disciples of the Buddha,
Forsaking previous deﬁling grasping and
[Now] enjoying nongrasping.
With insight into the Dharma and unshakable certainty,
The son of Vipaśyin, with his mind pure,
Has been welcomed here and has visited the Great Sage.
The son of Śikhin Buddha,
Immaculate (vimala) and unconditioned (asaṃskṛta),
Came here with his mind pure and genuine and
Visited the honorable Vibhava.
The son of Viśvabhū Buddha,
Endowed with perfect senses,
With his mind pure and genuine,
Came here and visited me,
As if the sun shines in the sky.
The son of Krakucchanda Buddha,
Free from desires, with his mind pure,
Visited me, as if his mysterious light ﬂared in abundance.
The son of Kanakamuni,
Immaculate and unconditioned,
With his mind pure and genuine, visited me.
His light was like that of the full moon.
The disciple of Kāśyapa,
Endowed with perfect senses,
With his mind pure, visited me and
Did not disturb the Great Sage.
His supernormal power was primary,
With his mind ﬁrm,

60

Sutra 1: The Great Origin

He became a disciple of the Buddha, and
With his mind pure and genuine, he came here.
As a disciple of the Buddha,
He venerated the Tathāgata and
Informed the Most Honorable among Humans of his birthplace,
Realization of the path,
Name and family, and clan background in detail.
He had insight into the profound Dharma and
Realized the highest path.
The residence of bhikṣus should be free from dust and dirt,
Because they endeavor to terminate
All deﬁlements with exertion, without slackening.
The foregoing are the stories of those seven buddhas
From beginning to end
As related by Śākyamuni Buddha.

The Buddha completed this sutra of the “Stories of the Great Origin.” The
bhikṣus listened to what the Buddha taught and, delighted, they followed the
instructions that were imparted in it.
[End of Sutra 1: The Great Origin]

61

11a

Sutra 2
Last Journey and Sojourns

(Dīgha Nikāya 16: Mahāparinibbāna Suttanta)
First Episode

Thus have I heard. At one time, the Buddha was sojourning on the [mountaintop called] Vulture Peak in the city of Rājagṛha, together with one thousand
two hundred and ﬁfty disciples. At that time, Ajātaśatru, the king of Magadha,
desired to conquer the country of Vṛji. The king thought to himself, “Though
the Vṛji countrymen are known to be brave and the people physically strong,
it would not be too difﬁcult for me to conquer them.” Thereupon, King Ajātaśatru summoned his prime minister, Varṣākāra, a brāhmaṇa, saying:

May you visit the World-honored One at Vulture Peak, [venerate him] in
my proxy, and greet him with words of enquiry regarding his well-being:
“Is his holiness at ease with his rising and sitting and does he feel strong
in his walking?” Then speak to the World-honored One [with my words]:
“The Vṛji countrymen are proud of their valor and of the physical strength
of their people, and do not submit to my authority. I wish to conquer them,
but since I have not thoroughly examined the matter, may I ask if the
World-honored One could give some words of instruction on my behalf?”
If the World-honored One does say something, bear in mind exactly what
he has said without missing a word, and tell me his words exactly as you
have heard them. Whatever the Tathāgata says cannot be false.

Having received the king’s order, Prime Minister Varṣākāra at once boarded
a carriage leaving for Vulture Peak, reached the point where he had to alight
from the vehicle, and then approached on foot. On reaching the World-honored
One’s dwelling place and greeting him with a bow, Varṣākāra withdrew to
one side to take his seat and said to the World-honored One:
The king of Magadha, Ajātaśatru, [venerates] the Buddha by bowing
to your feet and respectfully greets the World-honored One with words

63

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

of enquiry: “Is his holiness at ease in his rising and sitting and does he
feel strong in his walking?” Again his majesty says to the Worldhonored One: “The Vṛji countrymen are proud of their valor and of
the physical strength of their people, and do not submit to his authority.
His Majesty wishes to conquer them, but since [the king] has not thoroughly examined the matter, he requests the World-honored One to
give some words of instruction on his behalf.”

At that time, Ānanda was sitting behind the World-honored One, fanning
him. The Buddha said to Ānanda, “Haven’t you heard that the Vṛji countrymen
have frequently assembled to discuss the matter of their governance?” Ānanda
replied, “Yes, I have heard so, sir.” The Buddha said to Ānanda:
If that is really the case, the young and old are harmonious, together
they are all the more prosperous, their country should be secure for
some time to come and cannot be invaded by any other country. O
Ānanda, haven’t you heard that the leaders and the followers of the
Vṛji country are harmonious and have respect for each other between
the superior and the inferior?

Ānanda answered, “Yes, this also I have heard, sir.” The Buddha spoke
to him again:

O Ānanda, if that is really the case, the young and old are harmonious,
together they are all the more prosperous, their country should be secure
for some time to come and cannot be invaded by any other country. O
Ānanda, haven’t you heard that the Vṛji countrymen respect their law,
know what should be avoided, and do not fail to perform their customary
duties?

11b

Ānanda answered, “Yes, this also have I heard, sir.” The Buddha spoke
to him again:

O Ānanda, if that is really the case, the young and old are harmonious,
together they are all the more prosperous, their country should be secure
for some time to come and cannot be invaded by any other country. O
Ānanda, haven’t you heard that the Vṛji countrymen are ﬁlial to their
parents and obedient to their teachers and elders?

64

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

Ānanda answered, “Yes, this also have I heard, sir.” The Buddha spoke
to him again:

O Ānanda, if that is really the case, the young and old are harmonious,
together they are all the more prosperous, their country should be secure
for some time to come and cannot be invaded by any other country. O
Ānanda, haven’t you heard that the Vṛji countrymen venerate the
Buddhist shrines (abhyantara-caitya) and respect the heretic shrines?

Ānanda answered, “Yes, this I also have heard, sir.” The Buddha spoke
to him again:
O Ānanda, if that is really the case, the young and old are harmonious,
together they are all the more prosperous, their country should be secure
for some time to come and cannot be invaded by any other country. O
Ānanda, haven’t you heard that the wives and daughters of the Vṛji countrymen are genuine, faithful, spotless, and speak no evil even in jest?

Ānanda answered, “Yes, this also have I heard, sir.” The Buddha spoke
to him again:

O Ānanda, if that is really the case, the young and old are harmonious,
together they are all the more prosperous, their country should be secure
for some time to come and cannot be invaded by any other country. O
Ānanda, haven’t you heard that the Vṛji countrymen render services
for the needs of religious practitioners, the śramaṇas, revere those who
are steadfast in moral precepts, and ready themselves to guard the religion and protect the practitioners, having never failed in doing so?

Ānanda answered, “Yes, this also I have heard, sir.” The Buddha spoke
to him again:
O Ānanda, if that is really the case, the young and old are harmonious,
together they are all the more prosperous, their country should be secure
for some time to come and cannot be invaded by any other country.

Thereupon, Prime Minister Varṣākāra said to the Buddha:

When the people of that country uphold even a single principle of wellbeing, it is an unwise scheme [to wage war against them]. How much
65

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

more so when they uphold all the seven principles of well-being. Since
I am obliged to deal with many matters of the state, may I now ask
Your Holiness for permission to depart, sir.

The Buddha said, “You may do as suits you best.”

Then Varṣākāra stood up from his seat, circumambulated the Buddha three
times, and, with a bow, withdrew. Not long after his departure, the Buddha
instructed Ānanda, “Go at once and instruct all the disciples, right and left,
in their residences in Rājagṛha to assemble at the meeting hall.”
Ānanda replied, “Yes, sir, right away.” At once he went to the city of
Rājagṛha and urged the bhikṣus to assemble at the meeting hall, and he
reported back to the World-honored One: “All the bhikṣus have assembled,
sir. May Your Holiness be ready.”
Thereupon, the World-honored One stood up from his seat, and, reaching
the meeting hall, took his seat in the place prepared for him and said to the
bhikṣus, “I shall speak to you on the subject of seven principles of wellbeing. Listen attentively, you should contemplate and remember [what I shall
now say].”
The bhikṣus responded to the Buddha, “Yes, World-honored One. We are
ready to listen, sir.”
The Buddha said to them:

The seven principles of well-being means the following: The ﬁrst is
the principle of frequent assembly to discuss the matter of right meanings, so that the bhikṣus of the sangha, young and old, may be harmonious and the Dharma should not decline. The second is the principle
of harmonious cooperation and obedience regarding the teaching of
the Dharma between the superior and the inferior, so that the bhikṣus
of the sangha, young and old, may be harmonious and the Dharma
should not decline. The third is the principle of respecting rules (fa),
knowing what should be avoided (ji), and following regulations, so
that the bhikṣus of the sangha, young and old, may be harmonious and
the Dharma should not decline. The fourth is the principle of the sangha
leader’s protection and guidance for the members, so that the bhikṣus
of the sangha, young and old, may be harmonious and the Dharma

11c

66

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

should not decline. The ﬁfth is the principle of guarding one’s mind
and adhering to piety toward the elders, so that the bhikṣus of the
sangha, young and old, may be harmonious and the Dharma should
not decline. The sixth is the principle of practicing pure and genuine
austerity and refraining from desire, so that the bhikṣus of the sangha,
young and old, may be harmonious and the Dharma should not decline.
The seventh is the principle of letting others be ﬁrst and yourself second
in matters of the order and refraining from [seeking] fame or advantage,
so that the bhikṣus of the sangha, young and old, may be harmonious
and the Dharma should not decline.

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

There is also another set of seven principles of well-being that enable
the Dharma to ﬂourish and protect it from slander. The ﬁrst is the principle of concentrating on a few [matters] rather than being involved
in many, which enables the Dharma to ﬂourish and not be subject to
slander. The second is the principle of maintaining quietude and silence
and refraining from the use of many words. The third is the principle
of reducing sleep and refraining from indulging in sleep. The fourth
is the principle of refraining from the habit of group mentality and the
indulgence in useless conversation. The ﬁfth is the principle of refraining
from praising oneself without [the presence of] real virtues in oneself.
The sixth is the principle of refraining from joining any group of bad
inﬂuence. The seventh is the principle of abiding in a secluded, quiet
place in the forest. If each of you keep these principles, O bhikṣus, you
shall enable the Dharma to ﬂourish and protect it from slander.

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

Again there is another set of seven principles16 that enables the Dharma
to ﬂourish and protect it from slander. The ﬁrst is the principle of faith
in the arhatship of the Tathāgata and in the ten titles attributed to the
Buddha who realized perfect enlightenment. The second is the principle
of having a sense of shame regarding one’s own deﬁciencies. The third
is the principle of knowing shame regarding one’s wrong actions toward

67

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

others. The fourth is the principle of maximizing learning, examining
the deep meanings of what one has learned regarding good, better, and
best, and carrying out the practice of pure and genuine austerity. The
ﬁfth is the principle of exerting oneself in ascetic practice, refraining
from evil, and promoting good action. The sixth is the principle of bearing in mind whatever one has learned and practiced in the past. The
seventh is the principle of practicing insight, knowing the law of birth
and cessation, and following the essentials of the wise and holy, thereby
terminating the origin of suffering. These are the seven principles that
enable the Dharma to ﬂourish and protect it from slander.

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

There is another set of seven principles that enable the Dharma to ﬂourish
and protect it from slander. What are the seven principles? First, the principle of reverence toward the Buddha; second, the principle of reverence
toward the Dharma; third, the principle of reverence toward the sangha;
fourth, the principle of reverence toward the precepts; ﬁfth, the principle
of reverence toward the practice of concentration; sixth, the principle of
reverence toward one’s parents; seventh, the principle of reverence toward
the discipline of attentiveness. These are the seven principles that enable
the Dharma to ﬂourish and protect it from slander.

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

There is another set of seven principles that enable the Dharma to ﬂourish
and protect it from slander. First, the principle of contemplating the
impurity of the physical body; second, the principle of contemplating
the impurity of food; third, the principle of not being pleased with the
human world; fourth, the principle of reminding oneself always of the
thought of death; ﬁfth, the principle of giving rise to the thought of
impermanence; sixth, the principle of giving rise to the thought of suffering due to impermanence; seventh, the principle of giving rise to
the thought of suffering and nonself. These are the seven principles
that enable the Dharma to ﬂourish and protect it from slander.

12a

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

68

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

Again there is another set of seven principles that enable the Dharma
to ﬂourish and protect it from slander. What are these seven? First, the
principle of mindfulness regarding discerning insight, the retention of
previous experiences with good memory, and abiding in seclusion,
quietude, nondesire, and non-action by transcending both suffering
and happiness; second, the principle of differentiation of psychophysical
elements (skandhas) retained in memory with regard to their truthfulness
or falsity; third, the principle of exertion in the pursuit of critically discerning right dharmas from false ones; fourth, the principle of abiding
in the delight arising from the preceding practices; ﬁfth, the principle
of freedom from bodily and mental disturbances through the state of
delight previously accomplished; sixth, the principle of “mental concentration to realize bodily and mental calmness”; seventh, the principle
of maintaining a mind of equanimity and equilibrium. These are the
seven principles that enable the Dharma to ﬂourish and protect it from
slander.

The Buddha spoke to the bhikṣus:

Again there are six principles that enable the Dharma to ﬂourish and
protect it from slander. What are these six? First, the principle of acting
with a sense of friendly love (maitrī) and non-harm toward sentient
beings; second, the principle of speaking words of friendly love and
not speaking words of evil intent; third, the principle of keeping friendly
love in one’s mind and not holding any grudge or criticism; fourth, the
principle of obtaining pure and genuine material support and sharing
it with others equally; ﬁfth, the principle of adhering to the precepts
of the wise and holy without deﬁciency and without omission, unshakable in purity and genuineness; sixth, the principle of seeing the path
of the wise and holy and thus acquiring insight into the origin of suffering. These are the six principles that enable the Dharma to ﬂourish
and protect it from slander.

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

Again there is another set of six principles that enable the Dharma to
ﬂourish and protect it from slander. First, the principle of mindfulness

69

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

of the Buddha; second, the principle of mindfulness of the Dharma;
third, the principle of mindfulness of the Sangha; fourth, the principle
of mindfulness of the precepts; ﬁfth, the principle of mindfulness of
the practice of charity; sixth: the principle of mindfulness of birth in
heaven. These are the six principles that enable the Dharma to ﬂourish
and protect it from slander.

At that time, the World-honored One sojourned in Rājagṛha as long as he
wished, and then said to Ānanda, “You are doing well [in the life of daily
practice]. I wish to visit the Bamboo Grove monastery.”
Ānanda replied, “Yes, sir.” At once, he packed the Buddha’s robe and
almsbowl and, carrying them [on his shoulder], followed behind him together
with the other bhikṣus. Proceeding on the highway of Magadha, the Worldhonored One then reached the Bamboo Grove, entered the monastic building,
and took his seat in the meeting hall. There, he taught the bhikṣus the curriculum of three [major] trainings: (1) moral precepts (śīla), (2) mental concentration (samādhi), and (3) [analytical] insight (prajñā).

Being steadfast in the set of moral precepts and experiencing mental
concentration, you may acquire great reward; being steadfast in the experience of mental concentration and the application of analytical insight,
you may acquire great reward. Being steadfast in the application of analytical insight and realizing the purity of your mind, you may acquire
perfect deliverance and extinguish three kinds of deﬁlements, namely,
deﬁlement due to carnal desire, deﬁlement due to existential desire, and
deﬁlement due to ignorance. When one has realized deliverance, he
acquires the subsequent knowledge that he has realized emancipation,
namely, “Whosoever has terminated [the cause of] birth and death,
accomplished the goal of the practice of austerity, completed whatever
should be done, for him there will be no more birth after this life.”

At that time, the World-honored One sojourned at the Bamboo Grove as
long as he wished, and then said to Ānanda, “You are doing well [in the life
of daily practice]. I should proceed to the city of Pāṭaliputra.”
Ānanda replied, “Yes, sir.” At once, he packed the Buddha’s robe and
almsbowl and, carrying them [on his shoulder], followed behind him together

70

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

with the other bhikṣus. Traveling on the highway of Magadha, the Worldhonored One then reached the city of Pāṭaliputra and took his seat under a
paṭala tree.
Having heard that the Buddha had arrived from a long distance at the
paṭala tree accompanied by a group of his disciples, a group of lay devotees
came out from the city and from a distance saw the World-honored One
seated under the paṭala tree. They realized that his handsome appearance
and calm, restrained senses were most sublimely matched in his holiness,
just as a great dragon can be clearly seen through transparent water. They
noted that the thirty-two eminent marks and eighty additional marks embellished his physical features. With delight in their hearts, they ﬁnally reached
the place of the Buddha and, having honored him [by bowing] their foreheads
to his feet, they withdrew to one side and took their seats. At that moment,
the World-honored One began to teach them the doctrine of Dharma, thus
encouraging, beneﬁting, and delighting them.
Having listened to the teaching, the lay devotees said to the Buddha:

We humbly wish to take refuge in the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha.
May your holiness, with compassion, grant us lay devotees your permission. From now on, we are committed to upholding the ﬁve precepts:
not to injure life, not to steal, not to indulge in sexual misconduct, not
to speak falsehoods, and not to ingest intoxicants. We have also planned
to set up a place to make our offerings, sir. We earnestly wish, O Worldhonored One, that your holiness as well as the host of venerables have
sympathy with us in accepting our offerings.

At that time, the World-honored One remained silent, thus granting their
wish. Having seen that the World-honored One remained silent, the lay devotees stood up from their seats, circumambulated the Buddha three times, and
with veneration, they returned [to the city]. At once they built a grand hall
for the Tathāgata, ﬁxing things here and there, cleaning up, burning incense,
and respectfully placing a cushion at the main guest seat, they arranged the
offerings in due order. They then returned to the World-honored One, saying,
“The place has already been prepared. Whenever your holiness is ready, sir.”
Thereupon, the World-honored One stood up from his seat, donned his
saṃghāṭī robe, and with his almsbowl in hand he went into the hall. After

71

12b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

washing his hands and feet, he took his seat in the prepared position. Then
the host of bhikṣus took their seats on the left side, whereas the lay devotees
sat on the right side. At that time, the World-honored One said to the lay
devotees:

In general, when someone commits a moral transgression against the
ﬁve precepts, he is then visited with ﬁve kinds of disasters. What are
the ﬁve? First, even though one wishes to acquire wealth, he cannot
do so; second, even when one obtains some sort of gain, it is exhausted
within a single day; third, wherever one is, no one respects his presence;
fourth, his bad name and rumors [about him] spread through the world;
ﬁfth, when his body dissolves and his life comes to an end he falls into
the hells.

Again he said to the lay devotees:

In general, when a person keeps moral precepts, he is then visited with
ﬁve kinds of blessings. What are the ﬁve? First, one is able to obtain whatever he wishes to acquire; second, his own wealth increases, with never
a loss; third, wherever he is, his presence is respected; fourth, his good
name is widely known in the world; ﬁfth, after the dissolution of his body
and his life’s end he is bound to be born among the heavenly gods.

12c

The time quickly passed through one half of the night. The World-honored
One told the lay devotees, “May each of you return home.” They then followed
the word of the Buddha, circumambulated him three times, and after venerating him, went away.
At that time, during the latter half of the night as dawn approached, the
World-honored One went to his secluded place and, through his supernormal
vision, witnessed various high-ranking gods occupying the city, and also the
middle- and lower-ranking gods as well, all occupying that city. Thereupon,
the World-honored One at once returned to the meeting hall and took his seat
on the cushion. As he thought it was the right time, he asked Ānanda, “Who
built this city of Pāṭaliputra?”
Ānanda replied, “It was Prime Minister Varṣākāra, sir, and it is said that
he built this to defend against a possible invasion of the Vṛji, sir.”

72

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

The Buddha said to Ānanda:

Whoever built this city has received the gods’ approval. During the
latter half of the night when the dawn was approaching, I went to a
secluded place [for meditation] and, through my supernormal vision,
saw high-ranking gods occupying the city and also middle- and lowerranking gods as well. O Ānanda, you should know that when humans
live at a site that high-ranking gods occupy, their lives will become
secure and prosperous. Whoever lives at a site that middle-ranking
gods occupy will be among the middle class of people. The site that
lower-ranking gods occupy is the section where lower-class people
live. Even these people have varied degrees of merit; their respective
prosperity is somehow limited by these conditions.
O Ānanda, this is a place where the wise may reside, it will also be
a center where people come for commercial and business transactions,
and the laws of the state are true and cannot be false. This is the best
of cities, to be commended by many and not to be destroyed. Should
this city be destroyed at some future time, it would necessarily be due
to one of these three causes: ﬁrst, by a great ﬂood; second, by a great
ﬁre; or third, by the conspiracy of city residents who side with foreign
invaders. The city would be destroyed for one of these causes.

Throughout that night the lay devotees were then engaged in preparation
of the next day’s provisions. When the preparations were complete, they
came to the Buddha, announcing, “The morning meal has already been prepared, sir. Whenever your holiness is ready.”
Then they set up a dining hall, served food to everyone with their own
hands, and served water at the end of the meal. Thereupon, they each took
their small sitting cloths with them and took their seats before the Buddha.
At once, the World-honored One began to teach them:

Now, I shall tell you that this is the city where the wise and the learned
will reside, many of them upholding moral precepts, engaging in the
practice of austerity, because of which those gods of good nature will
be delighted. At once they recited mysterious charms for the presence
of gods’ blessings, if they are respected and served with respect, thus

73

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

widely conducting charity, love, and sympathy. This is the place the
gods praise and hence it is destined to meet with good fortune and will
not meet with bad things.

At that time, when the World-honored One had completed his teaching,
he stood up from his seat and the assembly circumambulated around the
Buddha and followed him in leaving the city. Prime Minister Varṣākāra, followeing after the procession, thought to himself:
Now, the śramaṇa Gautama went out of this gate. This gate will be
named “Gautama’s gate.” Again, the riverbank from which the Tathāgata
crossed the Ganges will be called “Gautama’s fording place.”

At that time, leaving the city of Pāṭaliputra, the World-honored One reached
the riverbank, where many people tried to ﬁnd a means of crossing the river.
Some of them boarded boats in order to cross, while others got on bamboo
rafts, and yet others crossed the river on wooden rafts. At that time the Worldhonored One was together with the host of disciples. Within an instant, as
swiftly as a wrestler bends his arm and straightens it, he at once reached the
yonder shore. The World-honored One contemplated the meaning of this and
spoke in verse:
The Buddha is the captain of an oceangoing ship.
The Dharma [that he teaches]
Bridges rivers and fords.
The vessel of the great path (mahāyāna-mārga) [that he steers]
Transports both gods and humans across the water together.
One may untie his knots (i.e., the deﬁlements),
Cross over to the [yonder] shore, and
Ascend to the state of the sages.
[But] the Buddha is the one who helps his disciples
To untie their knots together and thereby realize nirvana.

13a

At that time, the World-honored One, traveling on the highway of Vṛji,
reached the village of Koṭigāma. Resting under a forest tree, he said to the
disciples:

74

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

There are four profound branches of the Dharma17 (1) noble precepts,
(2) noble concentration, (3) noble insight, and (4) noble deliverance.
These doctrines are subtle and difﬁcult to fathom. If I and you had not
clearly understood these subjects, we would have been in the endless
cycle of birth and death.

Thereupon, having contemplated these subjects, the World-honored One
continued in verse:
It is the Buddha who alone can differentiate
The four divisions of the Dharma:
Moral precepts, mental concentration,
Analytical insight, and deliverance.
Liberated from the state of suffering,
He helps others to come to their conversion and
To terminate their cycle of birth and death.

At that time, the World-honored One sojourned in the Koṭigāma village
as long as he wished. Then he said to Ānanda, “I wish to proceed to the
village of Nādikā.” Thus instructed, packing the Buddha’s robe and almsbowl
and carrying them [on his shoulder], Ānanda followed the World-honored
One together with the other bhikṣus. Traveling on the highway of Vṛji, he
reached Nādikā village and rested at a brick resthouse. At that time, Ānanda
remained in a secluded place and thought to himself:18
In this village, twelve lay devotees once lived. Their names were: (1)
Kakkaṭa (or Kakkudha), (2) Kaliṅga, (3) Nikaṭa, (4) Lishu, (5) Sāḷha,
(6) Poyalou, (7) Potoulou, (8) Subhadra, (9) Tuolishetu, (10) Soudalishetu, (11) Yaśas, and (12) Yeshuduolou. These people are all dead
and must have been reborn somewhere. Again, ﬁfty of the people passed
away. Again, ﬁve hundred of them have died. Where have these people
been reborn?

Having thought thus, Ānanda arose from his secluded place. Coming to
the World-honored One, after honoring him by bowing his forehead to his
feet, he withdrew to one side and said to him:

75

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

O World-honored One, while I was silently contemplating in my
secluded place, I came to think of those twelve lay devotees, such as
Kakkaṭa, and so on, who have died. Then again, ﬁfty people also passed
away in this village, and again ﬁve hundred of them have died since
then. Where have these people been reborn, sir? I wish that your holiness
would explain these matters.

The Buddha replied to Ānanda:

Those twelve, including Kakkaṭa, extinguished the ﬁve deﬁlements
that bind sentient beings to the lower sphere of desire, and after their
deaths they were born among heavenly beings. They will enter the
ﬁnal nirvana (parinirvāṇa) from where they are, and will not return to
this human world.
Those ﬁfty people who passed away extinguished the ﬁrst three of
the ﬁve deﬁlements (i.e., heretical belief in self, doubt, and attachment
to non-Buddhist practices and observances), and freed themselves from
desire, hatred, and delusion, thus realizing the saintly state of streamenterer (srotaāpanna), ﬁrst of the four [states of spiritual development].
They return to this world and will terminate the root cause of suffering.
Those ﬁve hundred people who have died also extinguished the
three deﬁlements and realized the state of stream-enterer. It is certain
that they are not destined for an evil course of the life cycle, hence
they will realize the path by returning to this world seven times in order
to terminate the cause of suffering.
O Ānanda, it is the universal rule that once born, everyone is bound
to die. There is no question about this. If everyone, when their death
approaches, asks me about their destiny, wouldn’t this be a great tragedy
on their part?

13b

Ānanda replied, “From the point of view of believers in the destinies, it
will indeed be a tragedy, sir.”
The Buddha said to Ānanda:
Now, I am obliged to teach you the Dharma mirror. You should tell
these noble disciples that if, in their present life, they can remove the
cause of falling into the three evil courses of life and can realize the

76

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

holy state of stream-enterer, they should be able to exhaust the cause
of suffering before passing through the seventh return to this human
world. Also you should share the following:
O Ānanda, the Dharma mirror refers to the state of unshakable faith
that every noble disciple should acquire:
(1) Delighted at heart, every disciple should have faith in the Buddha
Tathāgata as endowed with the ten titles, such as “one who has totally
extinguished deﬁlements,” “one who is fully enlightened,” and so forth.
(2) Delighted at heart, every disciple should not hesitate, whenever
possible, to inculcate the Dharma that is real and subtle and to show
the path of nirvana, believing in the testimony of what the knower of
the path has been practicing.
(3) Delighted at heart, every disciple should have faith in the Sangha
whose members are in harmonious cooperation, sincere and direct,
and without false ﬂattery; in which the fruits of the path are realized;
in which harmonious obedience is held regarding the teaching between
the superior and inferior; and in which each of the members respectively
embodies the Dharma in himself. For, when the members are ready as
candidates for the state of stream-enterer, they will realize it; when
they are ready for the state of once-returner (sakṛdāgāmin), they will
realize it; when they are ready for the state of nonreturner (anāgāmin),
they will realize it; when they are ready for the state of arhat, they will
realize it.
(4) Every disciple should have faith in these [holy] men who are
called the “four pairs of men” or the “eight [distinguished] personalities,” the wise and holy disciples of the Tathāgata, worthy of honor
and respect as the best ﬁeld of the world in which to harvest merit [by
making offerings to them and serving them]. Every disciple should
have faith in the body of precepts, pure, genuine, and spotless, neither
deﬁcient nor missing, adhered to by these wise and holy people. Every
disciple should have faith in the practice and realization of mental concentration by the bright and sagacious.
O Ānanda, these are the contents of the Dharma mirror. You should
tell the noble disciples that if, in their present life, they can annihilate
the causes for falling into the three evil courses of life and realize the

77

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

holy state of stream-enterer, then they should be able to exhaust the
cause of suffering before passing through the seventh return to this
world. Also you should tell these things to those [who seriously wish
to know about them].

At that time, the World-honored One sojourned in Koṭigāma village as
long as he wished, and then said to Ānanda, “Let us go to the country of
Vaiśālī.” Thus, having packed the Buddha’s robe and almsbowl and carrying
them [on his shoulder], Ānanda followed the World-honored One together
with other bhikṣus. Traveling on the highway of Vṛji, the World-honored
One reached Vaiśālī and took his seat under a tree.
A courtesan, Ambapālī by name, having heard that the Buddha, accompanied by his disciples, had arrived in Vaiśālī and was resting under the tree,
at once boarded a carriage to visit the place where the Buddha stayed, wishing
to venerate him with offerings. Even before reaching the site, she saw the
World-honored One from a distance, noting his handsome appearance, his
extraordinary senses, and his eminent marks, as though seeing the moon
among stars. Delighted at heart, Ambapālī alighted from the carriage and
approached on foot. She ﬁnally reached the place of the Buddha and, having
honored him by bowing her forehead to his feet, she withdrew to one side
and took her seat.
At that time, the World-honored One began to teach the Dharma, encouraging, beneﬁting, and delighting her. Having listened to the Buddha’s teaching,
Ambapālī was delighted and said to the Buddha:

From today, for the ﬁrst time, I humbly take refuge in the Three Treasures.
May your holiness grant this wish. I will become an upāsikā (laywoman)
in order to devote myself to the right Dharma and, until the end of my
life, will keep my vow not to injure life, not to steal, not to commit sexual
misconduct, not to tell lies, and not to take intoxicants, sir.

She again said to the Buddha:

May I request, World-honored One, that your holiness and the venerable
disciples accept tomorrow’s meal at my place. And may you take your
rest for the night in the grove that I own.

13c

78

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

At that time, the World-honored One maintained his silence, thus granting
her wish. Having realized the Buddha’s silent acceptance, Ambapālī arose
from her seat, venerated him, and after circumambulating the Buddha,
departed. Not long after Ambapālī left, the Buddha said to Ānanda: “I am
ready to go to the grove together with all of you.” Ānanda replied, “Yes, sir.”
The Buddha stood up from his seat, and carrying his robe and almsbowl himself, he went to Ambapālī’s grove accompanied by one thousand two hundred
and ﬁfty disciples.
The Licchavi clanspeople of Vaiśālī, having heard that the Buddha was
sojourning at Ambapālī’s grove, at once hurriedly set up their carriages decorated in ﬁve colors. Some of them rode a blue carriage drawn by a horse
colored in blue, wearing blue garments, under a blue canopy with the mark
of a blue streamer and a blue ofﬁcial ensign. The ﬁve colored carriages,
horses, and so forth were all arranged in a similar manner. The ﬁve hundred
Licchavi clanspeople, whose garments were of variegated colors, then equally
wished to visit the Buddha.
After leaving the place of the Buddha, Ambapālī returned alone to her
home but on the way she encountered the Licchavi clanspeople on the same
path. Her horse shied and her carriage rubbed against one of the Licchavi
clansman’s decorated carriages and damaged its canopy and streamer. She
did not, however, try to turn out of the way of their passage. The Licchavi
clansman said accusingly:
Under what authority have you not turned out of the way of our passage?
By bumping into my carriage, you have damaged my canopy and
streamer.

Ambapālī replied:

Gentlemen, I have already requested the Buddha to come to my place
for tomorrow’s meal. In order to prepare the meals, I am returning
home. Because of this, I have to make this carriage run as fast as it
can, not allowing it to turn off from this road, sirs.

Some Licchavi clanspeople then asked [her]: “Can you set your request
aside for a while, and give us the opportunity [to make the ﬁrst offerings to
the Buddha]? We shall give you one hundred thousand gold pieces for it.”

79

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

Ambapālī at once replied, “I am the ﬁrst to have requested the Buddha
and it has already been settled. I cannot transfer this opportunity to you, sirs.”
Then the Licchavi clanspeople again said to [her]: “Then we shall give
you sixteen times that amount of one hundred thousand gold pieces. Give
us the ﬁrst opportunity.”
Ambapālī still did not agree, asserting, “My request has been granted. I
cannot transfer it to you, sirs.”
Then the Licchavi clanspeople said to her again, “We will give you one
half of the state’s wealth. Let us have the ﬁrst opportunity.”
Ambapālī again replied:

Even if you promise me all the wealth of the state, I am not interested
in it, sirs. The reason is that the Buddha is sojourning at my grove and
has accepted my request. This matter has been settled, sirs.

Thus she refused. All of the Licchavi clanspeople wrung their hands and
lamented, “Now, because of this woman, we have lost the opportunity to
make the ﬁrst offering!” but they proceeded on their way toward the grove.
At that time, the World-honored One saw from a distance the ﬁve hundred
Licchavi clanspeople approaching the grove, accompanied by tens of thousands of carriages and horses, ﬁlling up the entire roadway. He said to the
bhikṣus:

If you wish to know how the gods of Trāyastriṃśa Heaven play games
and enjoy their heavenly garden, it would not differ much from the
oncoming host of visitors in pomp and stateliness. All of you, bhikṣus,
should maintain your minds in good unity and present yourselves in a
digniﬁed manner.
What, O bhikṣus, is called good unity of the mind? Here, O bhikṣus,
exert yourselves in observing the inner body (i.e., inner senses) in concentration, without slackening, being mindful and remembering your
observations, thereby discarding worldly desires and worries. Exert
yourselves also in observing the outer body (i.e., outer senses), without
slackening, being mindful and remembering your observations, thereby
discarding worldly desires and worries. [Further,] exert yourselves to
observe both the inner and outer body, without slackening, being mindful

14a

80

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

and remembering your observations, thereby discarding worldly desires
and worries. It is the same with observing one’s sensation (senses),
mind (intellect), and psychophysical elements.
O bhikṣus, what then does it mean to not be digniﬁed in respect to
manners? [It is the opposite of digniﬁed conduct and discipline.] In
this matter, O bhikṣus, whatever one should do, he should know how
to do it. Whatever one should stop, he should know how to stop. Look
around right and left, bend forward, stretch back, look downward and
look upward, holding the robe and almsbowl; you should not lose the
[digniﬁed] manner of eating and drinking hot water and medicine;
applying properly expedient means, you should remove obstacles,
keeping your mind intact in silence without [letting it become] scattered,
whether walking, stopping, sitting, lying down, sleeping, or speaking.
Such a one is called a bhikṣu who is well endowed with digniﬁed manners and discipline.

The ﬁve hundred Licchavi clanspeople reached the grove owned by
Ambapālī and, having alighted from their carriages, proceeded on foot toward
the place of the Buddha. After honoring him by bowing their foreheads to
his feet, they withdrew to one side to take their seats. The Tathāgata, abiding
on his seat, cast his aura of authority and holiness over the entire assembly,
just as the autumnal moon casts its light, and also as the sun alone shines
brightly from midair through a clear sky, onto the clean ground with no speck
of dust whatsoever.
At that time, while his seat was surrounded by the ﬁve hundred Licchavi
clanspeople who sat on the ground, the Buddha alone amid the entire assembly
revealed his holy illumination. At that time, there was a brāhmaṇa, Piṅgiyānī
by name, among the assembly. He suddenly stood up from his seat, rearranged
his garments to expose his right shoulder, and with his right knee touching
the ground and both palms held together in respect, praised the Buddha in
verse:
King Aṅga of Magadha (i.e., Bimbisāra)
Seeking merit-worthy prosperity,
Clad himself in the heraldic paragon of armor.

81

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

The World-honored One appeared in this land and
Shook the triple world with his aura of authority and virtue.
The fame of his name has arisen like that of the Himalayas, and
[That of his virtue] like the blooming lotus ﬂowers
With their subtle and delicate fragrance.
Now, the brightness of his presence
Is like the sun arising at the beginning of the day and
Like the moon playfully passing through the sky
With no shade of clouds whatsoever.
Even so is the World-honored One
Whose light illumines the human world.
His supreme insight is just as clear and bright
As a garden torch perceived through the darkness of night.
He has bestowed on everyone the eyes of insight and
Dispelled all doubt from the minds of humans.

Then, the ﬁve hundred Licchavi clanspeople, having listened to Piṅgiyānī’s
recitation of his verse of tribute, requested of him, “May you recite the verse
of praise once again.” Thereupon, Piṅgiyānī repeated the recitation three
times before the Buddha. Having listened to the verse of praise repeatedly
sung by Piṅgiyānī, each of the Licchavi clanspeople took off their garments
and gave them to the brāhmaṇa for his recital. Piṅgiyānī at once presented
these garments to the Buddha as his offering, and the Buddha accepted his
gift with compassion.
Thereupon, the World-honored One said to the Licchavi clanspeople of
Vaiśālī:
In the world, there are ﬁve kinds of treasures that are difﬁcult to obtain.
What are the ﬁve? First is the appearance of the Tathāgata in this world,
who has realized the state of arhatship. Such an appearance is difﬁcult
to meet. Second is a person who is capable of expounding the right
Dharma of the Tathāgata. Such a person is difﬁcult to ﬁnd. Third is a
person who is capable of believing and understanding the Dharma taught
by the Tathāgata. Such a person is difﬁcult to ﬁnd. Fourth is a person
who is capable of realizing the Dharma taught by the Tathāgata. Such
a person is difﬁcult to ﬁnd. Fifth is a person who knows how occasions

14b

82

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

of crisis recur and how to rescue others from disasters. Such a person
is difﬁcult to ﬁnd. These are the ﬁve treasures most difﬁcult to obtain.

Then, having listened to the teaching of the Buddha, the ﬁve hundred Licchavi clanspeople were delighted and said to the Buddha, “We humbly wish,
O World-honored One, that your holiness and the venerable disciples accept
our invitation.”
The Buddha replied to the Licchavi clanspeople:
Dear noblemen, you have invited me and I have now already accepted
your offerings. Ambapālī made an invitation in advance, and this has
already been accepted by the Buddha, hence it still stands.

When all the Licchavi clanspeople heard this, each of the ﬁve hundred
clanspeople wrung his hands and expressed regret, saying, “While we wished
to make our offerings to the Tathāgata and his party, this woman has already
taken the ﬁrst auspicious opportunity.” At once they rose from their seats
and, having honored the Buddha by bowing their foreheads to his feet, they
circumambulated the Buddha and departed.
During the night, Ambapālī prepared various foods for the next day’s
offering. The next morning, when the time came, the World-honored One,
surrounded by one thousand two hundred and ﬁfty disciples, each neatly
dressed in the saṃghāṭī robe and with almsbowl in hand, arrived at the place
they had been invited to and took a seat in the prepared position.
Thereupon, Ambapālī set forth superb foods for the Buddha as well as
the members of the sangha. When the meal was over, the bowls were set
aside and the tables were removed. Ambapālī then carried a golden pitcher
to serve water for washing. As she stepped forward toward the Buddha she
said to him:
Among all the groves in the city of Vaiśālī, the one that I own is the
best. I would like to present it as gift to the Tathāgata. With compassion
for me, may your holiness accept this gift.

The Buddha said to Ambapālī:

Your ladyship, make this grove an offering to the universal sangha
(i.e., of the bhikṣus of all regions) with the Buddha as its head. The

83

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

reason is that whatever belongs to the Tathāgata, namely, the six items,
such as groves, forests, rooms, houses, robes, and bowls, cannot be
transferred as gifts to anyone, even ones such as [the Evil One] Māra,
Indra, Brahmā, and other powerful gods, who are not equally worthy
to the Tathāgata.

Thus instructed, Ambapālī at once dedicated her grove to the universal
sangha with the Buddha as its head. With compassion, the Buddha accepted
her gift and praised her deed in verses:
Whosoever builds the commemorative tower (stupa),
Whoever builds the monastic residence (vihāra),
Whoever dedicates the grove and orchard with cool shade,
Whoever helps people cross the water
By building bridges and steering boats,
Whoever provides travelers in the wilderness
With water and grass as well as a resthouse,
His merit increases by day and by night thereof,
With his moral quality pure and genuine,
He is bound to reach the goal of highest good.

14c

Then Ambapālī brought a small table before the Buddha and took her
seat. The Buddha began to teach the Dharma, encouraging, beneﬁting, and
delighting her, by expounding the doctrine of charity, the doctrine of morality,
the doctrine of rebirth in heaven, instructing that desires are to be shunned
as great danger, unclean and impure, determining ongoing deﬁlements of
passion as an obstacle, but [on the other hand], commending the path of distancing oneself from both suffering and pleasure as necessary and best (toward
the goal of salvation).
At that time, the World-honored One observed that [Ambapālī’s] mind
became receptive, peaceful, little obstructed, and ready to be educated. Thereupon, following the rule of all buddhas, he expounded on her behalf the noble
truths of suffering, the cause of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the
necessary path of cessation (i.e., the Four Noble Truths).
At that time, Ambapālī, with faith pure and genuine, like white cloth that
can be easily dyed any color, at once in that single session [at her seat]
removed herself from all deﬁlement and thus acquired genuine insight into
84

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

the nature of the Dharma, realized the Dharma as she envisioned it, became
determined to abide in the right path without falling into any evil course, and
thus attained the state of fearlessness. Thereupon, Ambapālī said to the
Buddha, “Now I humbly take refuge in the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha.”
After repeating the words of her vow, she said:

May your holiness grant me permission to become a lay devotee. From
now until the end of my life, I will not injure life, nor steal, nor indulge
in sexual misconduct, nor lie, nor drink intoxicating liquor.

Therewith, Ambapālī received the ﬁve precepts from the Buddha. Casting
away her earlier trade, she annihilated all unclean stains, and arising from
her seat, she venerated the Buddha and departed.
At that time, the World-honored One sojourned in Vaiśālī as long as he
wished, and then said to Ānanda, “You are doing well [in the life of daily
practice]. I wish to proceed to Beluva-gāma.” Having answered, “Yes, sir,”
Ānanda packed the Buddha’s robe and almsbowl, and carrying them on his
shoulder he followed the World-honored One with other the bhikṣus. Traveling
on the highway of Vṛji, the World-honored One reached the bamboo forest
of the village.
There was a brāhmaṇa, Pishatuoya by name. Having heard that the
Buddha, accompanied by his disciples, had arrived at the bamboo forest, he
thought to himself in contemplation:

This śramaṇa Gautama is renowned of name and virtue in all regions.
He is [perfectly] endowed with the ten supreme titles and has excelled
beyond all the heavenly beings, such as Indra, Brahmā, [Māra], the
Lord of Evil, and the evil ones (deva-māras), the śramaṇas, and the
brāhmaṇas, in his direct experience of deliverance, and has ever since
continued to teach the Dharma. Whatever he says at the beginning, in
the middle, as well as at the end, is true and right and is profoundly
subtle in its meaning, and matches his practice of austerity. It will be
good for me to see such a perfected person free from all attachment.

Then the brāhmaṇa came out of the bamboo forest and came to the place
where the World-honored One stayed and, having greeted him with a bow,
he took a seat at one side.

85

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

The World-honored One then began to teach the Dharma on his behalf,
encouraging, beneﬁting, and delighting him. Having listened to the teaching,
delighted in his heart, the brāhmaṇa requested the World-honored One and
his disciples to accept his offering of the next day’s meal and an overnight
resting place. The Buddha remained silent, thus accepting his invitation. The
brāhmaṇa, having understood that his request was accepted, rose from his
seat and, after circumambulating the Buddha, went home. At once, during
the night, the brāhmaṇa prepared the food and drink, and the next morning
he announced, “It is time, sir, if the World-honored One is ready.”
Thereupon, the World-honored One, donning the saṃghāṭī robe and with
his almsbowl in hand, reached the house accompanied by his disciples, and
took his seat in the prepared position. Then the brāhmaṇa served varieties
of good food for the Buddha and the members of the sangha. When the meal
was over and the bowls were set aside, he served water for rinsing the bowls
and washing hands. Then he brought out a small chair and sat before the
Buddha. Thereupon, the Buddha praised his deed in verse:
Providing those who are steadfast with moral precepts
With food and drink, robe and garment, as well as bedding,
One is bound to acquire great reward.
Such merit is a true companion,
Following him always and everywhere,
Just as the shadow following its form.
In this way it is best to plant good seeds
For securing food in the world to come.
Making merit, he is secure on that basis.
Protected by heavenly gods wherever he goes,
He will be free from disaster in all of his life and
Will be born in heaven when he dies.

15a

At that time, the World-honored One taught the subtle Dharma on behalf
of the brāhmaṇa, beneﬁting and delighting [him], and having done so, rose
from his seat and left the house.
The crops were very expensive in that land and because of the prevailing
famine it was very difﬁcult to obtain almsfood. The Buddha said to Ānanda,

86

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

“Call all the bhikṣus residing in this country and assemble them in the meeting
hall.”
Ānanda answered, “Yes, sir,” and released the message far and near to
call [all the bhikṣus] to assemble at the hall. Thereupon, all the bhikṣus residing
in that country came to assemble, and Ānanda reported to the Buddha, “The
bhikṣus have assembled, sir. May your holiness be ready.”
At that time, the World-honored One rose from his seat, reached the hall,
and, having taken his seat in the prepared position, said to the bhikṣus:
It is a time of famine in this land, and it is difﬁcult to obtain almsfood.
All of you form groups and go to Vaiśālī or the country of Vṛji to rely
on your friends and relatives. If you settle there for the duration of the
summer retreat, you may not have to face the difﬁculty of food shortage.
I alone will remain here with Ānanda to arrange the summer retreat.
The reason for sending you away is that I foresee food scarcity as well
as other things here.

Thereupon, the bhikṣus at once departed as instructed for their respective
destinations.
The Buddha alone remained in that country with Ānanda. Later on, during
the summer retreat, the Buddha experienced physical ailment with pains
throughout his body. He attentively spoke to himself:

Now I have got an illness and my whole body hurts very severely. But
all the disciples are not here. It would not be good if I were to take the
course of death here. For the time being, I must exert myself to prolong
my life.

At that time, the World-honored One came out of his secluded room and
took his seat in a cool spot. Having seen his appearance, Ānanda quickly
approached him and said to the Buddha, “As I see your holiness now, you
look to be suffering from an illness, sir.”
Ānanda again said:

I have known that the World-honored One has been ill. My mind has
been upset and distracted because of the deﬁlement of sorrow and

87

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

lamentation, without clear consciousness. Since my breath has still
survived, I tried to wake and gather my thoughts, then realized that
the Tathāgata has not entered nirvana. The Eye of Wisdom of the human
world has not entered nirvana. The great Dharma has not yet been damaged. But why has the World-honored One not yet left a testament for
all the bhikṣus of the sangha, sir?

The Buddha said to Ānanda:

Is there anything that the sangha expects from me? If anyone claims “I
am one who holds the sangha and who unites the sangha,” then such a
person may leave some sort of instruction to the sangha. But I, the Tathāgata, have never said “I am one who holds the sangha and unites the
sangha.” Why should I leave some sort of instruction after my death?
O Ānanda, the Dharma that I teach has been put into practice with
no distinction of inside or outside. Without a claim of “I,” the Dharma
that I [originally] realized has been practiced all through. I have become
aged, just about eighty years. Just as an old cart can barely [continue
to] travel by means of repairs, so it is the same with my body. I can
prolong my span of life for awhile by means of expediency, and I am
trying to forebear this ongoing pain. When I let go of all forms of
thought, I enter the state of no-thought where I feel at peace and at
ease with my body, feeling none of its afﬂiction.
Therefore, O Ānanda, you must make yourself your own light, you
must make the Dharma your light, but you should not make anything
else your light. Take refuge in yourself, in the Dharma, but not in anything else. Why do I say to you, “Make yourself your own light, make
the Dharma your light, but not make anything else your light. Rely on
yourself, rely on the Dharma, but do not rely on anything else”?
O Ānanda, when a bhikṣu observes his inner body (inner senses) in
concentration, he should exert himself with no slackening, being mindful
of his observations and keeping them in memory, thereby removing
worldly desires and worries. In observing his outer body (outer senses),
and also observing both inner and outer body, he should exert himself
with no slackening, being mindful of his observations and keeping
them in memory, thereby removing worldly desires and worries. It is

15b

88

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

the same with observing one’s sense perceptions, mind (intellect), and
psychophysical elements.
This is what I mean by making oneself one’s own light, making the
Dharma one’s light, but not making anything else one’s light; to rely
on oneself as one’s refuge, to rely on the Dharma as one’s refuge, but
not to rely on anything else as one’s refuge.

The Buddha said to Ānanda:

If there is anyone who would really be able to practice this discipline,
he surely would be the primary practitioner of the path among all my
disciples.

The Buddha said to Ānanda, “We shall go to the Cāpāla shrine.”
“Yes, sir,” replied Ānanda. The Buddha stood up, donned the saṃghāṭī
robe, and with his almsbowl in hand, reached the shade of a tree. He said to
Ānanda, “Spread my sitting cloth. My back hurts. I wish to rest here.”
“Yes, sir,” replied Ānanda, and he at once spread the sitting cloth. The
Tathāgata took his seat and Ānanda also set up a small seat and sat before
him. The Buddha said to Ānanda:

There are those who practice the four kinds of supernormal power.
While practicing these powers, they are always mindful of these practices so as to keep them in good memory. When one so desires, he can
prolong his life on the basis of his power for as long as the remaining
duration of the current eon.
O Ānanda, the Buddha has already practiced these four supernormal
powers on many occasions and, being mindful of these experiences,
he does not forget the use of them. If it is necessary, the Tathāgata can
extend his life span for the remaining duration of the present eon, so
that he may remove darkness, beneﬁt the world, and make heavenly
gods happier.

At that time, Ānanda remained silent and did not respond. The Buddha
repeated these words three times, but Ānanda still remained silent. At that
time Ānanda was obstructed by the Evil One and did not understand the
Buddha’s words. After three repetitions the Buddha suggested that he respond,

89

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

yet Ānanda was unaware that he should ask the Buddha to prolong his life.
[Finally] the Buddha said to Ānanda, “You ahould know what to do.”
At that moment, Ānanda understood [the Buddha’s] words, rose from his
seat, and, after venerating the Buddha, left that place. He sat under a tree not
far from the Buddha and engaged in meditation and reﬂection.
A short while later the Evil One [Māra] appeared before the Buddha and
said to him:

O Enlightened One, when you have no further wish, you should take
the course of entering ﬁnal nirvana. Now is the right moment. You
should quickly enter ﬁnal nirvana.

15c

The Buddha replied to the Evil One:

Speak no more. I, myself, know the right time. I, the Tathāgata, will
not take the course of nirvana just yet. I must wait for the time when
all the bhikṣus come together. I shall, by control of my own destiny,
approach courageously and without cowardice the goal of peace and
ease. I shall continue to take my own merit and will be the teacher
(ācaryaka) for others. I shall continue to be a propagator of the teaching
of the sutras and will expound the meaning of each sentence.
If there is any heretical teaching, I will repudiate it on the basis of
the right Dharma. I shall vindicate the testimony of my own experience
on the mysteries of the Dharma. My disciples are not yet assembled
for all this, nor have the bhikṣus, bhikṣuṇīs, upāsakas (laymen), or upāsikās (laywomen) assembled yet. Now it is still necessary to propagate
the practice of austerity and to expound the enlightened mind, allowing
the heavenly beings to witness the mystery of the Dharma.

Then the Evil One again spoke to the Buddha:

O Enlightened One, in the olden days, when you realized supreme
enlightenment under the ajapāla-nyagrodha tree by the bank of the
Nairañjanā River in the village of Uruvilvā, I appeared before you, O
World-honored One, and urged the Tathāgata to enter ﬁnal nirvana,
saying “It is the right time now for you to enter nirvana swiftly and at
once.”

90

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

At that time, O Tathāgata, you replied to me, saying “Stop, Evil
One, I, myself, know the right time. I, the Tathāgata, will not take the
course of entering nirvana. When a good number of disciples has assembled, and so forth, even allowing the heavenly beings to witness the
mystery of the Dharma, only then I will take the course of entering
nirvana.”
O Enlightened One, now you have acquired many disciples and the
heavenly beings have all witnessed the mystery of the Dharma. Now
is the right time. Why are you not taking the course of entering nirvana?

The Buddha said:

Stop, Evil One! The Buddha himself knows the right time. I will not
abide for a long time. Three months from now, at the spot between two
śāla trees near Kuśinagara, the original place of the Mallan clan, I shall
take the course of entering ﬁnal nirvana.

Then the Evil One quickly thought to himself, “The Buddha does not lie.
He will surely enter nirvana soon.” Dancing and jumping for joy, he suddenly
disappeared.
Not too long after the Evil One had departed, the Buddha exerted himself
to concentrate on volitional concentration at the Cāpāla shrine solely to extend
his life span. Exactly at that time, the great earth trembled and all the people
of that country were stricken with fear; there were none whose hair did not
stand on end. The Buddha emitted a great ray of light that penetrated everywhere without limitation, even illuminating the dark underworld, thus enabling
the beings therein to see each other. At that time, the World-honored One
uttered these words in verse:
Of the two divisions of the conditioned and the unconditioned,
I have now forsaken the conditioned,
Abiding solely in the state of concentration;
Like a chick coming out of the shell.

At that time, wise Ānanda, with a frightened mind, his hair standing on
end, quickly approached the Buddha. Having honored the Buddha by bowing

91

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

his forehead to his feet, he withdrew to one side and said to the Buddha, “It
is very strange, O World-honored One, that the earth trembled, sir. Why did
this happen?” The Buddha said to Ānanda:

In general there are eight causes for the occasion of the trembling of
the earth. What are the eight? The ground is ﬂoating above water. Water
stays on wind, and wind stays in space. When a storm arises in midair,
a great churning of water automatically follows. When the great water
is churned, every part of the ground shakes. This is called the trembling
of the earth.
Next, O Ānanda, when a bhikṣu or a bhikṣuṇī, as well as the powerful
among the gods, has realized the path, recognized an imbalance between
the ground and the water, and has tested his or her capacity to balance
them, the ground necessarily shakes. This is the second reason.
Again next, O Ānanda, when a bodhisattva initially descends from
Tuṣita Heaven to his mother’s womb and abides there in concentration
with his mind undisturbed, the ground then trembles. This is the third
reason.
Again next, O Ānanda, when a bodhisattva comes out of his mother’s
right side and abides there in concentration with his mind undisturbed,
then the ground trembles greatly. This is the fourth reason.
Again next, O Ānanda, when a bodhisattva realizes supreme enlightenment, at that moment the ground trembles greatly. This is the ﬁfth
reason.
Again next, O Ānanda, when the Buddha, after his realization of
the path, turns the supreme wheel of Dharma that neither the Evil One
nor his evil gods, neither śramaṇa nor brāhmaṇa, neither gods nor
people can do, then the ground everywhere shakes greatly. This is the
sixth reason.
Again next, O Ānanda, when the Buddha’s teaching is close to its
end, and if he abides in concentration with his mind undisturbed and
decides to forsake his longevity, then the ground everywhere shakes
greatly. This is called the seventh reason.
Again next, O Ānanda, when the Tathāgata, while abiding in the complete state of nirvana (anupadiśeṣa-nirvana), [freed from both mental

16a

92

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

and bodily continuation,] enters parinirvāṇa, the ground shakes greatly.
This is called the eighth reason.
These eight causes make the ground tremble greatly.

At that time, the Buddha continued in verse:

Highest among all humans, great ascetic śramaṇa,
Is he who illuminates the human world.
To this teacher of heavenly gods asked Ānanda:
“Why does the ground tremble, sir?”
With compassion, thus expounded the Tathāgata
With his voice like that of a kalaviṅka bird.
“All of you listen to what I explain.
The ground lies on water, water lies upon wind.
If wind moves in space, the ground shakes greatly.
This is the ﬁrst cause of the ground that trembles.
O bhikṣus, bhikṣuṇīs, if you wish to test your supernormal power,
Hills, oceans, the ground, and myriad grasses and trees all tremble.
When the gods Indra, Brahmā, and
All powerful gods wish to shake the ground,
The spirits of hills and oceans shake the ground.
The Bodhisattva, Most Honorable among Humans,
Endowed with hundreds of meritorious virtues,
When he initially enters his mother’s womb,
The ground trembles because of it.
Abiding for the duration of ten months in the mother’s body
Is like a dragon lying in a cushion mattress.
When he appeared from the mother’s right side,
The ground trembles greatly because of it.
When the Buddha was a youth,
His deﬁlement was already extinguished, and
His enlightenment excelled inﬁnitely,
Because of this the ground trembled.
When he turned the wheel of the Dharma in the Deer Park,
The gathering place of all sages, and
When his power of insight overcame the Evil One,

93

16b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

The ground trembled greatly.
The Evil One frequently visited the Buddha,
Urging him to enter nirvana.
When the Buddha himself decided to enter ﬁnal nirvana,
The ground trembled greatly.
The Most Honorable among Humans, Great Teacher, Sage,
One who exhausted the cause of subsequent existence,
Remained unmoved, and yet
When he decided on the course of entering nirvana,
The ground trembled greatly.
By one whose eyes were pure and genuine
The eight kinds of events are explained
As accompanying the ground’s trembling.
As the eighth cause,
It was the time when the Buddha enters ﬁnal nirvana
From the complete state of cessation,
That the ground everywhere trembles greatly.”

Second Episode

The Buddha said to Ānanda:

There are eight kinds of people in the world. What are the eight? First,
the kṣatriyas (nobility); second, the brāhmaṇas (priesthood); third, the
lay householders; fourth, the śramaṇas (ascetic mendicants); ﬁfth, the
four guardians of the heavens; sixth, the gods of the thirty-three levels
of heaven; seventh, the followers of the Evil One [Māra]; eighth, the
gods of Brahmā Heaven. I recollect the following regarding myself:
Long ago I was once associated with the kṣatriya people. The number
of times I sat with them, stood with them, and exchanged words with
them are beyond counting. Wherever I was with them, because of
my endeavors and powers of concentration I was a prominent ﬁgure.
Some of the kṣatriya people had good complexions, but my complexion far exceeded theirs. Some of them had good voices, but my
voice far exceeded theirs. They ceased to compete with me, but I
did not stop competing with them. Whatever subject matter they

94

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

could discuss well, I too could discuss equally as well as they. Whatever subject matter they could not discuss, I could discuss. O Ānanda,
I taught them the Dharma extensively, beneﬁting and delighting
them. I died while I was among them, but they believed that I was
a heavenly god and did not realize that I was actually a human. In
this way, I mingled with the followers of the god Brahmā and,
through incalculable times back and forth [through transmigration],
extensively taught the Dharma to the heavenly gods, and yet no one
knew who I really was.

Ānanda said to the Buddha:

It is marvelous, sir. O World-honored One, no one ever, before your
holiness, could accomplish such [great] tasks as those accomplished
by the World-honored One, sir.

The Buddha continued:

This subtle, delicate, and rare Dharma, O Ānanda, is exceedingly unique
and has never before been realized by anyone. Only the Tathāgata alone
could realize this Dharma.

Again he spoke to Ānanda:

The Tathāgata alone knows the nature of the arising, abiding, and perishing of sensation; he alone knows the nature of the arising, abiding,
and perishing of ideation; he alone knows the nature of the arising,
abiding, and perishing of analytical introspection. This is the unique,
never-before-realized Dharma, which the Tathāgata alone has accomplished. You should take this Dharma to heart and make it work for
yourself.

At that time, the World-honored One said to Ānanda, “Let us go to the
Kūṭāgāra hall (near Vaiśālī).” He then sat on the sitting cloth spread under a
tree. The Buddha said to Ānanda, “Go and tell the bhikṣus residing in the
right and left quarters of the Kūṭāgāra [hall], without missing anyone, to
assemble in the meeting hall.”
As instructed, Ānanda assembled all the bhikṣus in the hall and reported
to the Buddha, “All the bhikṣus have assembled, sir. May your holiness be
95

16c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

ready.” Thereupon, the World-honored One at once went to the hall, took his
seat in the prepared position, and said to the bhikṣus:

You should know the following disciplines, on the basis of which I
myself accomplished the direct experience and realization of perfect
enlightenment. They are: (1) four kinds of mindfulness, (2) four kinds
of endeavor, (3) four kinds of supernormal power for acquiring concentration, (4) four kinds of meditation, (5) ﬁve kinds of spiritual faculties, (6) ﬁve kinds of spiritual power, (7) seven kinds of auxiliary
disciplines of enlightenment, and (8) eight kinds of paths pertaining
to the wise and saintly practitioner. You should be in harmonious cooperation, respectful and obedient toward each other with regard to these
disciplines, refraining from creating disputes. When you have one and
the same teacher, all of you receive the same water and milk. Whoever
receives the practice of these disciplines from me should make of them
your light, equally, and share your delight in practicing them.
O bhikṣus, you should know the following sources in which I have
expounded the Dharma since I accomplished the direct experience of
it. They are: (1) the sūtra collection, the sacred discourses in prose; (2)
the geya collection, the sacred discourses in prose and verse; (3) the
vyākaraṇa collection, the doctrines and destinies of religious fulﬁllment;
(4) the gāthā collection, the literature in verse; (5) the udāna collection,
the Buddha’s solemn and joyous utterances in prose and verse; (6) the
nidāna collection, the doctrinal and Vinaya discourses on motives and
occasions; (7) the jātaka collection, stories of past lives and experiences
as a bodhisattva; (8) the itivṛttaka collection, stories of past events; (9)
the vaipulya collection, extensive doctrinal studies; (10) the adbhuta
or adbhuta-dharma collection, descriptions of supernormal events and
mysteries; (11) the avadāna collection, moral instructions consisting
of heroic stories and moral retributions; and (12) the upadeśa collection,
detailed and extensive expositions and interpretations.
You should take these sources of the Dharma thoroughly to heart
and carefully evaluate and analyze them so as to avail yourselves of
them when needed, according to given circumstances. Why do I say
this? Because I shall not live for a long time. Three months from now
I shall enter ﬁnal nirvana.

96

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

Having heard these words, all the bhikṣus were terror-stricken, shocked,
and confused; some threw themselves to the ground. One cried out in a loud
voice, “How is it that the Buddha will take the course of cessation so soon?”
Another mourned, “How sad it is that Eye of Insight of the world goes to
cessation! Without his holiness, we will wither away over time.” Some bhikṣus
cried in sorrow and stamped [their feet] in grief, twisting their bodies and
wailing, totally out of control, just as a snake that has had its head cut off
twists and wriggles without knowing where it is going.
The Buddha said to them:
O bhikṣus, halt your wailing a moment. You should not be overwhelmed
by sorrow. There is no one in the entire world, whether one is in heaven,
on earth, or among human beings, who does not perish once born. No
matter how hard one wishes to halt conditioned things from changing,
one cannot do so. I have previously taught you that whomever you
love, whomever you ﬁnd endearing, all such is impermanent; whoever
meets with another will after all become separated. The physical body
is not one’s possession. Life does not continue to exist forever.

Thereupon, the World-honored One continued in verse:

Now I am free to take my course
Reaching the place of peace and quiescence.
Hence, I have assembled the members of the sangha
To tell them what I mean.
I am aged, having no more years to live.
I have accomplished that which should be done.
Now I am ready to forsake my life.
Being mindful, without slackening,
I have been steadfast with the precepts of the bhikṣus.
Keeping myself intact by concentrating on my volition,
I protect my mind [from scattering].
Whoever is steady, without slackening,
With the Dharma I have taught,
Can annihilate the root cause of suffering,
Thus overcoming the fate of birth, old age, and death.

17a

97

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

Again the Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

I have given you these admonitions now, because the Evil One among
gods came to urge me, saying, “O Enlightened One, when you have
no further purpose, you should take the course of ﬁnal nirvana. Now
is the right time. You should quickly enter that nirvana.”
I replied to the Evil One, “Stop, Evil One. The Enlightened One
himself knows the right time. I will wait for the time when all the
bhikṣus come together and all the gods are able to witness the mystery
of the Dharma.”
The Evil One again said, “O Enlightened One, in the olden days,
when you realized supreme enlightenment under the ajapāla-nyagrodha
tree by the bank of the Nairañjanā River in the village of Uruvilvā, I
appeared before you, O World-honored One, and urged the Tathāgata
to enter ﬁnal nirvana, saying: ‘It is now the right time that you enter
ﬁnal nirvana swiftly and at once.’ At that time, O Tathāgata, you replied,
‘Stop, Evil One, I myself know the right time. I, Tathāgata, will not
take the course of entering nirvana. When a good number of disciples
have assembled, and so forth, even allowing the heavenly beings to
witness the mystery of the Dharma, only then I will take the course of
entering nirvana.’ O Enlightened One, now, you have acquired many
disciples and the heavenly beings have all witnessed the mystery of
the Dharma. Now is the right time. Why are you not taking the course
of entering nirvana?”
I said: “Stop, Evil One, the Buddha himself knows the right time.
I will not abide much longer. Three months from now, at the spot
between two śāla trees near Kuśinagara, the original place of the Mallan
clanspeople, I shall take the course of entering ﬁnal nirvana.”
Then the Evil One quickly thought to himself: “The Buddha does
not lie. He will surely enter nirvana soon.” Thus, dancing and jumping
for joy, he suddenly disappeared. Not long after the Evil One had
departed, I exerted myself to concentrate on volitional concentration
at the Cāpāla shrine solely to extend my life span. Exactly at that time
the great earth trembled, while all the people of that country were fearstricken and there were none among them whose hair did not stand on

98

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

end. I emitted a great ray of light that penetrated everywhere without
limitation, even illuminating the dark underworld, thus enabling the
beings therein to see each other.
At that time, I uttered the following words in verse:

Of the two divisions of the conditioned and the unconditioned,
I have now forsaken the conditioned,
Abiding solely in the state of concentration;
Like a chick coming out of the shell.

At that time, Venerable Ānanda stood up from his seat, rearranged his
robe to expose the right shoulder, knelt with his right knee touching the
ground, and with his palms joined together, said to the Buddha:

O World-honored One, we request that your holiness remain in this
world by extending your life span until the fulﬁllment of the present
eon, not taking the course of ﬁnal nirvana. With compassion for all
sentient beings, may your holiness beneﬁt gods and humans.

At that time, the World-honored One remained silent, without responding.
Ānanda repeated his request in the same manner three times. Thereupon, the
Buddha said to Ānanda, “Do you believe in the path through which the Tathāgata realized supreme enlightenment?”
He replied, “Yes, sir. I believe in the word of the Buddha.”
The Buddha continued:
If you believe in it, why have you approached to press me three times?
You heard it closely from me and closely received instruction from me
before, namely:
There are those who practice four kinds of supernormal power.
While practicing these powers, they are always mindful of these
practices so as to keep them in good memory. When one so desires,
he can prolong his life on the basis of his power for as long as the
remaining duration of the current eon. O Ānanda, the Buddha has
already practiced these four supernormal powers on many occasions
and, being mindful of these experiences, he does not forget the use
of them. If it is necessary, the Tathāgata can extend his life span

99

17b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

for the remaining duration of the present eon, so that he may remove
darkness, beneﬁt the world, and make heavenly gods happier.

At that time, why didn’t you repeat your request asking me not to take
the course of ﬁnal nirvana? Your wish could have been fulﬁlled if you
had inquired twice, or up to a third time. You could have requested me
at that time to extend my life span for the remaining duration of the
present eon, thereby removing darkness, beneﬁting the world, and
making heavenly gods happier. You have now made this request, but
isn’t it foolish? I expressed my intention three times, yet you remained
silent throughout. Why didn’t you ask me at that time, “May the Tathāgata extend his life for the remaining duration of the present eon,
thereby removing darkness and beneﬁting the world”?
Nay, do not press me any more, Ānanda. I have already forsaken the
span of my life. I have discarded it and vomited it out. Even if you urge
the Tathāgata to contradict his own word, you know that it is of no avail.
It is as if a wealthy man has vomited food upon the ground. How and
why would he retrieve the food once vomited upon the ground?

Ānanda replied, “There is no reason, sir.”
[The Buddha continued:]

It is the same with the Tathāgata. He has forsaken it and already vomited
it out. How and why should you ask him to retrieve what he has already
forsaken?

The Buddha said to Ānanda, “Let us go to Ambala village.” Packing up
the Buddha’s robe and almsbowl [and carrying them on his shoulder], Ānanda
followed the World-honored One together with the other bhikṣus. Traveling
on the highway of Vṛji, he reached Ambala village and sojourned in a forest
on a hill.
At that time, the World-honored One taught the bhikṣus the three [main]
branches of training: (1) moral precepts (śīla), (2) mental concentration
(samādhi), and (3) [analytical] insight (prajñā):
Being steadfast with the set of moral precepts and experiencing mental
concentration, you may acquire great reward; being steadfast with the

100

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

experience of mental concentration and applying analytical insight,
you may acquire great reward. Being steadfast with the application of
analytical insight and realizing the purity of your mind, you may acquire
perfect deliverance and extinguish three kinds of deﬁlements, namely:
deﬁlement due to carnal desire, deﬁlement due to existential desire,
and deﬁlement due to ignorance. When one has realized deliverance,
he acquires a subsequent insight of his realization (vimukti-jñāna):
“Whoever has exhausted [the cause of] birth and death, accomplished
the goal of the practice of austerity, and completed that which should
be done [in life], to him there will be no more birth after this life.”

At that time, the World-honored One sojourned in Ambala village as long
as he wished. [Then] the Buddha said to Ānanda, “You are doing well [in
the life of daily practice]. I wish to visit the villages of Jambugrāma, Bhāṇḍagrāma, Hastigrāma, and then the town of Bhoganagara.”
Ānanda replied, “Yes, sir,” and packing up the Buddha’s robe and almsbowl
at once, he followed him together with the host of other bhikṣus. Traveling
on the highway of Vṛji, gradually visiting those places, they ﬁnally reached
the forest of śiṃśapā trees north of the town of Bhoganagara and sojourned
there.
The Buddha said to the bhikṣus, “I shall introduce you to four principles
of great importance. Listen attentively, you should contemplate and remember
[what I shall now say].” The bhikṣus responded, “Yes, sir. We are delighted
and ready to listen to the teaching, sir.”
The Buddha began to teach:

What are the four [principles]? Suppose a bhikṣu (or a group of bhikṣus)
asserts a certain matter by saying, “At such-and-such village or town
or country, I listened directly to the word of the Buddha and received
directly from him this doctrine, this discipline, or this teaching.” Even
so, you should neither believe it nor reject it unless whatever is asserted
is examined to be true in reference to the scriptures, the rules of discipline, or in reference to its origin and adaptation with the system of
authentic belief. If it is neither in accord with the scriptures, nor with
the rules of discipline, nor with the system of authentic belief, you

101

17c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

should respond to the assertion by saying, “Venerable, the Buddha did
not teach this particular thing. You may have heard it from the group
of bhikṣus erroneously. My understanding in reference to the scriptures,
the rules of discipline, or the system of authentic belief is different
from what you have asserted. The Buddha did not teach this particular
thing that you have asserted, because we have examined it in reference
to the scriptures, the discipline, and the system of authentic belief.
What you previously asserted is not in accord with the system of authentic belief, nor is it in accord with the rules of discipline, nor is it in
accord with its origin and adaptation. Venerable, you should not keep
it, nor should you teach it to others. You should discard it.” If, however,
what he has asserted accords with the scriptures, the rules of discipline,
and the system of authentic belief, you should say to him, “What you
have previously asserted is truly the Buddha’s teaching, because we
have examined it in reference to the scriptures, the rules of discipline,
and the system of authentic belief. Venerable, you should hold it and
teach it widely for the sake of others. You should be careful not to discard it.” This is the ﬁrst principle of great importance.
Again next, O bhikṣus, when a bhikṣu (or a group of bhikṣus) asserts
a certain matter by saying “At such-and-such village or town or country,
I listened directly to the words of a learned elder of the harmonious
sangha and received directly from him this doctrine, this discipline,
and this teaching.” Even so, you should not believe what is said [to be
the Buddha’s teaching], nor reject it either. But you should respond to
this similar case by saying, “Venerable, we must examine whether
what you assert is true or false in reference to the scriptures and clarify
its origin and adaptation on the basis of the system of authentic belief.”
If, however, what is asserted does not accord with either the scriptures,
or the Vinaya, or the system of authentic belief, then you should say
to him, “The Buddha did not teach this particular thing that you have
asserted. You may have heard it from a group of bhikṣus erroneously.
The reason is that our understanding in reference to the scriptures, the
rules of discipline, and the system of authentic belief is different from
what you have previously asserted. Venerable, you should not keep it,
nor should you teach it to others.” If, however, what he has asserted

102

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

accords with the scriptures, the rules of discipline, and the system of
authentic belief, you should say to him, “What you have previously
asserted is truly the Buddha’s teaching, because we have examined it in
reference to the scriptures, the rules of discipline, and the system of authentic belief. Venerable, you should hold it and teach it widely for the sake
of others. You should be careful not to discard it.” This is the second principle of great importance.
Again next, O bhikṣus, when a bhikṣu (or a group of bhikṣus) asserts
a certain matter concerning the doctrinal teaching and the moral discipline, saying, “At such-and-such village or town or country, I listened
directly to the words of a group of learned elders who uphold the doctrinal teaching, the rules of discipline, and the maintenance of model
restraints and received directly from them this doctrine, this moral discipline, and this teaching.” Even so, you should not respond to this
similar case by saying, “Venerable, we should examine whether what
you assert is true or false in reference to the scriptures and clarify its
origin and adaptation on the basis of the doctrine and the discipline.”
If what is asserted is neither in accordance with the scriptures, nor with
the rules of discipline, nor with the system of authentic belief, then
you should say to him, “The Buddha did not teach this particular thing
that you have previously asserted. You may have heard it from the
group of bhikṣus erroneously. The reason is that our understanding in
reference to the scriptures, the rules of discipline, and the system of
authentic belief is different from what you have previously asserted.
Venerable, you should not keep it, nor should you teach it to others;
you should discard it.” If, however, what he has asserted is in accordance
with the scriptures, the rules of discipline, and the system of authentic
belief, you should say to him, “What you have previously asserted is
truly the Buddha’s teaching, as we examined it in reference to the scriptures, the rules of discipline, and the system of authentic belief. Venerable, you should hold it and teach it widely for the sake of others.
You should be careful not to discard it.” This is the third principle of
great importance.
Again next, when a bhikṣu (or a group of bhikṣus) asserts that “At
such-and-such village or town or country, I listened directly to the words

103

18a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

of a bhikṣu about this doctrine, this rule of discipline, and the maintenance
of model restraints, and received directly from him this doctrine, this
moral discipline, and this teaching.” Even so, you should not respond
to this similar case by saying, “Venerable, we should examine whether
what you assert is true or false in reference to the scriptures, and clarify
its origin and adaptation on the basis of the doctrine and the discipline.”
If what he previously asserted does not accord with the scriptures, nor
with the rules of discipline, nor with the system of authentic belief, you
should say to him, “The Buddha did not teach this particular thing that
you have previously asserted. You may have heard it from the group of
bhikṣus erroneously. The reason is that our understanding in reference
to the scriptures, the rules of discipline, and the system of authentic belief
differs from what you have previously asserted. Venerable, you should
not keep it, nor should you teach it to others; you should discard it.” If,
however, what he has asserted is in accordance with the scriptures, the
rules of discipline, and the system of authentic belief, you should say to
him, “What you have previously asserted is truly the Buddha’s teaching,
as we examined it in reference to the scriptures, the rules of discipline,
and the system of authentic belief. Venerable, you should hold it and
teach it widely for the sake of others. You should be careful not to discard
it.” This is the fourth principle of great importance.

18b

At that time, the World-honored One sojourned at the town of Bhoganagara
as long as he wished, and then said to Venerable Ānanda, “Let us go to the
city of Pāvā.” Having replied, “Yes, sir,” Ānanda packed the Buddha’s robe
and almsbowl and followed the World-honored One together with the host
of other bhikṣus. Traveling on the highway of the Mallan country, he reached
Dutou Grove near the city of Pāvā.
There was then a son of a blacksmith, Cunda by name. Having heard that
the Buddha had arrived in the city by way of the Mallan highway, he dressed
up and visited the place where the Buddha sojourned and, after honoring
him by touching his forehead to the Buddha’s feet, he withdrew and sat to
one side. The Buddha then began to teach Cunda the Dharma, encouraging
him, beneﬁting him, and delighting him. After the Buddha’s teaching, his
heart ﬁlled with faith and delight, Cunda said to the World-honored One,

104

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

“May your holiness accept my invitation to the next day’s meal.” Thereupon
the Buddha accepted [Cunda’s offer by] remaining silent.
Having noted that the Buddha had accepted his request, Cunda rose from
his seat, and after venerating the Buddha, he returned home. During the night
he prepared various provisions consisting of rice and other food for the morning meal. The following day, at the proper time [after the announcement:]
“May the Buddha be ready,” the World-honored One donned his saṃghāṭī
robe and, with his almsbowl in hand, surrounded by the host of bhikṣus,
arrived at the house and took his seat in the prepared position.
Thereupon, Cunda set forth food and drink, offering them to the Buddha
and the members of the sangha. He had separately cooked mushrooms grown
on the roots of a sandal tree (sūkara-maddava),19 known as a rare delicacy,
and offered this dish only to the World-honored One. The Buddha said to
Cunda, “Refrain from serving this food to the bhikṣus.” As instructed, Cunda
did not serve that food to the bhikṣus. Then an elderly bhikṣu, who had
renounced family life at a late age, put the remainder of the food onto a separate plate. At that time, having observed that all the bhikṣus had ﬁnished
the meal, Cunda removed the food vessels and served water. Thereupon, he
asked the Buddha in verse:
May I proffer my question, O Holiness,
Possessor of great wisdom, perfectly enlightened,
Most Honorable among Humans,
Unrivaled leader and charioteer of the truth?
How many kinds of śramaṇas are there in this world, sir?

At that time the World-honored One also replied in verse:

As to your question, I would say,
In general there are four.
But their goals vary and are not identical;
These you must distinguish for yourself.
First, those who excel in the practice of the path;
Second, those who excel in expounding the meaning of the path;
Third, those who rely on the path for living;
Fourth, those who do bad things in the name of the path.

105

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

[Now, what are these four?]
One who overcomes the thorns of love and
Affection for familial relations and
Enters nirvana with no obstacle whatsoever,
He is beyond the realm of heavenly beings—
This is the śramaṇa who excels in the practice of the path.
One who excels in understanding
The primary meaning of transcendence and
Is spotless in expounding the path,
[And] with friendly love and compassion
Dissolves doubts from people’s minds—
This is the śramaṇa who excels in expounding the path.
One who excels in propagating the words of the Dharma and
Living his life in reliance upon the path,
[And who] yearns from a distance
For the place of total freedom from deﬁlement—
This is the śramaṇa who lives his life in reliance upon the path.
One who is crooked within but clean in [outward] appearance,
Fraudulent, without sincerity,
This is the śramaṇa
Who does wrong things in the name of the path.
Why, however, with good and bad together,
Purity and impurity intermixed, both looking alike,
Should all appear agreeable externally,
Just as copper within and gold coating without?
Looking at such a fake
Ordinary people wrongly regard him as a disciple
Endowed with holy insight.
But, [I say,] the remaining disciples
Are not necessarily like that false one.
[Therefore,] do not forsake [your] faith in them.
Even alone, a single bhikṣu (or a host of bhikṣus) can uphold
The standard of the sangha.
While [one who is] muddy within yet clean externally
May cover up fraudulence externally and

18c

106

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

Hide recklessness within.
[Therefore], by merely seeing the external appearance,
One should not be drawn toward anyone
Trusting them without caution.
Because even if some
Do not leave any trace of external wickedness,
They may retain recklessness within.

At that time, taking a small seat with him, Cunda approached and sat
before the Buddha. The Buddha began to teach the Dharma and, having thus
beneﬁted and delighted [Cunda], he left the house, surrounded by the host
of bhikṣus. On the roadway the Buddha stopped under a tree and said to
Ānanda, “My shoulder pain is pressing me. Spread my sitting cloth on the
ground.”
[Ānanda] answered, “Yes, sir,” at once spread the sitting cloth, and the
World-honored One took his seat on it. Then Ānanda spread his small sitting
cloth and sat before the Buddha. The Buddha said to him: “Have you noticed
any appearance of regret in Cunda? If he has a sense of regret, what do you
think caused it?” Ānanda said to the Buddha:
[It is probably] because Cunda, despite his charitable conduct, may not
acquire merit, sir. The reason is that at his place the Tathāgata received
his last food, which may be a further cause of ﬁnal nirvana, sir.

The Buddha warned Ānanda:

Do not speak like that. Cunda will soon acquire great beneﬁt and
longevity, a good complexion and physical strength, enjoy great fame,
and acquire wealth and treasures. When he dies he will be born in
heaven and will be able to obtain whatever he wishes. Why? Because
there is no difference in merit between one who offers food at the time
of the initial enlightenment of the Buddha and one who offers food at
the time of his ﬁnal nirvana. Go see Cunda and tell him:
O Cunda, I have closely heard from the Buddha, and closely received
the teaching from the Buddha. O Cunda, because you have offered
food to the Buddha you will acquire great beneﬁt and great reward.

107

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

Thereupon, as instructed by the Buddha, Ānanda visited Cunda and said
to him:

O Cunda, I have closely heard from the Buddha, and closely received
the teaching from the Buddha. O Cunda, because you have offered
food to the Buddha you will acquire great beneﬁt and great reward.
The reason is that there is no difference in merit between one who
offers food at the time of the [Buddha’s] initial enlightenment and one
who offers food at the time of his ﬁnal nirvana.

(The narrative continues in verse:)

19a

After offering food [to the Tathāgata] at his house,
Cunda heard for the ﬁrst time
That the illness of the Tathāgata had become serious, and
That his life was about to end.
Although his illness worsened
After eating the sandal tree mushrooms,
The Buddha, bearing his illness,
Continued, step by step,
On the road toward the town of Kuśinagara.

At that time, the World-honored One rose from his seat and walked around
by himself for a while. When he arrived under a tree, he again said to Ānanda,
“My shoulder pain is pressing me. Spread my sitting cloth.”

Ānanda at once spread [the sitting cloth] and the Tathāgata took his seat
on it to catch his breath. Ānanda venerated [the Buddha] and then sat to one
side.
Passing by was a [former] lay disciple, Ālāra Kālāma20 Pukkusa by name,
who was on the way from the town of Kuśinagara to Pāvā. He saw the Buddha
resting under a tree, with his handsome appearance and calm senses and
mind, restrained in sublime quiescence, like a great dragon in transparent
water, pure and spotless. Pukkusa was delighted, and with good intent arising
in his heart he approached the Buddha. After venerating him [by touching
his forehead to the Buddha’s feet], Pukkusa withdrew to sit at one side and
said to the Buddha:

108

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

O World-honored One, whoever has renounced family life is remarkable
because he stays in a place pure and clean, and seeks the abode of happiness and transcendence. Even if ﬁve hundred oxcarts were to pass
by before him, such an ascetic would neither see nor hear them. My
teacher was once silently sitting under a tree by the roadside between
the two towns of Kuśinagara and Pāvā. Then ﬁve hundred carts passed
before him. Despite the loud noise of the carts, though awake, he did
not hear any of the noise created by the carts, sir. At that time, a man
came and asked him, “Did you see the carts that passed by here a short
time ago, sir?” My teacher replied, “No, I did not see them.” Again he
asked, “Did you hear the noise, sir?” [The teacher replied,] “No, I did
not hear it.” So the man asked once again, “At that time were you here
or somewhere else, sir?” My teacher replied, “I was here.” [The man]
then asked, “Were you awake at the time, sir?” He replied, “Yes, I was
awake.” Again, the man questioned him, “Were you awake or were
you asleep, sir?” He replied, “I was not asleep.” The questioner silently
thought to himself, “This is marvelous; when this ascetic was in his
concentration, even though fully awake he did not hear any of the loud
noise of the carts.” He then said to my teacher, “A short while ago, ﬁve
hundred carts passed by on this road, sir. But you did not hear anything,
even when the carts shook [the ground] loudly. How much less would
you be able to hear anything other than that noise.” Then, giving greetings
to my teacher and with a delighted heart, the man departed, sir.

The Buddha said to Pukkusa:

I shall now question you; answer me as you like. Which of the two do
you think is more difﬁcult: While awake, not hearing anything of the
multiple carts passing by, or not hearing anything when lightning and
thunder shake the ground?

Pukkusa replied:

Even tens of thousands of carts cannot match the loud noise made by
thunder and lightning. It is not so difﬁcult for an ascetic to not hear
the noise of carts as [compared to] not hearing thunder and lightning,

109

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

sir. When thunder and lightning shake the ground, not hearing that
sound is deﬁnitely far more difﬁcult, sir.

The Buddha said to Pukkusa:

Once, while visiting the village of Ātumā, I stayed in a grass-thatched
abode. Ominous clouds arose, accompanying a storm of some magnitude.
Thunder and lightning shook [the entire area] and mortally struck two
brother farmers and their four oxen. Many people gathered because of
this [unfortunate] event. At that time, I was outside the abode, engaged
in a meditative walk, roaming [the ﬁeld]. A man left the gathering and,
after venerating [me] by bowing his forehead toward my feet, began to
walk along with me. I was aware of a person at my side and asked him,
“What are those people that are gathered there doing?” The man asked
me, “Where were you a little while ago, sir? Were you awake or asleep?”
I answered, “When I am walking like this, I am certainly not asleep.”
The man was again impressed and exclaimed to himself, “This is marvelous! When one acquires concentration he becomes like the Buddha,
who, even though awake, hears nothing when in total quiescence, even
as thunder and lightning shake the entire sky and earth with a resounding
noise.” Then he said to [me], “A short while ago ominous clouds arose,
accompanying a storm of some magnitude. Thunder and lightning shook
with tremendous noise and struck two brother farmers and their four
oxen, killing them. Many people have gathered here because of that
event, sir. [But I now realize that] this [concentration] is the right place,
sir.” This man, with joy in his heart, was delighted with the Dharma
and, after venerating [me], went on his way.

19b

At that time Pukkusa took up two golden garments of extraordinary value,
worth a hundred thousand [cash], and rose [from his seat]. Kneeling respectfully with palms joined together, he said to the Buddha, “May I present these
two garments to the World-honored One as a gift, sir. May your holiness
accept this gift.”
The Buddha said to Pukkusa, “You should dedicate one garment to me
and the other to Ānanda.” Then, following that advice, Pukkusa presented
one [garment] to the Tathāgata and the other to Ānanda as gifts. The Buddha

110

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

accepted it out of compassion. Then Pukkusa, having venerated the Buddha,
stayed to one side. The Buddha began to teach the Dharma, encouraging, beneﬁting, and delighting him by expounding upon the doctrines of (1) charity,
(2) morality, (3) rebirth in heaven, (4) abandoning unclean and impure desires
as a great danger, (5) determining that any ongoing deﬁlement from passion
is an obstacle, and (6) the commendability and necessity of the path of distancing oneself from both suffering and pleasure as the best [step toward the
spiritual goal].
The Buddha then observed that Pukkusa’s mind was ﬁlled with joy, had
become receptive without hindrance, and was ready to be educated. In accordance with the rule of all buddhas, he taught Pukkusa (1) the doctrine of the
noble truth of suffering and the remaining three truths: (2) the truth of the cause
of suffering, (3) the truth of the cessation of suffering, and (4) the truth of the
path of cessation. At that time, Pukkusa, with pure and genuine faith, like a
white cloth that can easily be dyed any color, immediately in that single session
[at his seat] removed himself from all deﬁlement and acquired genuine insight
into the nature of the Dharma; realized the Dharma as he envisioned it; became
determined to abide in the right path, without falling into any evil course; and
thus attained the state of fearlessness. He then said to the Buddha:
Now, I humbly take refuge in the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha. May
your holiness grant me permission to become a lay devotee. From now
on until my life ends, I will not harm life, steal, indulge in sexual misconduct, lie, or ingest intoxicants. May your holiness grant me permission to become a lay devotee.

Again he said to the Buddha:

If your holiness should visit or sojourn in Pāvā, may you pass by the
poverty-stricken houses and proceed directly to my residence. Whatever
I have in my house, food and drink, couch and bed, garment and cloth,
hot water and medicine, will be ready for use in the service of the
World-honored One. If your holiness accepts my humble charity, my
household will be blessed, becoming safe and peaceful, sir.

The Buddha said, “What you have said is good.” At that time, the Worldhonored One [further] taught the Dharma to Pukkusa, encouraging, beneﬁting,

111

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

19c

and delighting him. Pukkusa stood, venerated the Buddha by bowing his
forehead to his feet, and departed with delight in his heart.
Not long after Pukkusa left, Ānanda presented the golden garment to the
Tathāgata, and the Tathāgata accepted it for Ānanda’s sake, and put it on. At
that moment, in his whole expression the World-honored One looked most
composed, his aura of authority as expansive as ever, his senses pure and
immaculate, and his complexion harmoniously delightful. Observing this,
Ānanda remained silent and thought to himself:
It has been twenty-ﬁve years since I began to serve the Buddha as his
personal attendant, but I have never before seen him with such a wonderful appearance, emitting a shining ray of light like that of gold.

At once Ānanda stood up and, kneeling with his right knee on the ground
and both palms joined together, said to the Buddha:

During the twenty-ﬁve years in which I have attended your holiness,
I have never seen the Buddha’s complexion so bright and golden as it
is now, sir. I do not know why this is so. May your holiness explain to
me why this is so?

The Buddha said to Ānanda:

There are two reasons why the complexion of the Tathāgata becomes
especially different from its usual [aspect]. First, it happens when the
Buddha realizes perfect enlightenment for the ﬁrst time; second, it happens when the Buddha decides to take the course of ﬁnal nirvana, forsaking his span of life. O Ānanda, in these two situations, such a bright
complexion becomes prominent and distinct from the ordinary.

At that time, the World-honored One continued in verse:
The golden robe, delightful its reﬂection,
Fine and soft to the touch, clean and fresh,
Pukkusa offered it to the World-honored One,
He, emitting from the forehead
A ray as white as snow.

112

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

The Buddha said to Ānanda, “I feel thirsty. I need water. Please go and
fetch some.” Ānanda replied:

A while ago, ﬁve hundred carriages crossed the river upstream, causing
the water to become muddy, and it has not returned to its normal transparency, sir. It can be used for washing the feet but not for drinking, sir.

In this manner, the Buddha asked him three times, “O Ānanda, please go
and fetch water.” Ānanda replied: “Not too far from here there is a river called
Kakuṭṭhā, the water of which is clean and cool and can be used for drinking
as well as for bathing, sir.” Then a spirit that resided in the Himalaya mountains,
a believer in the Buddhist path, immediately scooped up clean water of eight
qualities with a bowl and offered it to the World-honored One. With compassion, the Buddha received [the water] and uttered the following verses:
In eight kinds of voice,
The Buddha asked Ānanda to fetch water, saying:
“I am thirsty. Now I wish to drink water.”
Having ﬁnished drinking the water,
He reached Kuśinagara.
His soft, pleasant voice and
The meaning of what he spoke
Equally pleased the minds of the people.
Attending the Buddha closely,
Ānanda said to the World-honored One:
“In the distance, ﬁve hundred carts entered the stream and
Crossed the river to the yonder shore,
Making its water muddy and unsanitary for drinking.
The Kakuṭṭhā River is not far from here.
Its water is beautiful, clean, and cool.
It is better to drink water there and
Also to bathe your body in that river.”
A spirit residing in the Himalaya
Fetched water for the Tathāgata.
Having ﬁnished it, the World-honored One
Regained his strength and

113

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

Walked with gait of a lion.
In the waters [of that river] a dragon abides,
[The water is] clear and transparent,
Spotless, with no speck of dust.
With his holy appearance resembling [in grandeur] the Himalayas,
The World-honored One crossed the Kakuṭṭhā River
In peace and tranquility.

20a

At that time, the World-honored One crossed the Kakuṭṭhā River and,
after drinking water and bathing himself, he went on with the host of bhikṣus.
On the way, the World-honored One wished to rest and stopped under a tree.
He asked [Venerable] Cundaka, “Take out the saṃghāṭī robe, fold it into four
layers, and spread it on the ground. I must rest as my back pain presses me.”
As instructed, Cundaka spread out the robe and the Buddha took his seat
upon it. Having venerated the Buddha, Cundaka remained at one side and
then said to the Buddha, “I wish to take the course of entering nirvana, sir.”
The Buddha said to him, “You know it is the right time.” Thereupon Cundaka
entered ﬁnal nirvana in the presence of the Buddha. At that time the Buddha
uttered these verses:
The Kakuṭṭhā River where the Buddha arrived
Was clean, with no mud whatsoever.
After bathing his body in the water,
The Most Honorable among Humans
Crossed the river to the yonder shore and
Said to Cundaka, who was leading the group of bhikṣus:
“I say that I now feel my body is exceedingly exhausted.
Spread the cloth on the ground.”
Folding up the robe into four layers,
Cundaka spread it on the ground.
When the Tathāgata had rested [and caught] his breath,
Cundaka, seated before him, said to the Buddha:
“May I take the course of entering nirvana, sir.
Now I am ready to reach the place
Where there is neither love nor hate,
The yonder ocean, immeasurably meritorious.”

114

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

The [Tathāgata,] highest among humans,
Replied to him:
“You have done what should be done.
Now is the right time.”
[Having] obtained his permission,
Cundaka doubled his exertion in concentration and
Thus accomplished total cessation.
He was gone, like a ﬂame that has been extinguished.

Thereupon, Ānanda stood up from his seat, stepped forward, and enquired
of the Buddha, “How should the funeral rite be conducted after the nirvana
of the Buddha, sir?” The Buddha replied, “You should instead be quietly
concerned with what you should accomplish [in your religious life]. Leave
the matter to the lay devotees who themselves wish to conduct it.” Ānanda,
however, asked him again three times, “How should the funeral rite be conducted after the nirvana of the Buddha, sir?” The Buddha replied,
If you wish to know the funeral rite for the Buddha, you should conduct
it exactly as you would conduct the rite for a universal ruler.

Ānanda again asked, “How should the funeral rite for the universal ruler
be conducted, sir?” The Buddha said to Ānanda:

First, you should bathe the body in warm scented water, cover the
entire body with new cotton cloth, wrap it in a cloth equally as long
as ﬁve hundred pairs of garments, place the body within a golden cofﬁn,
pour sesame oil over it, place the golden cofﬁn inside a second, larger
iron vault, cover it with a sandalwood vault, cover that vault with a
thick pile of a various incense, and then cremate the entire thing. After
retrieving the ashes, build a commemorative tower (stupa) or shrine
at each major crossroads and hang a picture on a rock pillar set before
it, so as to enable the citizens of the country who are passing on the
roads to view the towers of the universal ruler of the law, [thereby]
causing a sense of affection to arise in their hearts toward his benevolent
rule, thus bringing about a beneﬁcial inﬂuence upon the populace.
O Ānanda, if you wish to conduct the funeral rite for me, you should
bathe my body with warm scented water, cover the entire body with

115

20b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

new cotton cloth, wrap it in a cloth equally as long as ﬁve hundred
pairs of garments, place the body within a golden cofﬁn, pour sesame
oil over it, place the golden cofﬁn inside a second, larger iron vault,
cover it with a sandalwood vault, cover that vault with a thick pile of
various incense, and then cremate the entire thing. After retrieving my
ashes, build a commemorative tower or shrine at each major crossroads
and hang my picture on a rock pillar set before it, so as to enable whoever passes on the road to view the Buddha’s tower, refreshing his
sense of affectionate regard for the religious deed accomplished by the
Tathāgata, and encouraging him to strive for his own goal of happiness
in life when born into this world, and to obtain the opportunity to be
reborn in heaven when he dies.

Then the World-honored One contemplated the matter once more and
uttered the following verses:
Ānanda stood up from his seat, and
Kneeling down respectfully,
Said to the World-honored One:
“After the nirvana of the Tathāgata,
How should his funeral rite be conducted?”
[The Buddha replied:]
“O Ānanda, you should instead be quietly concerned
With what you should accomplish in life.
Leave the matter to the lay devotees
Who themselves wish to conduct it.”
Then, because Ānanda again
Repeated his enquiry three times,
The Buddha thus replied,
Explaining the funeral rite of the universal ruler.
“In conducting the funeral rite for the Tathāgata,
One should wrap his body with a long garment cloth,
Place it in the cofﬁn, and then in a second vault.
[After cremation,] erect a commemorative tower or shrine
At every major crossroads
So as to beneﬁt sentient beings.

116

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

Whoever comes to venerate and
Pay respect to the tower
Will acquire immeasurable merit.

The Buddha said to Ānanda,

There are four kinds of [supreme] personalities in the world, for whom
a commemorative tower (stupa) should be erected, and for whom offerings of incense, ﬂowers, images, canopies, song and dance, and food
should be made. What are these four? They are, ﬁrst, the Tathāgata,
for whom the commemorative tower should be erected; second, the
solitary buddha (pratyekabuddha); third, the saintly disciple (śrāvaka);
and fourth, the universal ruler (cakravartin). These are the four kinds
of personalities for whom the commemorative tower should be erected,
and the rite of offering incense, ﬂowers, images, canopies, song and
dance, and food should be conducted.

At that time, the World-honored One continued in verse:

The Buddha should be commemorated
In the primary tower, and
Then follow the pratyekabuddha,
The śrāvaka buddha, and
The universal ruler (cakravartin).
For these four towers,
Administered under the authority of the primary one,
There should be conducted offering rites.
The Tathāgata referred thus to the stupas of the Buddha,
The pratyekabuddha, the śrāvaka buddha, and
The universal ruler (cakravartin).

At that time, the World-honored One said to Ānanda, “Let us go to the
town of Kuśinagara, to the spot between two śāla trees.” Replying, “Yes,
sir,” Ānanda together with the host of bhikṣus surrounded him and proceeded
on the road. Then a brāhmaṇa who happened to be on the road between the
towns of Pāvā and Kuśinagara saw the World-honored One from a distance
and observed his handsome appearance, senses well restrained in sublime

117

20c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

quiescence. Delighted in heart and with good intent, he approached the
Buddha and, after greeting him, withdrew to one side and said to him:

O World-honored One, the village of my residence is not too far from
this place. May I request, O Gautama, that you sojourn overnight
there, and after partaking of the morning meal proceed to the town of
Kuśinagara.

The Buddha replied to the brāhmaṇa, “May you ask me no more. Your
offering has already been made.” The brāhmaṇa, however, respectfully repeated
his request three times. The Buddha replied as before, but advised the brāhmaṇa, “Ānanda is coming along behind me. Speak to him about your wish.”
Thereupon, as instructed, the brāhmaṇa immediately went to Ānanda. After
greeting him with a bow, he withdrew to one side and said to him:

The village of my residence is not far from here. I humbly wish that
Gautama accept my invitation to visit there for my offering. After the
morning meal, his holiness may proceed to the town of Kuśinagara.

Ānanda replied, “Ask no more. O brāhmaṇa, your offering has already
been fully appreciated.” The brāhmaṇa, however, again respectfully repeated
his invitation [for a second and] third time. Ānanda replied:
The weather is already hot, and the village is too far from the road.
Since the World-honored One is exhausted, it is no longer feasible to
[continue to ask] him about it.

At that time, the World-honored One envisioned what was going on and
uttered the following verse:
One who is endowed
With eyes pure and genuine
Proceeded on the road,
With exceeding fatigue,
Toward the pair of śāla trees.
A brāhmaṇa saw the Buddha from a distance;
Quickly he approached him.
Having greeted him with a bow, the brāhmaṇa said:

118

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

“The village of my residence is in this neighborhood.
With compassion, may your holiness come to stay overnight.
I shall set forth the next day’s meal in the morning.
Thereafter, may your holiness take the course toward town.”
[The Buddha said:]
“O brāhmaṇa, my body is exhausted.
It is too far for me to go that way.
My close attendant is coming behind.
May you go and speak to him.”
As instructed, the brāhmaṇa
Came to Ānanda at once and
Said to him:
“I just invited the Buddha to come to my village, and
After the next day’s meal
Leave upon his journey, sir.”
Ānanda said:
“Please, ask no more.
The weather is already hot, and
It is not feasible for the World-honored One
To visit your residence.”
The brāhmaṇa repeated his wish three times, but in vain.
[The Buddha said:]
“No one is free from worry and afﬂiction,
Nor can he be satisﬁed or at ease,
Ah! With these conditioned elements (saṃskṛta-dharmas) so
evanescent,
Never remaining unchanged.
Now, at the spot between the pair of śāla trees,
I shall extinguish this body
Though already free from deﬁlement (anāsrava-kāya).
The Buddha, pratyekabuddha, śrāvaka,
All equally return to this nirvana,
Because there is no other choice
With the way in which the world is impermanent
Like a forest ablaze with ﬁre.

21a

119

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

At that time, having reached the town of Kuśinagara, the World-honored
One proceeded through the original land of the Mallan clanspeople toward
the pair of śāla trees, and he instructed Ānanda:

Set up my bedding between the pair of śāla trees, with my head to the
north and facing toward the west. For my teaching will spread toward
the north and ﬂourish there for some time.

With his answer, Ānanda spread the sitting cloth on the ground with the
head toward the north. At that time, the World-honored One folded his
saṃghāṭī robe into four layers by himself, lay down on his right side, and
placed his left foot on top of the right, like a lion. Then the tree spirits abiding
between the twin śāla trees, with their ﬁrm faith in the Buddha, scattered
ﬂowers that were blooming out of season. At that moment the World-honored
One said to Ānanda: “These spirits of the twin śāla trees made an offering
of ﬂowers blooming out of season. This is not a true offering for the Tathāgata,
however.” Ānanda enquired, “What kind of things are regarded as true offerings for the Tathāgata, sir?” [The Buddha] answered, “When a person receives
the Dharma well and practices it well, this is regarded as a true offering for
the Tathāgata.” Having contemplated on the meaning of this, the Buddha
uttered the following verses:
The Buddha laid himself down
Between the twin śāla trees
With his mind undisturbed.
The tree spirits, with their minds pure and genuine,
Scattered ﬂowers upon the Buddha.
Ānanda enquired of the Buddha:
“What is a true offering?’
[The Buddha replied:]
“Having received the Dharma well, and
Practiced it well,
One offers the ﬂower of enlightenment.
Even scattering the purplish-golden ﬂower garlands
Over the Buddha does not make a true offering.
Only when one realizes the insight of nonself

120

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

With the ﬁve aggregates,
This is the best, primary offering.”

At that time, Venerable Upavāna was sitting before the Buddha, fanning
him. The Buddha said to him, “Upavāna, leave the place where you are and
make that space open.” Then Ānanda quietly thought to himself:

Upavāna has always been by the Buddha’s side, serving him with whatever he needed. He is so devoted to the Tathāgata that he never tires
of looking at him. Now this is the Buddha’s last moment; he should
be permitted to see his last moment. The Buddha, however, asks him
to leave his position. What is his reason for doing that?

Thinking thus, Ānanda rearranged his robe, proceeded forward, and said
to the Buddha:

Upavāna has always been by the Buddha’s side and has served your
holiness with whatever was needed. He is so devoted to the Tathāgata
that he never tires of looking at [you]. Now it is your holiness’ last
moment; he should be allowed to attend this moment. Yet your holiness
asks him to withdraw from his position. What is your holiness’ reason
for doing so, sir?

The Buddha said to Ānanda:

Beyond this town of Kuśinagara, there are regions within the range of
a distance of twelve yojanas where great distinguished spirits reside
in concentration, leaving no empty space. These spirits equally wish
that [Upavāna] should not stand before the Buddha because they wish
to witness my last moment, but this monk’s eminence in authority and
virtue and his luminous body obstruct their vision and direct access
for their veneration and offerings. O Ānanda, for this reason I have
asked him to withdraw from in front of me.

Ānanda said to the Buddha:

What kind of merit has this honorable bhikṣu accumulated, and also
what kind of discipline has he practiced, for which he has realized an
aura of authority and virtue such as that, sir?

121

21b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

The Buddha replied to Ānanda:

During the period ninety-one eons ago, there appeared a buddha in this
world, Vipaśyin by name. This bhikṣu then, with delight in his heart,
held a grass torch to illuminate the commemorative tower of that
buddha. Because of this deed, now his aura of authority and virtue
reaches the twenty-eighth level of the heavens, making the gods of the
lower heavens unable to compete with him in splendor.

At that time, Ānanda rose from his seat, rearranged his robe to expose his
right shoulder, respectfully knelt with his right knee on the ground, and, with
his palms joined together, said to the Buddha:

May the World-honored One refrain from taking the course of entering
nirvana in this region near a small, rustic town. Why, sir? There are
many large capitals elsewhere—Campā, Vaiśālī, Rājagṛha, Vṛji, Śrāvastī,
Kapilavastu, and Vārāṇasī, sir. In those centers there are many people
and clanspeople who cherish their faith in the Buddha’s teaching
(Dharma). After the nirvana of the Buddha, they surely will enshrine
the ashes most respectfully and with veneration, sir.

The Buddha replied:

Speak no more. You should not produce prejudice. Nor should you
regard this region as [merely] rustic countryside. Why is this so?
Once upon a time, this country had a king, Mahāsudarśana by name.
At that time this town was called Kuśavatī and it was that great king’s
capital, one hundred twenty miles in length and seventy miles wide. At
that time, the crops and rice harvests were abundant, the citizens were
prosperous, and the city was protected by seven rings of moats and
seven levels of railings as well. Records were inscribed on iron plates
[hung on the railings], and metallic bells were hung between them. The
depth of the city wall was twenty-four feet (below the ground) and the
height was ninety-six feet from the ground. The height of the tower
cloister was a further ninety-six feet above that building, and the circumference of its main pillars was twenty-four feet. The four sides of
the city were embellished with four precious materials, such as a golden

122

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

wall endowed with a silver gate [on the ﬁrst side]; a silver wall endowed
with a golden gate [on the second]; a lapis lazuli wall endowed with a
quartz gate [on the third]; and a quartz wall endowed with a lapis lazuli
gate [on the fourth side]. The railings inlaid in these four sides were
also embellished with the same four precious materials. To the golden
tower were attached silver bells, to the silver tower were attached golden
bells, while the seven moats were ﬁlled with all kinds of lotus ﬂowers:
blue, pink, red, and white. Golden sands spread in the depths of the
water revealed the bottom of the moats, while palm trees were planted
on those narrow banks. These golden palm trees bore leaves, ﬂowers
and fruits made of silver; the silver palm trees bore leaves, ﬂowers, and
fruits made of gold; likewise, the palm trees made of quartz bore ﬂowers
and fruits made of lapis lazuli, while the lapis lazuli palm trees bore
ﬂowers, and fruits made of quartz. Between these palm trees there were
a number of bathing ponds with clean streams, deep pools, all pure and
spotless, demarcated by tiles studded with the four precious materials.
There were golden stairways with silver steps, silver stairways with
golden steps, and lapis lazuli stairways with golden steps. The steps of
some lapis lazuli stairways were inlaid with quartz, while the steps of
some quartz stairways were inlaid with lapis lazuli. The railings that surrounded the city were continuous, and within the city there grew palm
trees here and there. The golden palms bore leaves, ﬂowers, and fruits
made of silver; the silver palms bore leaves, ﬂowers, and fruits made of
gold; the quartz trees bore ﬂowers and fruits made of lapis lazuli; the
lapis lazuli trees bore ﬂowers and fruits made of quartz. Between these
trees there were placed four kinds of ponds [each respectively] ﬁlled
with four kinds of lotus ﬂowers.
The streets and houses were neatly aligned, and the town blocks
were well organized with parallel streets running horizontally as well
as vertically. Quantities of ﬂowers scattered by the wind fell upon the
streets. A mild breeze arose four times [daily], passing through these
trees, creating soft sounds like those of heavenly music. The people
of this country, male or female, adult or child, played among these
trees and enjoyed their games.

123

21c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

In that country ten kinds of sounds were always heard, [those produced by:] (1) a conch shell, (2) a drum, (3) a hand drum, (4) singing,
(5) dancing, (6) musical instruments such as ﬂutes, (7) elephants, (8)
horses, (9) carriages, and (10) gatherings in which people were drinking,
eating, joking, and laughing.
At that time, King Mahāsudarśana was endowed with seven precious
treasures and enjoyed four blessings. He was the universal ruler of all
four quarters of the earth under the sky. What are these seven treasures?
They are: (1) the golden wheel, (2) the white elephant, (3) the darkblue horse, (4) the divine gem, (5) the jadelike queen, (6) the householder, (7) the military commander. The following was the way in
which the universal ruler managed to use his ﬁrst treasure, the golden
wheel. The king bathed in scented water on the full moon day, the ﬁfteenth of the month, and ascended to the top of a pavilion surrounded
by the palace ladies. The sacred wheel then appeared of its own accord
before the king, with a thousand spokes of rich color and splendor. It
was built by a heavenly master and did not belong to the human world.
Made of genuine gold, it had a diameter of thirty-two feet.
King Mahāsudarśana quietly thought to himself:
I once heard from my virtuous elders the following words: “When
a king of the kṣatriya race, anointed on his head for the throne, takes
a scented bath on the full moon day, the ﬁfteenth of the month, and
ascends to the top of the pavilion surrounded by the palace ladies,
then at that moment the golden wheel is supposed to appear before
him of its own accord. The wheel has a thousand spokes of rich
color and splendor. It is built by a heavenly master and does not
belong to this world. It is made of genuine gold and has a diameter
of thirty-two feet. Thereupon, the king is called the cakravartin,
‘one who turns the sacred wheel.’”
Now I see this wheel before me, but who knows if this shall
really work. I should now test this treasured wheel.

Then King Mahāsudarśana called the four divisions of the army to
assemble. He faced the golden wheel directly and, rearranging his garment to expose his right shoulder and kneeling with his right knee on

124

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

the ground, he rubbed the wheel with his right hand and spoke to the
wheel: “Let the wheel turn itself toward the east, turning as it should,
without losing regularity.” The wheel at once began to roll toward the
east. Then King Mahāsudarśana followed after the wheel leading the
four divisions of his army. When the golden wheel was turning forward,
the four guardian gods were in charge of guiding it. Wherever the wheel
stopped, the king stopped his chariot.
At that time, having seen the great king approaching, the rulers of
the small countries in the eastern regions prepared a golden bowl ﬁlled
with silver grains and a silver bowl ﬁlled with golden grains, stepped
forward toward the king, and, with heads bowed, said to him:
Welcome, great king. The eastern countries are now blessed with
an abundance of harvests and produce, the people are prosperous,
the nature of the populace is friendly and harmonious, and all are
ﬁlial to their parents and loyal to their rulers. O holy ruler, your
majesty is recommended to govern these lands through ofﬁces established here. We shall closely attend your majesty and will execute
your commands as you wish, sir.

At that time, King Mahāsudarśana replied to the rulers of the small
countries:
Enough, dear wise kings, your offerings have already been appreciated by me. Your kingships rule these countries on the basis of
the right Dharma, so that neither injustice nor wrong action can take
place in your countries. I say that these two principles embody my
governance.

After listening to his exhortation, the kings of the small countries then
accompanied him on his inspection tour until they reached the eastern
ocean.
Next, the great king proceeded toward the south, then to the west,
and then to the north; in whichever direction the wheel rolled, the [king
and his army] followed. The kings of the small countries in these regions
all abnegated their dominions for the sake of the great ruler, just as the
eastern rulers had done.

125

22a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

At that time, King Mahāsudarśana, having already made a complete
round of the four oceans by following the golden wheel, educated the
populace in the path of morality, provided security in their lives, and
then returned to his own country. The golden wheel continued to hover
in midair above the palace gate. Rejoicing by dancing and leaping, King
Mahāsudarśana said, “This treasure, the golden wheel, is truly my blessing. Now I am truly the universal ruler who turns this sacred wheel.”
This is called the realization of the ﬁrst treasure, the golden wheel.
Next, the following describes how the king was able to use his second treasure, the white elephant. When King Mahāsudarśana was seated
in the main hall of the palace early in the morning, the white elephant
of its own accord suddenly appeared before him. The color of its hair
was pure white, the seven parts of its body (four feet, two shoulders,
and neck) were equally developed, and it could ﬂy in midair. The neck
had mixed colors, the six tusks were delicate and studded with real
gold pieces. Then, having seen the elephant, the king thought to himself,
“This elephant is supposed to be wise and good- natured. If it is well
trained, it can serve me in riding.” He immediately tried to see if it
could be trained, and it revealed a capacity ﬁt for all training. Then,
wishing to take his ﬁrst ride, King Sudarśana mounted the elephant,
went out of the capital in the morning, made a round of all four oceans,
and by breakfast time he had already returned to his palace. Then,
rejoicing by dancing and leaping, the King Sudarśana said, “This white
elephant is truly my blessing. Now I am truly the universal ruler who
turns the sacred wheel.” This is called the realization of the second
treasure, the white elephant.
Next, the following describes how the king was able to use his third
treasure, the horse. King Sudarśana was seated at the main hall early
in the morning when of its own accord the horse suddenly appeared
before him. Its color was dark blue, but it had a long mane and tail,
red in color. Its head and neck were like those of an elephant, and it
could ﬂy in midair. Having seen the treasured horse, the king thought
to himself, “This horse is supposed to be wise and good-natured. If it
is well trained, it can serve as my steed.” He immediately tried to see
if it could be trained, ﬁnding that it revealed a capacity ﬁt for all training.

126

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

Then, wishing to take his ﬁrst ride, King Sudarśana mounted the horse,
went out of the capital in the morning, made a round of all four oceans,
and by breakfast time he had already returned to his palace. Then,
rejoicing by dancing and leaping, King Sudarśana said, “This darkblue horse is indeed my blessing. I am now truly the universal ruler
who turns the sacred wheel.” This is called the realization of the third
treasure, the dark-blue horse.
Next, the following describes how the king was able to use his fourth
treasure, the divine gem. King Sudarśana was seated at the main hall
early in the morning when of its own accord the divine gem suddenly
appeared before him. The quality and color of this gem were evident
in its clear transparency and purity. Having seen the divine gem, King
Sudarśana thought to himself, “This gem is mysterious and very nice;
it is supposed to be able to illuminate a region as wide as this entire
palace compound when light shines upon it.” Wishing to test the gem
himself, King Sudarśana immediately called the four divisions of his
army and placed the gem on top of the ﬂagpole. In the darkness of the
night, he carried the ﬂag pole and went out of the city. The gem emitted
a ray of light that illuminated the entire army, just as if it were daytime.
Then, rejoicing by dancing and leaping, King Sudarśana said, “Now
this treasured gem is truly my blessing. I am truly the universal ruler
who turns the sacred wheel.” This is called the realization of the fourth
treasure, the divine gem.
Next, the following describes how the king was served by his ﬁfth
treasure, the jadelike queen. The treasured queen suddenly appeared
before the king, her complexion well composed, beautiful in appearance,
neither too tall nor too short, neither ﬂeshy nor bony, neither too light
nor too dark, neither too hard nor too soft, her body warm in winter
and cool in summer. The scent of the sandal tree radiated from the
roots of her hair throughout her body and the scent of a blue lotus
emananted from her mouth. Her words and speech were invariably
gentle and her manner was stable; she never failed to awake before the
king or to stay awake until the king fell asleep. As King Sudarśana had
realized purity [by extinguishing deﬁlement] and was totally freed from
attachment, he did not keep her in his mind even for a moment [as an

127

22b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

obstacle]; how much less could he have approached her physically [as
an object of desire]? Rejoicing by dancing and leaping, King Sudarśana
said, “This treasured jadelike queen is indeed my blessing. I am now
truly the universal ruler who turns the sacred wheel.” This is called
the realization of the ﬁfth treasure, the jadelike queen.
Next, the following describes how the king was assisted by his sixth
treasure, the householder. The householder gentleman suddenly
appeared of his own accord before the king, and the storehouses were
automatically ﬁlled with immeasurable riches and treasures. This person
was endowed with special vision due to his past merit; namely, he was
able to see any treasure buried underground, whether or not it belonged
to others. He protected the treasures that belonged to some owners,
while yielding those with no ownership to the king’s treasury. The
householder came to the king and said to him, “O great king, may you
have no worry about the stipend payments. I am able to manage the
funds by myself, sir.”
The king wished to test the gentleman treasurer. He arranged an
excursion on a pleasure boat, and while aboard, the king said to the
treasurer householder, “I need some gold pieces. Provide them to me
at once.” The treasurer replied, “O great king, give me a bit of time,
and I shall go to the shore, sir.” Pressing him further, the king said, “I
cannot stop this boat now. Bring the golden treasure right away.” Having
received the king’s urgent order, the householder kneeled down on the
boat and dipped his right hand into the water. A series of urns ﬁlled
with treasures arose from the water, following his hand upward, just
as insects cling to tree branches. The other treasurers too joined him,
all equally dipping their hands into the water to draw up immeasurable
treasures, and the boat was soon ﬁlled with treasure. The householder
gentleman then asked the king, “Your majesty needed some gold treasure before; how much more do you need, sir?’ Then King Sudarśana
said, “Bring no more treasure. I do not need any more. I only wished
to test your ability. Your service has already been appreciated.” On
hearing the king’s words, the householder returned all the treasures to
the water. Then, rejoicing by dancing and leaping, King Sudarśana
said, “This treasure householder is indeed my blessing. I am now truly

22c

128

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

the universal ruler who turns the sacred wheel.” This is called the realization of the sixth treasure, the householder.
Next, the following describes how the king was assisted by his seventh treasure, the military commander. The military commander, having
excellent knowledge, strategy, valor, and toughness, bright and decisive,
suddenly appeared. He went to King Mahāsudarśana and said to him,
“Great king, may you have no worry, sir, if you should wish to punish
any country. I shall be able to handle the task, sir.” King Sudarśana
then, to test him, immediately called the four divisions of the army and
told the general, “Make the entire army ready for battle. Assemble
those who have not come forth, release those who have already come;
let those who are not well prepared get ready for battle, and release
those who are already well prepared. Let those who still remain in the
assembly to return home, and let those who have already returned stay
in their places.” Then, having heard the king’s words, this military
commander at once assembled those who did not come forth to the
assembly, released those who had already assembled, let those who
were not well prepared get ready, released those who were already prepared, let those who still remained in the assembly to return home, and
let those who had already returned home stay in their places. At that
time, rejoicing by dancing and leaping, King Sudarśana said, “This
treasured military commander is truly my blessing. I am now truly the
universal ruler who turns the sacred wheel.” O Ānanda, this is called
the realization of the seventh treasure by the universal king who turns
the golden wheel.
What are the four kinds of blessings that pertain to the universal
ruler? First, as the universal king, he has longevity and can never meet
with an early death; in this no one can match the king. Second, he has
a strong physical body and never contracts illness; in this no one can
match the king. Third, he has the most handsome appearance; in this
no one can match the king. Fourth, his storehouses are ﬁlled with treasures; in this no one can match the king. The foregoing are the seven
treasures and four blessings that pertain to the universal ruler.
O Ānanda, after a rather long time had passed, King Sudarśana
had his carriage prepared, visited the royal park grove, and said to his

129

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

charioteer, “You should safely return [alone] with this carriage. The
reason is that I must contemplate whether or not the state and the
citizens are safe and will be free from oncoming danger.” The citizens
who happened to see the king on the streets said to his attendant, “Proceed slowly, we wish to see the countenance of the holy ruler.” O
Ānanda, King Sudarśana was concerned about the people as well as
with their material needs, just as a father is concerned about his children.
The people felt affection toward the king as if he was their father. They
made gifts of all kinds of rarities to the king, saying, “May his majesty
accept this” and “May this be of his majesty’s use.” The king replied,
“Bring no more, dear subjects, I have my own treasures. You should
keep these things for yourselves.”
On another occasion, the king thought to himself, “Now I should
build a palace building.” About the same time that this idea came to his
mind, the citizens of the country all said to King Sudarśana, “We wish
now to build a palace building for your majesty, sir.” The king replied,
“Even if I wish to accept your gifts I have enough treasures of my own,
sufﬁcient for building the palace pavilion.” The people, however, further
repeated their wish to the king, “We wish to join in your majesty’s task
of building the palace pavilion, sir.” The king was ﬁnally obliged to
reply, “I shall follow your wish.” As soon as their wish was granted,
the citizens ﬁlled eighty-four thousand carts with gold and brought them
to the capital city, Kuśavatī, to build the Sudharma pavilion.
At that time, the heavenly being (deva) Viśvakarman, master of
architectural building and resident of the second Trāyastriṃśa heaven,
quietly thought to himself, “Only I myself, together with King Sudarśana, could build the Sudharma pavilion on such a grand scale.” O
Ānanda, the god Viśvakarman subsequently constructed the Sudharma
pavilion, ﬁfteen miles in length and seven and a half miles wide, embellished with the four precious materials, with a straight and even foundation, and with seven layers of tiles piled upon each other to make
the stairways. The pillars of this Sudharma pavilion were as many as
eighty-four thousand, consisting of golden pillars with silver beam
supports, silver pillars with golden beam supports, and likewise, lapis
lazuli pillars with quartz beam supports and quartz pillars with lapis

23a

130

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

lazuli beam supports. There were four railings around the pavilion,
made of the four precious materials mentioned before. The four stairways
were also made of the four precious materials. Above the Sudharma
pavilion were built eighty-four thousand towers; each of the golden
towers had a silver door, while each of the silver towers had a golden
door; in similar manner, each of the quartz towers had a lapis lazuli
door, while each of the lapis lazuli towers had a quartz door. Each of
the golden towers was equipped with silver couches, while each of the
silver towers was equipped with golden couches. Each couch was covered with a soft and ﬁne cushion woven of golden thread; the lapis lazuli
and quartz couches were also covered with similar cushions. The brightness of the pavilion was so blinding to viewers’ eyes that it was like the
intense light of the sun, such that no one could look directly at it.
Then King Sudarśana thought to himself, “I should build pools with
palm trees around them on both sides of the pavilion.” The four sides
of the pools were each one yojana long. The king again thought to
himself, “In front of the Sudharma pavilion there should be set the
Dharma pond.” When it was built, each of its four sides were one
yojana long. The water was clean and clear, pure and spotless. The
bottom of the pond was constructed with tiles made of the four kinds
of precious materials as before. A railing was attached around the four
sides of the pond, studded with four kinds of precious materials, such
as gold, silver, quartz, and lapis lazuli. Inside the pond grew varieties
of water grass and all kinds of lotus plants with blue, pink, red, and
white ﬂowers that released exquisitely delicate fragrance in all directions.
The gardens that surrounded the four sides of the pool were also ﬁlled
with varieties of blooming ﬂowers, such as atimuktaka, campaka, pāṭalī,
sumanā, vārṣika, and dhanuṣkari. The pond was looked after by some
caretakers, but if any citizens who passed by the pond wished to bathe
in it they could do so, because it was cool and refreshing. Fruit juice as
well as food were amply provided to anyone who wished to drink or
partake of it, as much as they might desire. Clothing, carriages, horses,
fragrant ﬂowers, riches, and treasures were all available to anyone.
O Ānanda, King Sudarśana had eighty-four thousand elephants,
among which the treasured elephant, decorated with gold and silver

131

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

ornaments on which precious gems were strung, was foremost. He had
eighty-four thousand carriages mounted with bridles made of lion’s
hide, decorated with four precious gems, among which the divine gem
was foremost. He had eighty-four thousand horses, among which the
treasured horse, also decorated with ornaments of gold and silver on
which precious gems were strung, was foremost. He had eighty-four
thousand gems, among which the treasure, the divine gem, was foremost. He had eighty-four thousand women, among whom the treasure
of the jadelike queen was foremost. He had eighty-four thousand householders, among whom the treasure of the householder gentleman was
foremost. He had eighty-four thousand soldiers, among whom the treasure of the military commander was foremost. He had eighty-four thousand cities, among which Kuśavatī was foremost. He had eighty-four
thousand pavilions, among which the Sudharma pavilion was foremost.
He had eighty-four thousand towers, among which the central tower
was foremost. He had eighty-four thousand couches all made of gold
and silver and various precious stones, which were covered with exquisite cushions and ﬁne and soft spreads. He had eighty-four thousand
million garments, of which those made of hemp, muslin, and cotton
were foremost. He had eighty-four thousand kinds of food, of which
a meal was provided each day, all with different ﬂavors.
O Ānanda, King Sudarśana, riding on the second treasure, the white
elephant, foremost among all his eighty-four thousand elephants, left
his capital in the morning, traveling the entire land under the sky,
making the round of the four oceans, and returning within a short time
to his castle for the morning meal. The king, riding on the third treasure,
the dark-blue horse, foremost among all his eighty-four thousand
horses, left his capital in the morning, traveled the entire land under
the sky, made the round of the four oceans, and returned within a short
time to his castle for the morning meal. The king, riding on the ﬁrst
treasure, the golden wheel vehicle, [drawn by] the treasured horse,
foremost among all his eighty-four thousand vehicles, left his capital
in the morning, traveled the entire land under the sky, made the round
of the four oceans, and within a short time returned to his castle for
the morning meal.

23b

132

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

The king used the fourth treasure, the divine gem, foremost among
all his eighty-four thousand gemstones, to illuminate the entire palace
compound, making night as bright as day. He had the sixth treasure,
the jadelike queen, foremost among all of his eighty-four thousand
ladies, serve him at his side. The king entrusted the sixth treasure, the
householder gentleman, foremost among all his eighty-four thousand
householders, with managing ﬁnancial matters. The king entrusted the
seventh treasure, the military commander, foremost among all of his
eighty-four thousand soldiers, with [the duty of] disciplining any [miscreants] among the troops.
King Sudarśana’s central capital city, foremost among the eightyfour thousand cities he ruled, was Kuśinagara. The king always stayed
at the Sudharma pavilion, foremost among all of his eighty-four thousand pavilions. The king always stayed at the central tower, foremost
among all of his eighty-four thousand towers. The king always sat on
the quartz seat, foremost among all of his eighty-four thousand seats,
because it was best for meditation. He ordered all of his eighty-four
thousand million garments to be inlaid with precious stones. Donning
a garment at one’s will is done out of modesty externally as well as
internally. The king always ate naturally grown rice, preferring it from
among all the eighty-four thousand different kinds of meals, because
he knew the proper amount of food for his best health.
The eighty-four thousand elephants came to the capital city and
injured and killed sentient beings on innumerable occasions. The king
then thought to himself, “These elephants come around frequently,
causing innumerable injuries and damage; from now on, each elephant
shall be permitted to come only once during a hundred-year period.”
In this way, a rotation system was put in order. When a hundred years
had passed, it started over again from the beginning.

Third Episode

At that time, the Buddha said to Ānanda:

Then King Sudarśana contemplated to himself, “What kind of merits
did I originally accumulate, what kind of good discipline did I practice,

133

23c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

such that I have now acquired such an august and splendid reward as
universal rulership?”
Again he contemplated to himself, “I have acquired this fortunate
reward due to three causes. What are the three? First, charity (dāna);
second, morality (śīla); and third, meditation (dhyāna). Because of
these causes, I have now acquired such a great reward.”
The king again contemplated to himself, “I have now already
acquired this fortunate reward as a human; I must further upgrade my
practice of good karma so as to be rewarded a heavenly destiny. I
should sacriﬁce myself, withdraw from daily noise and trouble, reside
in a secluded place, and practice the path.”
The king then said to his treasured queen, Sumatī, “I have now
already obtained this splendid reward as a human, I must further
improve my practice of good karma so as to be rewarded a heavenly
destiny. I should sacriﬁce myself, withdraw from daily noise and trouble,
reside in a secluded place and practice the path.”
The queen replied, “I understand, sir.” She thus notiﬁed [everyone]
both within and without [the palace] to cancel appointments to attend
as well as receive an audience [with the king].
Thereupon, King Sudarśana ascended to the Sudharma pavilion,
entered the golden cloister tower, and sat on the silver couch. He contemplated the eradication of deﬁlements, such as avarice, carnal desire,
craving, evil, and wrongdoing; he realized the ﬁrst meditative state of
absorption (dhyāna-samādhi), in which there is an awareness of an
object and an act of examining while the sense of joy and bliss increase
through removal of the cause of birth, thus reaching the supramundane
sphere. Next, eliminating the awareness of an object and the subjective
act of examination, with tranquility or self-conﬁdence (Pāli saṃpasādana) increasing, continually applying concentration of the mind, he
proceeded to the second meditative state of absorption, in which there
is neither the awareness of an object nor a subjective act, the sense of
joy and bliss predominating in the arising state of concentration. Next,
the sense of joy fading away, dwelling in the sense of equanimity, fully
aware of subtler bliss, he reached the third meditative state of absorption
in which one experiences the mindfulness and bliss sought by the wise

134

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

and holy practitioner. Next, transcending both pain and pleasure,
removing sorrow and joy, he realized the fourth meditative state of
absorption in which there is neither pain nor pleasure, but an increase
of the state of equanimity (upekṣā) that consolidates pure and genuine
mindfulness.
Thereupon, King Sudarśana arose from the silver chair, came out
of the golden cloister tower, went to the central tower, sat on the lapis
lazuli chair, and practiced the four kinds of immeasurable minds (brahmavihāras), ﬁrst by permeating friendly love (maitrī) inﬁnitely in one
direction, and then likewise in the remaining three directions. Thus he
extended his immeasurable mind of benevolence universally in all
directions, neither [divided] nor bound to limitation. Casting away various feelings of hatred, leaving no ill will in his mind, the king enjoyed
the state of tranquility and silence, compassion and tenderness. He also
completed the remaining three practices, namely, the immeasurable
mind of compassion (karuṇā), the immeasurable mind of sympathetic
joy (muditā), and the immeasurable mind of equanimity (upekṣā).
At that time, the treasured queen quietly thought herself, “I have
not seen his majesty for some time and wish to set up an occasion for
audience. I shall now notify the king of this.” Then the treasured queen
Sumatī said to the eighty-four thousand palace ladies, “May all of you
bathe in warm scented water and attire yourselves in formal dress.
Since we have not seen his majesty for some time, we are going to see
the countenance of his majesty.” As instructed, the palace ladies bathed
and properly attired themselves. Then Queen Sumatī also said to the
treasured military commander, “May your leadership assemble the
four divisions of the army. Since we have not seen his majesty for some
time, we are going to have an audience.” Thereupon, the treasured military commander, having assembled the four divisions of the army,
reported, “The four divisions of the army have already been assembled.
Whenever your ladyship is ready.” Thereupon, leading the eighty-four
thousand palace ladies, accompanied by the four divisions of the army,
the queen reached the golden palm tree grove. The sound of the multitude reached the king’s cognizance. Having heard the sound, the king
looked through a window and saw the treasured queen standing by the

135

24a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses

doorside. Seeing the queen, the king said to her, “Please halt there and
do not proceed. I am coming out of this cloister.”
Thereupon, King Sudarśana stood up from the quartz seat, came out
of the central tower, came down to the Sudharma pavilion, and together
with the treasured queen, walked toward the palm tree grove, [where
he] took his seat in the prepared position. At that time, the great king
Sudarśana’s complexion was more luminous than on ordinary days. The
queen thought to herself, “Now, his majesty’s complexion exceeds that
seen on other ordinary days. What kind of auspicious sign is this?”
Then Queen Sumatī said to the king, “Your majesty’s complexion
exceeds that of ordinary days. This may not be an auspicious sign, but
is it because your majesty has decided to forsake the span of life, sir?
Among the eighty-four thousand elephants, foremost is the treasured
white elephant decorated with gold and silver ornaments from which
precious gems are strung. The elephant, the precious gem, and so on
are themselves your majesty’s possessions. I entreat your majesty: be
reminded of these treasures and enjoy a further span of this life with
us. May your majesty not forsake your life span and leave tens of thousands of your subjects without their ruler.
“Again, among the host of eighty-four thousand horses, the treasured
horse is foremost. Among the eighty-four thousand chariots, the treasured golden wheel is foremost. Among the eighty-four thousand gems,
the divine gem is foremost. Among the eighty-four thousand women,
the treasured jadelike lady is foremost. Among the eighty-four thousand
householders, the treasured householder gentleman is foremost. Among
the eighty-four thousand warriors, the treasured military commander
is foremost. Among the eighty-four thousand cities, Kuśinagara is foremost. Among the eighty-four thousand pavilions, the Sudharma pavilion
is foremost. Among the eighty-four thousand towers, the central tower
is foremost. Among the eighty-four thousand thrones, the bejeweled
throne is foremost. Among the eighty-four thousand million garments,
the soft and smooth garment is foremost. The eighty-four thousand
kinds of meals are each different and exquisite in taste. All of these
varieties of treasures, without exception, belong to your majesty. I
entreat your majesty: be reminded of these treasures and enjoy a further

136

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

span of life with us. May your majesty not forsake your life span and
leave tens of thousands of subjects without their ruler.”
At that time, King Sudarśana replied to the queen, “Your ladyship,
since olden days you have assisted me in the virtues of mercy, gentleness, respectfulness, and obedience, and you have never uttered a careless word. Why do you say this to me now?”
The queen said to the king, “I do not understand, sir. How could
my statement be contrary to your majesty, sir?” The king replied to the
queen, “The things to which you have referred, namely, the elephants,
horses, chariots, the golden wheel, the palace pavilion and cloister, the
good garments, the exquisite meals—all these are impermanent and
cannot be held for a long time. Though you have urged me to remain
in this life, how can I follow this request?”
Queen Sumatī said again to the king, “I do not understand, sir. Your
majesty is my merciful teacher. What else could I say, sir?” The king
replied, “If you understand that the elephants, horses, chariots, golden
wheel, pavilions and cloisters, garments, and exquisite meals are all
impermanent, and hence cannot be held beyond a temporary period of
time, you would not exhaust your mind and thoughts out of attachment
to these things. The reason is that I have no more life left and must
soon leave for the next life. It is the universal rule that whenever there
is birth, there is death; whenever there is a meeting, there is a separation.
Who could, once born into this life, live forever? One should sever
oneself from affection and love and give weight to the path of seeking
the ultimate goal. Such are [what I consider to be] words of respect
and obedience.”
O Ānanda, at that time, having heard the king’s exhortation, the
treasured lady wept and cried in sorrow. Wiping away her tears, she
said to the king, “Your majesty, those elephants, horses, chariots, golden
wheel, pavilions and cloisters, renowned garments, exquisite meals,
are all impermanent and hence cannot be held beyond a temporary
period of time, sir. May your majesty not exhaust your mind and thoughts
out of attachment to these things. Your majesty has no more time left
in the span of life and must soon leave for the life to come. It is the universal rule that whenever there is birth, there is death; whenever there

137

24b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

is a meeting, there is a separation. Who could, once born into this life,
live forever? One should sever oneself from affection and love and
give weight to the path of seeking the ultimate goal, sir.”
O Ānanda, as the treasured lady was uttering this statement, King
Sudarśana suddenly passed away. Just as when a valiant soldier bites
into a delicious morsel, there was no suffering or agony. The king’s
spirit ascended to the seventh Brahmā Heaven (i.e., the twentieth of
thirty-three heavens). Seven days after the death of the great king
Sudarśana, the treasures of the golden wheel, the divine gem, and so
on all disappeared of their own accord. The treasures of the elephant,
the horse, the ladyship, the master householder, and the military commander all passed away on the same day the king died. The castle, the
ponds, the Sudharma pavilion, the cloister tower, the ornamented items,
the golden palm tree grove—all turned into earth and forest.

The Buddha continued, saying to Ānanda:

Whatever is conditioned is impermanent, is subject to change, and necessarily ends in cessation. When one does not mind avarice and pursues
it, he will exhaust his life. When one is attached to someone with affection and love, he will not ﬁnd the limit of satisfaction. Only those who
have realized the right insight and thus see the path as it really is can
know the limit of satisfaction.
O Ānanda, I recall that in my past lives I returned to this land six
times to become the universal ruler and laid my ashes in this land. In
this [seventh] life, I have accomplished supreme, perfect enlightenment
and once again forsake my life span and lay my ashes at this place.
There will be no more birth and death after this, and hence, no land
where my body may be placed after this. This is the last and the limit
of my life cycle, with no more birth hereafter.

At that time, the World-honored One was about to reach ﬁnal cessation
in the spot between the paired śāla trees in the śāla grove, the original place
of the Mallan clan, in the city of Kuśinagara. He instructed Ānanda,

Go to the city of Kuśinagara and tell the Mallan clanspeople, “Wise
friends, you should know that the Tathāgata is going to enter ﬁnal nirvana

138

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

in the middle of this night under the twin śāla trees. You should be
there to ask him about whatever doubts you have [regarding religious
salvation] and directly receive his answer and instruction. Do not make
cause for regret by missing this opportunity.”

Thus instructed, Ānanda rose from his seat and, after venerating the Buddha,
left for Kuśinagara. With tears in his eyes he went into the city, accompanied
by a bhikṣu. At that time he happened to see that ﬁve hundred Mallan clanspeople were gathering in a place for some purpose. Seeing Ānanda approaching
them, the Mallans stood up to greet him but, remaining at one side, they
enquired, “It is strange to see the venerable coming into town now, at this
time. It is already almost evening. What is your purpose, sir?”
With tears in his eyes, Ānanda said to them:

I came here in order to beneﬁt you. I announce to you, wise friends,
that the Tathāgata is about to enter ﬁnal nirvana in the middle of this
night. You should go ask him about whatever doubts you have [regarding your salvation] and directly receive his answer and instruction. Do
not make cause for regret by missing this opportunity.

At that time, having heard this news, the Mallan clanspeople loudly cried
out in grief, their bodies twisting and falling to the ground as they fainted,
then recovering consciousness, just as when huge trees fall due to the complete
loss of their roots’ hold, their branches breaking in a mess [on the ground].
They lamented in unison:

How is it that so soon the Buddha should go to cessation? Why must the
Buddha go to cessation so quickly? When the Eye of Insight of the world
ceases to be, all sentient beings will surely wither for a long time to come.

Ānanda was then obliged to console the Mallans:

Please stop your wailing and do not be grief-stricken. There is no one
in heaven or on earth who once his life has begun it will not end. No
matter how hard we try to make conditioned things continue in their
existence, such a result is totally out of the question. Hasn’t the Buddha
said frequently that whenever there is a meeting, there is a separation?
Whatever has its birth has its death as well.

139

24c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

The Mallan clanspeople then said to each other:

We shall go home at once and then go to the twin śāla trees accompanied by our families, as well as taking with us white cloth equally as
long as ﬁve hundred suits of garments.

The Mallan clanspeople then returned home at once and, accompanying
their families and taking with them a white cloth equally as long as ﬁve hundred suits of garments, they started out from Kuśinagara to the site of the
twin śāla trees, where Ānanda [awaited their arrival].
Seeing the Mallan clanspeople approaching, Ānanda thought to himself:
“There are too many people. If each of them wishes to see the Buddha, he
will have passed away before everyone in the line has seen him. I should
present all of them to the Buddha together before midnight.” Thus he led the
ﬁve hundred Mallan clanspeople and their families to the place where the
Buddha was, and after venerating him by bowing his forehead to the Buddha’s
feet, he stood to one side. He then stepped forward and said to the Buddha:
So-and-so, so-and-so, [these] Mallan clanspeople and their families
respectfully enquire of the World-honored One as to whether or not
he is at ease with his rising and sitting, and whether he feels strong or
weak in his walking, sir.

25a

The Buddha replied [to all the Mallan clanspeople], “I appreciate your
visit and wish you a long life and freedom from illness and pain.” In this
manner, Ānanda guided the Mallan clanspeople and their families to see the
Buddha. Subsequently, they venerated the Buddha by bowing their foreheads
to his feet, and sat to one side. The World-honored One then taught them
about the impermanence of life, encouraging, beneﬁting, and delighting them.
With a feeling of delight in their hearts, after listening to the teaching the
Mallan clanspeople presented to the Buddha the white cloth, equally as long
as ﬁve hundred sets of garments, which they had brought with them. The
Buddha accepted it for the sake of their merit. The Mallan clanspeople rose
from their seats and, having venerated the Buddha, departed.
At this time, there was a brāhmaṇa ascetic in the city of Kuśinagara,
Subhadra by name. He was as old as one hundred twenty years of age, well
established in his career, and renowned for his knowledge. Having heard

140

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

that the śramaṇa Gautama was taking the course of cessation, he thought to
himself:
I still have some doubt regarding religious salvation in the matter of
Dharma. Only Gautama alone understands the meaning of my doubt.
Now I should see him, visiting there by my own strength.

At once, he left the city of Kuśinagara during the night, [traveling to] the
twin śāla trees, and arrived at the place where Ānanda was. Having greeted
him, he stood to one side and said to Ānanda:

I was informed that the śramaṇa Gautama is going to enter cessation
during this night. I have come here because of that. I wish to meet him
because I have a doubt about a religious matter on the nature of Dharma.
By meeting Gautama, I wish to settle my mind once and for all. If there
is some extra time, may I be allowed to see him, sir?

Ānanda replied, “O Subhadra, do not impose [your questions] on him.
The Buddha is physically very ill. You should not bother him.”
Subhadra, however, ﬁrmly requested repeatedly, saying three times:
I have heard that the Tathāgata appears in this world only once in a
long period of time, like the udumbara ﬂower that blooms only very
rarely and intermittently. Therefore, I have dared to come here, because
I wish to settle my doubt. May I see the Buddha even for a short time,
if he can spare any moment at all?

Ānanda replied in the same way, “The Buddha is physically very ill. You
should not bother him.” However, the Buddha said to Ānanda:

Do not prevent him. Let him come here and permit him to settle his
doubt. It will not bother me too much. If he listens to my answer to
his question on the subject of Dharma, he will surely be able to resolve
his problem

Ānanda immediately conveyed the Buddha’s permission to Subhadra,
“If you wish, you may see him whenever you are ready.” At once Subhadra
went in and, having greeted the Buddha with a bow, sat to one side and said
to him:

141

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

I have been troubled by a doubt on the matter of religious salvation,
sir. If your holiness has a moment, may you help me to settle my doubt
once and for all, sir.

The Buddha replied, “Question me as freely as you wish.” Subhadra then
asked:

Why, O Gautama, are there a number of teachers, each of whom respectively claim that they themselves are the true teachers, for example,
Purāṇa-kāśyapa, Maskarin-gośālīputra, Ajitakeśa-kambalin, Kakudakatyāyana, Sañjayin-vairāṭīputra, and Nirgrantha-jñātiputra. These teachers
all hold different doctrines. O śramaṇa Gautama, I wish to know whether
or not your holiness has understood all these doctrines without exception.

The Buddha said:

Do not ask me to talk about all these doctrines. Let me simply say that
I know all of them without exception. For now, for your sake, I shall
teach you the very profound and subtle doctrine. Listen attentively,
and you should contemplate and remember [what I shall now say].

Subhadra focused his attention on the teaching. The Buddha said to him:
If whatever doctrine among these schools lacks the practice of the
eightfold noble path (āryāṣṭāṅgika-mārga), it can neither yield the fruit
of the ﬁrst saintly state, nor that of the second, nor that of the third,
nor that of the fourth. O Subhadra, if any of these doctrines had this
practice of the eightfold noble path, it should have yielded the fruit of
the initial state of spiritual development, or that of the second, or that
of the third, or that of the fourth. O Subhadra, there is the practice of
the eightfold noble path in my teaching; hence it yields the fruits of
the ﬁrst saintly state, the second, the third, and the fourth. But no other
school or group of practitioners has this fruit of the śramaṇa.

25b

At that time, the World-honored One uttered the following verses for Subhadra:
In the twenty-ninth year of my life,
I renounced family life

142

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

To seek the path of religion (i.e., the good path).
O Subhadra, it has been already ﬁfty years now
Since I realized enlightenment.
I have practiced morality, concentration, and wisdom,
And I have been in solitary thought in seclusion.
Now, I am explaining to you the essentials of my teaching.
There is no saintly realization
Through anything else but this practice.

The Buddha said to Subhadra, “If bhikṣus diligently worked for the goal
of deliverance, this world would be ﬁlled with arhats and would not be a forsaken place.” Subhadra then said to Ānanda:

His teaching assures us that if every śramaṇa has already been practicing
the practice of austerity under the guidance of Buddha, is currently
engaged in the practice of austerity, and will continue to carry it out
properly in the future, [that śramaṇa] will be able to realize the great
result. O Ānanda, you too have realized that great result since you have
been engaged in the practice of austerity under the guidance of the
Tathāgata. I have directly met the Tathāgata and have been able to ask
him about my doubts; therefore, I should be able to realize that great
result. Now, the Tathāgata has assured me that as his disciple I too am
able to accomplish such a great result.

Then he asked the Buddha, “May I now renounce my family life under
the Tathāgata’s Dharma and be ordinained to receive the vow of the precepts?”
The Buddha told Subhadra:

If a brāhmaṇa ascetic, [previously] a student of another school, wishes
to be ordained for the practice of austerity under my Dharma [and
Vinaya], there is set a probation period of four months during which
he should be subjected to observation as to his practice and his personality. If he is able to maintain dignity and proper manners, he may
be ordained under my Dharma [and Vinaya] to receive the vow of precepts. O Subhadra, you should know that it depends on the nature of
the candidate’s conduct.

143

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

Subhadra again said to the Buddha:

I understand, sir, that in the case of a student ascetic of any other school
there is a probation period of four months during which he should be
subjected to observation as to his practice and his personality. If he is
able to maintain dignity and proper manners, he may be ordained under
your authority of Dharma [and Vinaya] to receive the vow of precepts.
I have served in the right Dharma for the duration of four years by
now, sir. I have maintained my dignity and proper manner without
omission. I should be entitled to the ordination, sir.

The Buddha replied, “I have already said that it depends solely on the
person’s conduct.” As it happened, that night Subhadra went forth from
family life to be ordained, strove for perfection in the practice of austerity,
directly experienced for himself in the present life [the realization] that the
cause of birth and death is exhausted; the practice of austerity was accomplished; what should be done [for religious salvation] was thus accomplished;
and Subhadra realized the insight into the nature of things as they really are
and the subsequent insight that there would be no further birth for him. Before
the night had passed he realized the ultimate state of arhatship. Thus he was
regarded as the last direct disciple of the Buddha. Thereupon, it was Subhadra
who initially passed away into cessation, and the Buddha entered into ﬁnal
cessation afterward.
At that time, Ānanda was standing behind the Buddha and stroking the
edge of the bed couch he wept bitterly, unable to control himself. Weeping,
he said:

How is it that so soon the Buddha should go to cessation? Why must
the Buddha go to cessation so quickly? How swiftly the great religion
(i.e., the Dharma) is lost and obscured. When the Eye of the World
ceases to be, sentient beings shall surely wither for a long time to come.
Why? Though I have received the Buddha’s teaching and have been
practicing moral discipline, before I am able to realize what should be
done in my religious path he will have gone to cessation forever.

25c

At that time the World-honored One, though [already] knowing [the

144

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

answer], deliberately questioned the bhikṣus, “Is the bhikṣu Ānanda present
now?” The bhikṣus replied:

The bhikṣu Ānanda is standing behind your holiness, sir. Stroking the
edge of the bed couch, he weeps bitterly in sorrow, unable to control
himself, sir. While sobbing, he lamented, “How is it that so soon the
Buddha should go to cessation? Why must the Buddha go to cessation
so quickly? How swiftly the great religion (the Dharma) is lost and
obscured. When the eye of the world ceases to be, sentient beings shall
surely wither for a long time to come. For what reason? Though receiving the Buddha’s teaching and being able to practice moral discipline,
before I am able to realize what should be done in my religious path,
he will have gone to cessation forever.”

The Buddha said to Ānanda:

May you grieve no more, nor do not wail any more. Since you began to
serve as my personal attendant I have noticed an incomparable and
immeasurable sense of love (i.e., benevolence) in your physical conduct,
an incomparable and immeasurable sense of love in your verbal conduct,
and an incomparable and immeasurable sense of love in your volitional
conduct. O Ānanda, you have attended me with care (paricarati). Your
merit is great, far superior to that of anyone, whether they are gods, evil
ones, Brahmā, śramaṇas, or brāhmaṇas. You must continue to exert
yourself. It will not be too long before you realize enlightenment.

Thereupon, the World-honored One said to the bhikṣus:

Those disciples who personally attended the past buddhas were also
like Ānanda. Those disciples who will personally attend future buddhas
will also be like Ānanda. Each of those personal attendants of the past
buddhas knew what his master wished of him only after he was told,
but my attendant Ānanda now knows what I wish him to do through
observing my eyes: “The Tathāgata wishes to have this done. The
World-honored One wishes to have that done.” This is a wondrous
realization of excellence on Ānanda’s part. You should acquire this
kind of excellence.

145

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

The universal ruler had four kinds of wondrous excellence. What
are the four? First, whichever country the holy ruler happened to visit,
all the people of that land assembled to welcome his arrival with the
sense of hospitality. Second, they were delighted in seeing the ruler
and rejoiced in listening to his exhortation. Third, they never tired of
viewing his digniﬁed countenance. Fourth, regardless of whether he
was walking, standing, sitting, or lying down, all the ofﬁcials and the
populace came to see him, were delighted to see him, rejoiced in listening to his exhortation, and never tired of viewing his digniﬁed countenance. These are the four signs of the extraordinary popularity of the
universal ruler.
I point out now that our Ānanda is also endowed with four such
kinds of popularity. What are the four? First, when Ānanda joins the
gathering of bhikṣus, even without [speaking] a word, the members of
the sangha are delighted. Second, when he preaches the Dharma to the
members of the sangha, they are delighted to listen to it. Third, they
are also delighted to observe his digniﬁed manner and listen to his preaching, and they never tire of doing so. Fourth, regardless of whether it is an
assembly of bhikṣuṇīs (nuns), lay [male] householders (upāsakas), or
[lay] female householders (upāsikās), when he joins their meeting, even
without [speaking] a word, the participants of that meeting are delighted
to see him, rejoice in listening to his preaching, and never tire of viewing
his digniﬁed countenance and pleasant manner. These are his four kinds
of excellence.

At that time, Ānanda rearranged his robe to expose his right shoulder,
kneeled with his right knee on the ground, and said to the Buddha:
O World-honored One, at present, the śramaṇas of all regions, well
learned and knowledgeable, those who clearly understand the collection
of scriptures and disciplines and who are endowed with excellent virtue
and noble conduct, have all come to see the World-honored One.
Because of this I have been able to venerate and respect them, closely
associate with them, and greet them with a bow. After the Buddha takes
the course of cessation, however, they will not return again, because

26a

146

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

there [will no longer be] someone to look up to, sir. What should be
done about this situation?

The Buddha replied to Ānanda:

Have no worry, for those sons of good families have four kinds of
thought recollection. What are the four? First, they are mindful of the
birthplace of the Buddha and will always be delighted to see it. They
will not forget it but cherish a feeling of yearning for it. Second, they
are mindful of the place of the Buddha’s initial enlightenment and will
always be delighted to see it. They will not forget it but cherish a feeling
of yearning for it. Third, they are mindful of the place of the Buddha’s
initial turning of the wheel of the Dharma and will always be delighted
to see it. They will not forget it but cherish a feeling of yearning for it.
Fourth, they are mindful of the place of the Buddha’s ﬁnal nirvana and
will always be delighted to see it. They will not forget it but cherish a
feeling of yearning for it. O Ānanda, after my ﬁnal nirvana, the merit
of those sons and daughters of good families who are mindful of the
time of my birth is as such. It is also like this with the merit of their
being mindful of how the Buddha’s supernormal power acquired
enlightenment. It is also like this with the merit of their being mindful
of how his initial turning of the wheel of the Dharma brought conversion. It is also like this with the merit of their being mindful of how
the Buddha left the Dharma for them at the time of his ﬁnal nirvana.
If they have each respectively completed their journeys and sojourns
to these places and have paid tribute to the Buddha at various commemorative towers and temples, they will be born in heaven after death,
except for those who [have already] realized enlightenment.

The Buddha said to Ānanda:

After my ﬁnal nirvana, when the Śākya clanspeople come to seek the
path, you should permit them to renounce family life and grant them
the ordination vow of precepts for joining the sangha. You should not
make it difﬁcult for them to stay on. If a follower of a non-Buddhist
school genuinely comes to seek the path, you should not impose the

147

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

four-month probation period. Why is this so? Even if he has different
thoughts regarding religion, after staying a while he may come to share
the original doctrine of the Dharma.

At that time, Ānanda knelt and, with his palms joined together, said to
the Buddha:
The bhikṣu Channa, because of his background, behaves in an insistent
manner regarding his own way. How should we deal with his behavior
after the Buddha’s cessation?

The Buddha said to Ānanda:

After my cessation, if Channa does not follow the standard manner of
dignity, refuses to follow the admonitions, all of you should apply the
punishment of verbal excommunication by instructing all bhikṣus to
not exchange words with him, nor engage in forwarding or relaying
instructions to or from him.

At that time, Ānanda again said to the Buddha, “After the Buddha’s nirvana, what should be done with the female members who still refuse to take
the act of repentance, sir?” The Buddha replied to Ānanda, “No one should
meet with them.” Ānanda again said, “If someone [unexpectedly] encounters
them directly, what should be done, sir?” The Buddha replied, “You should
not exchange words.” Ānanda again asked, “If one is in an inevitable situation
of talking with them, what should be done, sir?” The Buddha replied, “One
should examine his own mind.” The Buddha continued:

26b

O Ānanda, are you saying that after the Buddha’s nirvana there will
be no protective umbrella (i.e., cover) over your head or that you might
lose whatever you have? You should not entertain this kind of view.
Since my realization of enlightenment, the discourses and disciplines
that I have continually taught are your protectors and your possessions.
O Ānanda, from today onward, the bhikṣus must be permitted to abandon trivial formalities and adopt the [simpliﬁed] rule of propriety as a
measure for distinguishing between senior and junior bhikṣus. This is
called the rule of propriety for bhikṣus.

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:
148

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

If any of you have doubt regarding the Buddha, Dharma, or Sangha,
or doubt regarding the path, you should question me at once. Don’t let
this opportunity pass without asking me about your doubts, and later
have regret because you did not do so now. As long as I am alive, I
shall explain the subject with which your doubts are concerned.

All the bhikṣus remained silent, not uttering a word. The Buddha again
said to them:
If any of you have doubt regarding the Buddha, Dharma, or Sangha,
or doubt regarding the path, you should question me at once. Don’t let
this opportunity pass without asking me about your doubts, only later
to have regret because you did not do so now. As long as I am alive I
shall explain the subject with which your doubts are concerned.

Once again all the bhikṣus did not utter a word, remaining silent. The
Buddha again said to them:
If you do not question me about your doubts because you are afraid
of shame within or without, bring up your questions to me by way of
your colleagues. Don’t let this opportunity pass without asking me
about your doubts, only later to regret not having done so now.

The bhikṣus once again did not utter a word and remained silent. Ānanda
said to the Buddha:
I have no doubt in my mind that all the members of this sangha are
steady in genuine faith, sir. There is not even a single bhikṣu who doubts
the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha or the path.

The Buddha said to Ānanda:

I myself know that even the youngest bhikṣu of this sangha now sees
the path of practice and shall not fall into an evil course of life. The
[bhikṣus] will return seven times to this world and necessarily exhaust
the fundamental cause of suffering.

At that time, the World-honored One thus granted his assurance to the
one thousand and two hundred bhikṣus regarding their respective goals of

149

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

realization. Thereupon, the World-honored One opened his upper robe to
reveal his golden forearm and said to the bhikṣus:

You should contemplate the fact that the Tathāgata appears in this world
only once in a long period of time, like udumbara ﬂowers that bloom
only very rarely and intermittently.

At that time, contemplating the meaning of this matter, the World-honored
One repeated it in verse:
His right arm is of purplish-golden hue.
The appearance of the Buddha
Is like that of a divine gem.
Things that pass away and
Come into being are impermanent;
[Hence] there is no dissoluteness in manifesting cessation.

[The Buddha continued:]

Therefore, O bhikṣus, be on guard against dissoluteness. It was on the
basis of constant vigilance against indolence that I realized perfect
enlightenment. An immeasurable number of sentient beings will also
realize perfect enlightenment on the basis of constant vigilance against
indolence. Of all things in this world, there is nothing whatsoever that
exists forever. This is the teaching exhorted by the Tathāgata in his last
moment of life.

Thereupon, the World-honored One entered the initial state of meditative
absorption; coming out of this state he then entered the second state of meditative absorption; coming out of this state he then entered the third state of
meditative absorption; coming out of this state he then entered the fourth
state of meditative absorption; coming out of this state he then entered the
ﬁrst formless state of concentration on the sphere of inﬁnite space; coming
out of this state he then entered the second formless state of concentration
on the sphere of inﬁnite consciousness; coming out of this state he then
entered the third formless state of concentration on the sphere of nothing or
nonutility; coming out of this state he then entered the fourth formless state
of concentration on the sphere of “neither ideation nor nonideation”; coming

150

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

out of this state he then entered the ﬁnal state of cessation, transcendent from
senses and ideation, equivalent to third saintly state of an anāgāmin.
At this time, Ānanda asked Anuruddha, “Has the World-honored One
entered ﬁnal nirvana?” Anuruddha replied:
Not yet. O Ānanda, the World-honored One is now in the state of cessation. In olden days I directly heard from the Buddha that the ﬁnal
nirvana is entered from the fourth meditative state of absorption.

Then at that time, the World-honored One, coming out of the state of cessation of ideation, entered into concentration on the sphere of “neither ideation
nor nonideation”; coming out of this state he then entered into concentration
on the sphere of nothing or nonutility; coming out of this state he then entered
into concentration on the sphere of consciousness; coming out of this state
he then entered into concentration on the sphere of space; coming out of this
state he then entered into the fourth meditative absorption (rūpa-dhyānasamādhi); coming out of this state he then entered into the third meditative
absorption; coming out of this state he then entered into the second meditative absorption; coming out of this state he then entered into the first
meditative absorption; coming out of this state he then entered into the second meditative absorption; coming out of this state he then entered into
the third meditative absorption; coming out of this state he then entered
into the fourth meditative absorption; coming out of this state he then
entered final nirvana.
Just at that moment the earth trembled greatly and heavenly gods and
humans were greatly terriﬁed. Various underworlds, dark and gloomy, in
which neither the sun or moon shone, were equally illuminated, allowing
those beings who were born therein to see each other, and they all exclaimed,
“That person has been reborn here,” “That one too was born here,” [and so
on]. A ray of light permeated the entire world, surpassing the luminosity of
heavenly beings. Then from the thirty-third heaven various lotus ﬂowers,
blue utpala, pink padma, red kumuda, and white puṇḍarīka, dropped and
scattered into the air over the Tathāgata as well as the assembled host of
bhikṣus, and heavenly sandalwood powder also scattered over the Buddha
below and the assembly of bhikṣus. The Buddha thus passed away into ﬁnal
nirvana. Thereupon, the god Brahmā uttered these verses from midair:

151

26c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

Whoever belongs to the species of sentient beings
Should equally discard the conﬁgured aggregates of his being.
The Buddha is one who is highest,
Unsurpassed by any one of this world.
O Tathāgata, the Great Sage hero,
Endowed with fearless supernormal power,
Though he could remain forever,
He has now entered ﬁnal nirvana.

At that time, the god Indra uttered the following verse:

No permanence is found
With the conditioned elements of an aggregate.
They embody nothing but the law of arising and perishing.
Once born, no one escapes from death.
The Buddha made his cessation the goal of happiness.

Then Vaiśravaṇa, guardian of northern heavenly quarter, composed the
following verse:
O fortunate trees and the great grove,
Those śāla trees acquired the highest fortune,
Because, at the spot between the twin śāla trees,
The best and most qualiﬁed
For offerings and merit-cultivation passed away.

Then Anuruddha composed the following verse:

27a

The Buddha abides in unconditioned transcendence and
Does not depend on breathing in and breathing out.
He originally came from that total quiescence,
Where the Sun (i.e., the Buddha) himself set.

Then the bhikṣu Upavāna composed the following verse:
With neither indolence nor pride,
But with self-restraint,
He practiced the supreme faculty of prajñā.

152

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

Free from attachment and untainted by deﬁlement,
He was the foremost Honorable [One]
Who freed himself from craving desire.

Then, the bhikṣu Ānanda composed the following verse:

Heavenly gods were terriﬁed, and
Because of this their hair stood on end.
Everything was fulﬁlled and
The Perfectly Enlightened [One] took the course of cessation.

Then the god Kumbhīra also composed a verse:

This world has lost the protective umbrella.
Sentient beings shall remain blinded for a long time,
Nor will they see the Perfectly Enlightened [One],
The human Hero, the Lion of the Śākyas, again.

Then the guardian god Guhyaka composed the following verse:
Whether it in this life or in the next,
The residents of Brahmā Heaven
Could never see such a human hero
Like that of the Śākya lion.

Then, Māyā, the mother of the Buddha, composed the following verse:
The Buddha was born in the Lumbinī grove;
His religion has spread widely.
He returned to the place
From which he was originally born, and
Forsook his human body
That was subject to the law of impermanence.

Then the spirit of the twin śāla trees composed the following verse:
We do not know when we may again
Make an offering of unseasonably blooming ﬂowers,
After now scattering them over the Buddha like this.

153

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

Well endowed with
The ten supreme powers of authority and virtue,
The Tathāgata has entered ﬁnal nirvana.

Then the spirit of the śāla forest composed the following verse:
This is the most satisfactory place
Where the Buddha grew up,
Where he turned his Dharma wheel, and
Where he has entered ﬁnal nirvana.

Then the four guardians of the heavens composed the following verse:
With his highest transcendental knowledge,
The Tathāgata always taught
The doctrine of impermanence,
Rescued all sentient beings from the bondage of suffering,
And having realized the ultimate goal,
He has entered ﬁnal nirvana.

Then the lord of Trāyastriṃśa Heaven composed the following verse:
During the period of millions of millions of kalpas,
He sought the highest goal of the path,
Rescued sentient beings from the bondage of suffering,
And, having realized the ultimate goal,
He entered ﬁnal nirvana.

Then the lord of the Yamaka underworld composed the following verse:

27b

This is the last robe that the Buddha wore
Before his cessation.
Since the Buddha has gone to ﬁnal nirvana,
To whom should this robe be given?

Then the lord of Tuṣita Heaven composed the following verse:
This is the last body of the Buddha,
In which the conﬁguration of his aggregates

154

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

Has been totally dissolved.
There are neither thoughts of sorrow nor of joy,
Nor any danger of birth and death.

Then the lord of Nirmāṇarataya Heaven composed the following verse:
The Buddha laid down
Upon his right side;
The Śākya lion entered ﬁnal nirvana
In this śāla grove.

Then the lord of Paranirmitavaśavartin Heaven composed the following
verse:
The world shall wither in darkness
For a long time to come
The moon, lord of the stars, fell away, and
Hindered by the force of impermanence,
The sun of great wisdom
Is shadowed for a long time.

At that time, the bhikṣus composed the following verse:

This body is like a water bubble.
Vulnerable as it is to any danger,
Who could ever enjoy it?
The Buddha obtained the imperishable body
Like that of a diamond, and
Yet his body is dissolved
Because of the force of impermanence.
The buddhas are in possession of the diamondlike body,
Yet all are subject to the force of impermanence,
So quickly perishing like a small pile of snow.
How could anything else be any different from this?

The Buddha thus entered ﬁnal nirvana. Some of the bhikṣus fainted in
sorrow and grief, casting themselves upon the ground, bitterly weeping, their
bodies twisting, unable to control themselves. While weeping, they lamented:

155

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

How is it that so soon the Buddha should go to cessation? Why must
the Buddha go to cessation so quickly? How swiftly the great religion
(i.e., the Dharma) is lost and obscured! Sentient beings shall surely
wither for a long time to come, when the world has lost its Eye of Insight
forever, just as when huge trees fall due to the total loss of their roots’
hold, their branches breaking in a mess; or just as a snake, its head
chopped off, continues twisting and wriggling without knowing where
it is going.

Then some other bhikṣus also fainted, grief-stricken, throwing themselves
to the ground, their bodies twisted, wailing loudly in grief, unable to control
themselves. While weeping, they lamented:

How is it that so soon the Buddha should go to cessation? Why must the
Buddha go to cessation so quickly? How swiftly the great religion (the
Dharma) is lost and obscured! Sentient beings shall surely wither for a
long time to come when the Eye of Insight of the world has ceased to be.

At that time, the elder bhikṣu Anuruddha said to those bhikṣus, “All of
you, grieve no more. The host of heavenly beings above us are also curiously
voicing similar lamentations.” Then the bhikṣus questioned Anuruddha, “How
many gods are there above us?” Anuruddha replied:

They ﬁll the entirety of space, beyond calculation. All of them are
roaming in midair in confusion, weeping, wailing, stamping with grief,
and shedding tears, saying, “How is it that so soon the Buddha should
go to cessation? Why must the Buddha go to cessation so quickly?
How swiftly the great religion (the Dharma) is lost and obscured! Sentient beings shall surely wither for a long time to come, when the world
has lost its Eye of Insight forever, just as huge trees fall due to the total
loss of their roots’ hold, breaking their branches in a mess, or just as
a snake, its head chopped off, continues to twist and wriggle without
knowing where it is going.”

27c

At that moment, the heavenly beings, as described by Anuruddha, who
were roaming in midair in confusion, weeping, wailing, stamping with grief,
and shedding tears, said:

156

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

How is it that the Buddha should go to cessation so soon? Why must the
Buddha go to cessation so quickly? How swiftly the great religion (the
Dharma) is lost and obscured! Sentient beings shall surely wither for a
long time to come when the world has lost its Eye of Insight forever.

Thereupon, throughout that night, the host of bhikṣus discussed the words
of the Dharma and completed [the recitation] by the arrival of the dawn.
Anuruddha said to Ānanda:

May you go to the city and tell the Mallan clanspeople, “The Buddha
has already entered ﬁnal nirvana. Those who wish to make tribute and
offerings to the Buddha are commended to know that now is the appropriate time.”

At that time, Ānanda stood up and after venerating the Buddha, accompanied
by a bhikṣu, with tears on his face, he entered the city, where he happened to
see ﬁve hundred Mallans gathered in one place for some reason. The Mallan
clanspeople too, noticing Ānanda approaching them, stood up to greet him,
venerated him [by bowing their foreheads to] his feet, and said to him, “Venerable,
why have you come here so early, sir?” Ānanda replied:

Because I wish to beneﬁt you, I have come here as quickly as possible
this early morning. You should know that the Tathāgata already entered
ﬁnal nirvana last night. If you wish to make offerings, now is the appropriate time.

When the Mallan clanspeople heard this news, there was none among
them who did not lament and grieve. Wiping tears from their faces, they said,
“How is it that the Buddha has gone to ﬁnal nirvana so soon? How is it that
so swiftly the Eye of Insight has ceased to be in this world?” Ānanda
responded:
Dear friends, weep no more. Even if one wished to prevent conditioned
things from changing, this is not at all possible. Did not the Buddha
teach us while he was alive that “whoever is once born is bound to die;
whenever one meets with another, he will be separated from the other;
and that there is none in this world whom we love and for whom we
feel affection who will exist forever”?

157

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

Then some Mallan clanspeople said to each other:

We should return home, and bringing with us various incense, ﬂowers,
and musical instruments, go to the twin śāla trees as quickly as possible
to make offerings to the World-honored One or his ashes.

[Again, some other Mallans said:]

After an entire day of offerings, we should place the body on the couch,
let the Mallan youths lift the four corners of the couch, and carry the
canopy and the streamers. [We should] burn incense, scatter ﬂowers,
and with accompanying musical performance, enter the city from the
eastern gate, make a round through various streets so as to allow all
the citizens of the country the opportunity to make offerings, then come
out of the western gate, proceed to a higher and visible place, and cremate the body there.

Having discussed the proceedings, they went home to prepare incense,
ﬂowers, and musical instruments, gathered at the twin śāla trees, and made
their offerings the whole day long. When the ﬁrst day ended, they placed the
body on a couch, and a number of Mallan clanspeople got together and tried
to lift the couch, but they could not do so. Then Anuruddha said to the clanspeople. “You should leave the couch as it is. Do not exhaust yourselves in
vain. Soon some heavenly beings who wish to lift the couch will come.”
Some of the Mallan clanspeople questioned Anuruddha, “Why do these gods
wish to lift this couch, sir?” Anuruddha replied:
You have been planning to make offerings to the Buddha’s body with
incense, ﬂowers, and music for the entire day, then to place the body
on the couch. The Mallan youths will then lift the four corners of the
couch and carrying the canopy and streamers, burning incense, scattering ﬂowers, and with accompanying musical performance, they will
enter the city from the eastern gate, making a round through various
streets so as to allow all the citizens of the country to have an opportunity to make offerings. They will then come out of the western gate,
proceed to a higher and more visible place, and cremate the body there.
Yet, according to their will, the heavenly gods wish to have the body

28a

158

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

remain in the same place for seven days, to be honored throughout that
period with various offerings, and thereafter to place the body on the
couch. Then the Mallan youths will lift the four corners of the couch,
and carrying the canopy and streamers, burning incense, scattering
ﬂowers, and with accompanying musical performance, they will enter
the city from the eastern gate, make a round through various streets so
as to allow all the citizens of the country to have an opportunity to
make offerings. They will then go out of the northern gate, cross the
Hiraṇyavatī River to reach the Makuṭabandhana shrine, and cremate
the body there. Because of this wish, the heavenly gods will not [yet]
allow the couch to be lifted.

The Mallan clanspeople said, “We agree, sir.” Splendid were the words
of Anuruddha! It precisely accorded with the will of the heavens.
The Mallan clanspeople said to each other:

Let us go back to the city and repair the roads and streets, clean them,
and burn incense along them, then return here and continue to make
offerings to the World-honored One for seven full days.

All the Mallan clanspeople then returned to town, repaired the roads and
streets, cleaned them, burned incense along them, and, coming out of the town,
made offerings for seven full days at the twin śāla trees by scattering ﬂowers,
burning incense, and playing musical instruments near the time of sunset on
the last day. The body was then moved onto the couch. The Mallan youths lifted
the four corners of the couch. They carried the canopy and streamers, scattered
ﬂowers, burned incense, and played musical instruments. In this manner, the
[funeral] procession proceeded, calmly accompanied in front and behind by the
leading group and the following group, respectively.
Then the gods of Trāyastriṃśa Heaven scattered from midair various lotus
ﬂowers, blue, pink, red, and white, as well as heavenly sandalwood incense
over the body of the World-honored One, thus ﬁlling up the streets with [these
offerings]. Some heavenly beings played music and the spirits sang songs. Then
the Mallan clanspeople spoke among themselves, “Halt the human performance
of music and let the heavenly performance of music be an offering to the body.”
In this manner, the Mallans carried the couch and proceeded gradually. Entering

159

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

the town from the eastern gate, they stopped at various streets to make offerings
by burning incense, scattering ﬂowers, and performing music.
The daughter of a Mallan, a devoted believer of the path taught by the
Buddha, offered a golden ﬂower garland as large as a carriage wheel. An
elderly woman gave praise in an uplifted voice:
These Mallans will acquire great beneﬁt. For at the end of his career,
the Tathāgata entered ﬁnal nirvana in this place, and it is for him that
all the citizens of this country are delightfully paying tribute by means
of various offerings.

28b

Having completed the various offerings, the procession of Mallans then
departed from the northern gate of the city, crossed the Hiraṇyavatī River,
and reached the Makuṭabandhana shrine, where they placed the couch on
the ground. The Mallan clanspeople then said to Ānanda, “What else should
we do to make additional offerings?” Ānanda replied:
I closely heard from the Buddha and received an instruction directly
from him. The funeral rite should be exactly similar to that which
should be held for a universal ruler.

The Mallans asked him again, “How should the funeral rite for the universal
ruler be done, sir?” [Quoting the Buddha’s words,] Ānanda replied:
For a universal ruler, you should ﬁrst bathe the body with warm scented
water, cover the entire body with new cotton cloth, wrap it in a cloth
equally as long as ﬁve hundred sets of garments, place the body within
a golden cofﬁn, pour sesame oil over it, place the golden cofﬁn inside
a second but larger iron vault, cover it with a sandalwood vault, cover
that vault with a thick pile of a variety of incense, and then cremate
the whole thing. After retrieving the ashes, build a commemorative
tower or shrine at each major crossroads and hang a picture on the
rock pillar set before it, so as to enable the citizens of the country who
are passing on the roads to view the towers of the universal ruler of
the law, causing a sense of affection to rise in their hearts toward his
benevolent rule, and thus bring about a beneﬁcial inﬂuence upon the
populace.

160

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

O Ānanda, if you wish to conduct the funeral rite for me, you should
bathe my body with warm scented water, cover my entire body with
new cotton cloth, wrap it in a cloth equally as long as ﬁve hundred sets
of garments, place the body within a golden cofﬁn, pour sesame oil
over it, place the golden cofﬁn inside a second but larger iron vault,
cover it with a sandalwood vault, cover that vault with a thick pile of
a variety of incense, then cremate the whole thing. After retrieving my
ashes, build a commemorative tower or shrine at each major crossroads
and hang my picture on the rock pillar set before it, so as to enable
whoever passes on the road to view the Buddha’s tower, refreshing his
[or her] sense of affection toward the religious deeds accomplished by
the Tathāgata and encouraging them to strive for their own goal of happiness in life when born into this world, and obtain the opportunity
upon their death to be reborn in heaven. Of course, this excludes those
who have [already] realized the ultimate goal of the path.

Thereupon, the Mallan clanspeople said to each other:

We should go back to the city to collect the funeral items, the incense
and ﬂowers, cotton cloth, the cofﬁn and vault, and the scented oil, as
well as the roll of white cloth.

They returned together and completed the preparation of the necessary
things. Returning to the Makuṭabandhana shrine, they bathed the Buddha’s
body with warm scented water, covered it entirely with a new cotton cloth,
wrapped it in the roll of cloth equally as long as ﬁve hundred sets of garments,
placed it in the golden cofﬁn, poured scented oil over it, placed the cofﬁn inside
a second, larger iron vault, covered it with another sandalwood vault, and covered the vault with a thick pile of various renowned incense. The minister of
the Mallan country held up a huge torch to set ﬁre to the funeral pyre of the
Buddha but the ﬂame did not reach the pyre. A few other Mallan dignitaries
one after another tried to set ﬁre to the pyre, but the ﬂame would not reach the
pyre. Then Anuruddha said to the Mallan clanspeople,“Try no more. Wise gentlemen, it is beyond your power. The ﬁre extinguished itself due to the will of
the gods.” The Mallans questioned him, “Why should the heavenly gods prevent
it from being burned, sir?” Anuruddha replied:

161

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

Our senior bhikṣu Mahākāśyapa, accompanied by ﬁve hundred disciples,
is enroute midway from the city of Pāvā to this place. If it has not yet
been cremated, he wishes to see the Buddha’s body once again. As the
gods know his thoughts, they have prevented this funeral pyre from
burning.

28c

The Mallans said, “Let his wish be realized.”
At that time, Mahākāśyapa was hurrying on the way from Pāvā, accompanied by ﬁve hundred of his disciples. Mahākāśyapa and his disciples met
a Jain ascetic who was holding a mandāra ﬂower in his hand, standing on
the road. Noticing the Jain ascetic from a distance, Mahākāśyapa approached
him and questioned him, “Where have you come from?”
[The Jain ascetic] replied, “I have come from the city of Kuśinagara, sir.”
Kāśyapa again asked him, “Do you know my master?”
He replied, “Yes, I know him.”
[Kāśyapa] again asked, “Is he still alive?”
[The ascetic] answered, “Seven days have now passed since his ﬁnal nirvana. I have come from there, having obtained this heavenly ﬂower, sir.”
Having heard this, Kāśyapa was disheartened with disappointment. The
ﬁve hundred disciples, having heard of the Buddha’s cessation, wept in
sorrow, wailing, their bodies twisted, hardly able to control themselves.
Wiping away their tears, they lamented:

How is it that the Buddha should go to cessation so soon? Why must
the Buddha go to cessation so quickly? How swiftly the great religion
(the Dharma) is lost and obscured! When the Eye of the World ceases
to be sentient beings shall surely wither for a long time to come, just
as when huge trees fall due to the total loss of their roots’ hold, breaking
their branches in a mess, or just as a snake, its head chopped off, continues to twist and wriggle without knowing where it is going.

At that time, a Śākya monk, Upananda by name, stopped the bhikṣus,
saying:
Don’t worry. Because of the World-honored One’s cessation I have
obtained my freedom. He used to say to us, “Do this at all times,” “This
you should not do.” From now on I can do as I wish.

162

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

Having heard these words, Kāśyapa was disheartened, and with disappointment said to the bhikṣus:

All of you, pack your robes and almsbowls. We are going to the place
of the twin śāla trees. Since the cremation has not yet been done we
may yet be able to see the Buddha.

Then the bhikṣus, having heard Mahākāśyapa’s words, rose from their
seats and followed him, proceeding to the city of Kuśinagara, crossing the
Hiraṇyavatī River, and [ﬁnally] arriving at the Makuṭabandhana shrine.
Having arrived at the place where Ānanda was, and after greeting him with
a bow, Mahākāśyapa said to him, “We wish to see the body once again. Since
the cremation has not yet been done, is it possible to do so?” Ānanda replied:

Though the cremation has not yet been done, it would be very difﬁcult
to see the body, sir. The reason is that the Buddha’s body was washed
with warm scented water, totally covered with new cotton cloth, wrapped
in a roll of cloth equally as long as ﬁve hundred sets of garments, placed
in a golden cofﬁn, then placed inside a second, larger iron vault, and
then encased in a sandalwood vault. Because of this it would be very
difﬁcult to see the Buddha’s body once again, sir.

Though Kāśyapa requested three times, Ānanda replied exactly as he had
ﬁrst replied, “For this reason, it would be difﬁcult to see the Buddha’s body
again, sir.” Mahākāśyapa then faced the funeral pyre directly and both of the
Buddha’s feet extended out from within the vault, bearing a strange color.
Having examined this, Kāśyapa was curious and asked Ānanda, “Why do the
Buddha’s feet appear so different, having a golden color?” Ānanda replied:
Previously, an elderly woman, in her grief, stretched out both her hands
to rub his feet. The change in the color of the Buddha’s feet was effected
by her tears falling upon them, sir.

Having heard this, Kāśyapa again felt disheartened with disappointment,
but he faced directly the funeral pyre and venerated the Buddha’s body. At
that moment, all four kinds of the Buddha’s disciples (i.e., bhikṣus, bhikṣuṇīs,
upāsakas, and upāsikās) as well as heavenly beings all accordingly offered
veneration at the same time. At that moment both of the Buddha’s feet suddenly

163

29a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

disappeared. Thereupon, Mahākāśyapa circumambulated the funeral pyre
three times and uttered the following verses:
The supreme insight of all the buddhas,
Which has no equal in this world
Except among the buddhas themselves,
To that sacred insight
That is without equal in this world,
I pay tribute with a bow.

The śramaṇa who has no equal in this world
Except among the buddhas themselves,
Highest, spotless, the Great Sage of all relations,
Most honored by heavenly gods,
Toward that foremost human hero,
I pay tribute with a bow.

Having no equal in the practice of austerity,
Teaching others without attachment,
Untainted and undeﬁled,
Toward that highest Honorable One,
I pay tribute with a bow.

Having totally exhausted three fundamental deﬁlements,
He who was engaged
In the practice of ultimate quiescence;
Having neither a second, nor any of similar standing,
Toward he who is worthy of the ten supreme titles,
I pay tribute with a bow.

The Sugata (Well-gone) was the highest,
The most honorable
Among all venerable ones in the human world;
He who discovered the Four Noble Truths and
The way that leads to ultimate cessation,
To that insight of safety and peace,
I pay tribute with a bow.

164

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

The highest among the ascetic mendicants (śramaṇas),
Turning wrong to right,
He who introduced the way to total quiescence,
Toward he whose trace is like the deep water,
I pay tribute with a bow.

Without the heat (of passion),
With the spotless teaching,
And the mind that is quiescent,
He who has removed all deﬁlements,
Toward that Honorable One, without deﬁlement,
I pay tribute with a bow.

Immeasurable with his eye of insight,
Wonderful and unthinkable is the title
Of [sublime] authority like that of nectar,
Toward that matchless (i.e., unequaled) one,
I pay tribute with a bow.

With his voice like a lion’s roar,
With no fear in the forest,
He who overcame the Evil One [Māra]
And transcended the four social classes,
For that reason,
I pay tribute with a bow.

Thus Mahākāśyapa, who was endowed with great authority and virtue,
well equipped with the four logical-linguistic excellences (catuṣ-pratisaṃvidaḥ), ﬁnished the foregoing verses. At that moment, the funeral pyre started
to burn of its own accord. The Mallan clanspeople said to each other:
Now the ﬁre appears to have intensiﬁed and is spreading over the pyre,
and it may not be controlled. After cremation it will extinguish itself,
but where can we now obtain water to prevent the ﬁre from spreading
over the whole pyre?

Then the śāla tree spirit by the side of the funeral pyre, who was devoted
to the path of the Buddha, extinguished the ﬁre with his supernormal power.

165

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I
29b

The Mallan clanspeople said to each other:

To the right and left beyond the city of Kuśinagara, for a range of
twelve yojanas, let us go collect fragrant ﬂowers to offer to the Buddha’s
body.

At once they left the city and collected fragrant ﬂowers to be used for the
funeral rite. Then each of the Mallan clanspeople of Pāvā, having heard that
the Buddha had entered ﬁnal nirvana under the twin śāla trees, without exception thought, “I must now go there and seek a part of his ashes (śarīras). We
shall erect a commemorative tower in our original place and conduct offering
services to the Buddha.” The Mallan clanspeople of Pāvā assembled the four
divisions of their army, the elephants, horses, chariots, and foot soldiers, and
well prepared they marched toward the city of Kuśinagara. On their arrival
they sent a messenger who delivered the following words:
We have been informed that the Buddha stayed in reliance upon your
service and entered ﬁnal nirvana in your country. He was also our
teacher. We have come here to receive some of his ashes out of respect
and affection for the World-honored One. We intend to erect commemorative towers in order to make offerings to him.

The king of Kuśinagara replied:

That is right, sir. Your claim is indeed correct, sir. However, the Worldhonored One happened to be here and entered ﬁnal nirvana in our land.
Our ofﬁcials and countrymen should themselves perform the memorial
service for the Buddha. Though it has caused you such trouble to come
from such a long distance, we cannot pass the ashes into your hands, sir.

At that time, the Buli people of the country of Allakappa, the Kauliyan
people of Rāmagrāma, the brāhmaṇas of Vaṭhadvīpa (Veṭhādīpa), the Śākya
people of Kapilavastu, the Licchavi people of Vaiśālī, and King Ajātaśatru
of Magadha had been informed that the Tathāgata had entered ﬁnal nirvana
at the twin śāla trees near the city of Kuśinagara. All equally thought to themselves, “We must now go there and receive some ashes.” So the rulers of
those countries, [especially] King Ajātaśatru of Magadha, at once ordered

166

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

their countrymen to assemble the four divisions of their armies, the elephants,
horses, chariots, and foot soldiers, and well prepared they marched and
crossed the Ganges River, sending the brāhmaṇa Droṇa as [the king’s] proxy
by instructing him:

Go to the city of Kuśinagara under my name and ask the Mallan clanspeople: “May I enquire as to whether you gentlemen are at ease in your
rising and siting, and feel strong in your walking, sirs. Wise gentlemen,
I am delighted to exchange mutual respect with you. We have been on
good terms as to territorial demarcation and have never put the matter
into the form of a public suit. I understand that the Tathāgata has entered
ﬁnal nirvana within your country. I simply wish to pay my respects
and reverence to the highest Honorable One as if he were a heavenly
god. Hence I have traveled a great distance to obtain a share of the
Buddha’s ashes, and upon taking the ashes to my own land I will erect
a commemorative tower for them in order to conduct offerings. If you
grant me some of the ashes, I will arrange for some of my country’s
treasure to be shared with your country, sir.”

Having thus received the king’s instruction, the brāhmaṇa Droṇa at once
went to the city and said to the Mallan clanspeople:

The king of Magadha makes courteously enquires as to whether you
[respected gentlemen] are at ease in your rising and sitting, and feel
strong in your walking. [He says:] “Wise gentlemen, I am delighted
to exchange mutual respect with you. We have been on good terms as
to territorial demarcation and have never put the matter into the form
of a public entered ﬁnal nirvana within your country. I simply wish to
pay my respects and reverence to the highest Honorable One as if he
were a heavenly god. Hence I have traveled a great a distance to share
some of the Buddha’s ashes, and on taking the ashes to my own land
I will erect a commemorative tower for them in order to conduct offerings. If you grant me some of the ashes, I will arrange for some of my
country’s treasure to be shared with your country, sir.”

At that time, the Mallan clanspeople replied:

167

29c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

That is right, sir. Your claim is indeed correct, sir. However, the Worldhonored One happened to enter ﬁnal nirvana in our land. Our ofﬁcials
and countrymen should themselves perform the memorial service for
the Buddha. Alhough it has caused you such trouble to come from such
a long distance, we cannot pass the ashes into your hands, sir.

The rulers of various countries assembled their respective ofﬁcials to discuss the matter and composed the following verse:
With courtesy we have come from a far distance
For the sake of a peaceful consultation and to
Request a share of the ashes
With words of moderation.
If this is not granted,
We have readied the four divisions of our armies here.
If [the relics] cannot be obtained on a justiﬁable basis,
Without fearing injury or death,
We will obtain them by force.

Then the people of Kuśinagara [also] assembled their ofﬁcials, and together
with the public they discussed the matter and replied in verse:
Although you have taken the trouble
To come from a long distance and
Proposed a deal with humility,
We dare not allow ourselves to yield
The ashes of the Tathāgata.
If you decide to resort to military force,
We have our own force here and
Will ﬁght against you even if we lose our lives.
We have no doubt about this.

At that time, the brāhmaṇa advised the people:

Dear wise men, you have received the Tathāgata’s teaching through
the long night. Do you not wish to recite the words of his Dharma,
convert yourselves to his compassion, and be mindful of the peace of
all sentient beings? If you raise armed conﬂict for the sake of the

168

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

Buddha’s ashes, everyone shall injure and kill each other. If you wish
to have the Tathāgata’s ashes, beneﬁt everyone widely; since the ashes
are available here, it is surely better to divide them among those who
wish to have a portion.

Everyone agreed that this would be best. Next, they discussed who would
be fairminded enough to carry out the task. Everyone agreed, “Let the brāhmaṇa Droṇa divide the ashes through his humane wisdom.” Thereupon, those
rulers of the various countries entrusted the task to the brāhmaṇa Droṇa,
saying, “Please divide the ashes on our behalf into eight equal portions.”
Droṇa, having listened to the rulers’ agreement, went to the place where the
ashes were stored and, having honored the ashes by bowing his head, proceeded to gently take an upper tooth and placed it aside. He sent for a messenger and instructed him:

Carry this upper tooth of the Buddha to King Ajātaśatru. You should
present my words to his majesty: “O great king, may I humbly enquire
as to whether your majesty is at ease in his rising and sitting, and feels
strong in his walking. Since the ashes have not yet been brought forth,
your majesty may feel immeasurably impatient. Now I have entrusted
an upper tooth of the Tathāgata in the hands of this messenger to carry
it to your majesty, so that an offering service may be conducted before
it and so that your majesty may be comforted by it, prior to the expected
plan (i.e., of erecting a commemorative tower). At sunrise tomorrow
I shall complete [the task of] dividing the ashes and will personally
transport your portion of the ashes to your majesty.”

Having received Droṇa’s instruction, the messenger at once went to King
Ajātaśatru and said:

With immeasurable honor, the brāhmaṇa Droṇa enquires as to whether
your majesty is at ease in his rising and sitting, and feels strong in his
walking. Since the ashes have not yet been distributed, your majesty
may feel immeasurably impatient. Now he has entrusted an upper tooth
of the Tathāgata into my hands to bring to your majesty, so that an offering
service may be conducted before it and so that your majesty may be
comforted by it, prior to the expected plan (of erecting a commemorative

169

30a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

tower). At sunrise tomorrow he will complete the division of the ashes,
and will personally transport your portion of the ashes to your majesty.

At that time Droṇa received all the ashes, measuring one shi, collected in
a urn, and at once divided the ashes into eight equal portions. Having done
so, he said to those who attended the session, “May I request you to use this
urn and yourselves witness who takes what through mutual consultation.”
Everyone praised Droṇa, “What splendid wisdom this is! He really knows
what is most proper at this given moment,” and each mutually agreed to
accept a portion. Then the people of Pippalavana made a request of all the
people, saying:
We would like to receive the amber that remains on the ground, for
the sake of erecting a commemorative tower in our country in order
to conduct an offering service.

Everyone agreed, “Let them have it.” Then the people of Kuśinagara
received a portion and erected their commemorative tower for conducting
their offering service. The people of Pāvā, those of Allakappa, those of Rāmagrāma, those of Veṭhadvīpa, those of Kapilavastu, those of Vaiśālī, and the
king of Magadha, Ajātaśatru, having received their respective portions,
returned to their countries and erected commemorative towers for conducting
offering services. The brāhmaṇa Droṇa received the urn that contained the
ashes, returned to his country, and erected a commemorative tower there.
The people of Pippalavana took the amber to their country and erected a
commemorative tower in their country. At that time, eight commemorative
towers were built, and a ninth was erected for enshrining the vase, a tenth
for enshrining the amber, and an eleventh for enshrining the World-honored
One’s hair.
When was the Buddha born? When did the Buddha realize enlightenment?
And when did he enter ﬁnal nirvana? He was born when the boiling star
( f eixing) appeared; he was enlightened when the boiling star appeared; he
entered the city of nirvana when the boiling star appeared.21
When was the foremost among humans born?
When did he renounce the world of suffering?
When did he realize the highest path?

170

Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns

When did he enter the city of nirvana?
When the boiling star appeared,
The Foremost among Humans was born.
When the boiling star appeared,
He came forth from the world of suffering.
When the boiling star appeared,
He realized the highest path.
When the boiling star appeared,
He entered the city of nirvana.
On the eighth day, the Tathāgata was born.
On the eighth day the Buddha renounced the world.
On the eighth day, he realized perfect enlightenment.
On the eighth day, he entered ﬁnal cessation.
On the eighth day, the Foremost among Humans was born.
On the eighth day, he came out from the world of suffering.
On the eighth day, he realized the highest path.
On the eighth day, he entered the city of nirvana.
In the second month, the Tathāgata was born.
In the second month, the Buddha renounced the world.
In the second month, he realized enlightenment.
In the second month, he entered ﬁnal nirvana.
In the second month, the Foremost among Humans was born.
In the second month, he came out of the world of suffering.
In the second month, he realized the highest path.
In the second month, he entered the city of nirvana.
The śāla tree ﬂowers were profusely blooming;
Various lights mutually illuminated.
At that original place,
The Tathāgata entered ﬁnal nirvana.
When the Great Merciful [One] entered ﬁnal nirvana,
Many people praised and venerated him.
Having removed all the people’s fearfulness,
He was determined to take the course of nirvana.

30b

[End of Sutra 2: Last Journey and Sojourns]

171

Sutra 3
A Great Treasury Councilor

(Dīgha Nikāya 19: Mahāgovinda Suttanta)
Thus have I heard. At one time, the Buddha was sojourning on the [mountaintop called] Vulture Peak in the city of Rājagṛha, together with one thousand
two hundred and ﬁfty disciples. At that time, the god Pañcaśika, son of Gandharva, brightly illuminated Vulture Peak with a great ray of light and visited
the Buddha when the place was all quiet and no one was around. Having
venerated the Buddha [by bowing] his forehead to [the Buddha’s] feet, he
withdrew and stood to one side, then said to the Buddha:
The god Brahmā, lord of Brahmā Heaven, recently visited Trāyastriṃśa
Heaven to consult with the god Indra, lord of that heaven. I happened
to hear directly from the god Brahmā. Shall I now tell your holiness
about this matter?

The Buddha replied, “If you wish to tell me about it, then do so.” Pañcaśika thus related the following story:

At one time, the gods of Trāyastriṃśa Heaven assembled at the Sudharma-sabhā hall to discuss a certain matter. At that time, the four
guardians of the heavens stationed themselves in their respective positions. Dhṛtarāṣṭra sat to the east while facing west; Indra was in front
of him. Virūḍhaka sat to the south while facing north; Indra was in
front of him. Virūpākṣa sat to the west while facing east; Indra was in
front of him. Vaiśravaṇa sat to the north while facing south; Indra was
in front of him. Waiting until all these four guardians took their seats,
I then sat down.
There were also other great luminaries who had previously accomplished the practice of pure and genuine austerity under the Buddha’s
guidance. Upon death they were reborn in Trāyastriṃśa Heaven and
[now] help the residents of that heaven increase the ﬁve kinds of beneﬁts: (1) heavenly longevity, (2) good appearance, (3) prominence,

173

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

(4) happiness, and (5) authority and virtue. [Accordingly,] the residents
of that heaven all rejoice, dancing and leaping, and praise them, “They
promote our well-being, thereby causing the advantage of the asuras,
the adversarial demigods, to diminish.”
At that time, knowing the joy of the residents in his heaven, the god
Indra composed the following verse on their behalf:

30c

The residents of Trāyastriṃśa Heaven and
Their lord Indra rejoice together
In the harmonious life of pleasure and happiness,
And respectfully venerate the Tathāgata and
The truth of his Dharma.
[For] the heavenly citizens have been beneﬁted
With visible fortunes, such as
Longevity, good complexion, fame,
Happiness, and authority.
The contributors of these beneﬁts
Were previously trained under the Buddha’s guidance
In the practice of austerity, pure and genuine,
And because of that merit
They have been born in this heaven.
Some of these citizens,
Whose auras and complexions
Are exceedingly noble and august,
Were [previously] the disciples of the Buddha.
Having acquired insight and
Having been born into this heaven,
They too became prominent.
The residents of Trāyastriṃśa and
The lord of this heaven, Indra,
Thinking of the state of happiness promoted by them,
Venerate respectfully the Tathāgata and
The truth of his Dharma.

Upon hearing this verse uttered by their lord, the gods of Trāyastriṃśa
Heaven could not help rejoicing all the more about such good fortune

174

Sutra 3: A Great Treasury Councilor

beyond their control, which thus promoted their well-being while causing the advantage of the asuras, the adversarial demigods, to diminish.
Having observed their joy and delight, the lord Indra said to them,
“Dear wise citizens, don’t you wish to learn the eight supreme qualities
that pertain to the Tathāgata?” The Trāyastriṃśa gods replied, “Yes,
we would be most delighted to hear about them, sir.” The god Indra
said, “Listen attentively, you should contemplate and remember the
following.”

O wise citizens, the Tathāgata is endowed with ten titles, such as
One who Realized Ultimate Truth, One who Realized Perfect
Enlightenment, and so forth. Throughout the past, present, and future
I have never seen anyone like the Buddha, to whom these ten titles,
Arhat and so forth, pertain so perfectly. Not only in teaching the
subtle Dharma so well but also in putting his knowledge of this
subtle Dharma into his own practice, throughout the past, present,
and future I have never seen anyone like the Buddha who combines
these two aspects of excellence in unison. Because of this subtle
Dharma, the Buddha was himself enlightened with it, became an
expert in it, and enjoyed it. Throughout the past, present, and future
I have never seen anyone like the Buddha who, because of this
Dharma, was himself enlightened, became an expert in it, and
enjoyed it.
O wise citizens, because of this Dharma, the Buddha was not
only enlightened, but the passage that leads to the goal of nirvana
was also opened and shown; he associated himself with this path,
gradually proceeded upon it, and ﬁnally entered the state of total
quiescence, just like the waters of the Ganges and Yamunā Rivers
combine and ﬂow together into the same ocean. The Buddha is also
like this. Not only in opening and showing the passage toward the
goal of nirvana but also in associating himself with it and gradually
proceeding on it, and ﬁnally entering the state of total quiescence.
Throughout the past, present, and future I have never seen anyone
like the Buddha who opened and showed the passage that leads to
the goal of nirvana.

175

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

O wise citizens, the Tathāgata organized the members of his
[religious] family. Whether they were kṣatriyas, brāhmaṇas, householders, or śramaṇas, whoever has acquired insight is a member of
his sangha. Throughout the past, present, and future I have never
seen anyone like the Buddha who has accomplished such a family.
O wise citizens, the Tathāgata organized his host of followers,
namely bhikṣus, bhikṣuṇīs, and [male and female lay] householders
(upāsakas and upāsikās). Throughout the past, present, and future
I have never seen anyone like the Buddha who accomplished an
organization of such a host of members.
O wise citizens, the Tathāgata’s words and conduct match perfectly. Whatever he says becomes his action; however he acts is in
accordance with his words. In accomplishing the constant relation
between what is said and what is done like this, throughout the past,
present, and future I have never seen anyone like the Buddha, none
who is as consistent in his speech and conduct, accomplishing such
an invariable relation between what is said and what is done.
O wise citizens, the Tathāgata enormously beneﬁted people in
their well-being and gave them [real] assurance. In beneﬁting heavenly citizens through his mercy and sympathy, throughout the past,
present, and future I have never seen anyone like the Buddha who
beneﬁted us so well and gave us such assurance. O wise citizens,
these are the eight supreme qualities that pertain to the Tathāgata.

31a

At that time, the gods of Trāyastriṃśa Heaven argued, asserting an
opinion:

If we could have eight buddhas arise into this world, they would
promote our well-being while causing the advantage of the asuras,
the adversarial demigods, to diminish.

Another group of Trāyastriṃśa residents spoke:

Setting aside the number of eight buddhas, seven, or six, and so on,
if even only two buddhas should arise into this world simultaneously,
this too would greatly enhance the fortunes of the heavenly citizens,

176

Sutra 3: A Great Treasury Councilor

while contrarily causing the advantage of the asuras to diminish.
How much more so if all eight buddhas could arise at once!

Then the lord Indra said to the Trāyastriṃśa residents:

I have heard from the Buddha, directly from him, that even if people
wish for two buddhas to arise simultaneously, there is no such place
in this world where they could arise at the same time. If only one
could successfully cause the Tathāgata to extend his life span, then,
since his love and sympathy are great, there would be many more
ways in which Tathāgata could beneﬁt people, but there also would
be greater appeasement of the heavenly citizens through the promotion of their well-being, thereby diminishing the advantage of
the asuras, the adversarial demigods.

At that time, Pañcaśika said to the Buddha:

O World-honored One, the purpose for which the Trāyastriṃśa residents
assembled at the Sudharma-sabhā hall was to discuss together, to think
together, to evaluate together, to investigate together, and to instruct
together. After that, the assembly gave various instructions to the four
guardians of the heavens and, having received the instructions, the
guardians returned to their respective positions. But soon after they
had returned to their respective positions an unusual ray of light illuminated all the regions. The Trāyastriṃśa gods, having seen this light,
were all terriﬁed, thinking, “What kind of ill omen does this unusual
ray of light indicate?” Some of the great deities endowed with supernormal powers were also terriﬁed, wondering, “What kind of ill omen
does this unusual ray of light indicate?”
The god Brahmā then assumed the form of a young boy and, with
his head shaped like a pentagon and his hair spread out over the host
of gods, he rose in midair. His appearance was exceedingly handsome,
surpassing that of the gods. His body was purplish gold, overwhelming
the luminosity of all the heavenly beings. The Trāyastriṃśa residents
did not then stand up to welcome him, nor did they greet him or commend him to take his seat. The Brahmā youth, however, took his seat

177

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

in an available space. He was delighted, as if an anointed kṣatriya had
ascended to the throne, and rejoiced, dancing and leaping. Soon after
he sat down, he changed himself into the form of a young boy, with
his head in the shape of a pentagon and his hair spreading out over the
host of gods, sitting in midair, just as a wrestler sits in his permanent
seat, immovable like a mountain. He then composed the following
verse:

31b

The residents of Trāyastriṃśa Heaven and
Their lord Indra rejoice together
In the harmonious life of pleasure and happiness,
And respectfully venerate the Tathāgata and
The truth of his Dharma.
[For] the heavenly citizens have been beneﬁted
With visible fortunes, such as
Longevity, good complexion, fame,
Happiness, and authority.
The contributors of these beneﬁts
Were previously trained under the Buddha’s guidance
In the practice of pure and genuine austerity,
And because of that merit
They have been born in this heaven.
Some of these citizens,
Whose auras and complexions
Are exceedingly noble and august,
Were [previously] the disciples of the Buddha.
Having acquired insight and
Having been born into this heaven,
They too became prominent.
The Trāyastriṃśa residents and
The lord of this heaven, Indra,
Thinking of this state of happiness promoted by them,
Venerate respectfully the Tathāgata and
The truth of his Dharma.

178

Sutra 3: A Great Treasury Councilor

At that time, the citizens of Trāyastriṃśa Heaven said to the Brahmā
youth, “We have just heard our lord Indra’s exhortation on the eight
supreme qualities that pertain to the Tathāgata and have been rejoicing,
dancing and leaping; we feel as if we are beyond self-control.”
The Brahmā youth said to the Trāyastriṃśa gods, “What are the
eight supreme qualities of the Tathāgata? I wish to also hear about
them, sirs.” Thus, the lord Indra at once also gave him his exhortation
on the Tathāgata’s eight supreme qualities. Having twice listened to
Indra’s exhortation, the Trāyastriṃśa gods uncontrollably rejoiced all
the more at the promotion of their well-being and the diminishment
of the asuras’ advantage.
At that time, observing the rejoicing Trāyastriṃśa gods, the Brahmā
youth also felt more and more joyous, as if he could not stop himself
from dancing, and at once said to the Trāyastriṃśa gods, “Do you not
wish to hear about another supreme quality of the Tathāgata?” The
gods replied, “Excellent, we wish to hear about it!” The boy said to
them, “Since you do wish to hear about it, listen attentively and I shall
explain it to you.” He related the following story to the gods:

Once, when the Tathāgata was a bodhisattva, he was sagacious and
acquired all kinds of knowledge in his birthplace. O wise citizens,
you should know that in an immemorial past there was a king,
Diśāṃpati (“Lord of the Region”) by name, in that world, and his
eldest prince was called Reṇu (“Mercy”). The king had a treasurer,
Govinda, as his prime councilor, and the latter had a son called
Jyotipāla. Prince Reṇu had a group of six kṣatriya friends who were
also ministers. When King Diśāṃpati withdrew to the rear palace
for leisurely amusement and pastimes, it was customary that he
entrusted the business of governance to the treasury councilor. Only
then did he withdraw to his palace to enjoy [the pleasures of the]
ﬁve senses, such as listening to music, watching performances of
dancing, and so on.
Whenever the treasury councilor Govinda conducted government
business he ﬁrst listened to his own son’s advice, and only then
made his decisions. Whenever he faced issues that required a decision,

179

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

he sought his son’s advice. After a while, the treasury councilor
suddenly passed away. When King Diśaṃpati was informed of the
treasury councilor’s death, he felt pity and sorrow, lamenting, “Alas,
what can I do now? I have lost the most important pillar of my
state.”
Prince Reṇu quietly thought to himself, “The king regrets the
death of the treasury councilor. I should go see him to advise him
that he should not succumb to his suffering in mourning his councilor’s death, because his son, Jotipāla by name, is sagacious and
learned, and has acquired varieties of knowledge exceeding even
that of his father. The king should appoint him to conduct the governance of the state.”
Prince Reṇu at once visited his father, the king, and advised him,
explaining the foregoing in detail. Having heard this advice, the king
summoned Jyotipāla and said to him, “I shall appoint you to the same
position held by your respected father and entrust you with the seal
of the councilor.” As soon as Jyotipāla received it, the king further
instructed him to take over the duties of governance and retreated to
the rear palace. By then, the councilor Jyotipāla knew the business
of governing well; he knew not only what his father had been doing
before him but also whatever his father had left unaccomplished.
Jyotipāla’s name and reputation spread throughout the continent as
far as the limit of the ocean, and everywhere under the sky he was
called the “great treasury councilor” by everyone.
Sometime later, the great treasury councilor thought to himself,
“King Diśāṃpati, whose body and mind have been impaired by
age, has little time left before his death. It would not be difﬁcult for
the prince to succeed his throne. I should inform the six kṣatriya
ministers, ‘King Diśāṃpati, whose body and mind have deteriorated
from age, has little time left before his death. It would not be difﬁcult
for the prince to succeed his throne. Your territorial lands too must
be sealed for your respective kingdoms. Do not forget this matter
after the new king is enthroned.’”
The great treasury councilor then visited the six kṣatriya ministers
and said to them, “Your honors, you should know that now King

31c

180

Sutra 3: A Great Treasury Councilor

Diśāṃpati, whose body and mind are impaired by age, has little
time left before his death. It would not be difﬁcult for the prince to
succeed to the throne. Go speak to the prince about this matter, saying, ‘Honorable prince, we were born together with you and
befriended you from childhood. If your excellence is suffering, we
too are suffering. If your excellence is happy, we too feel happy.
Now the king’s body and mind have become impaired, and his age
is reaching its limit and he has little time left before passing away.
It would not be difﬁcult for your excellence to succeed to the throne.
When you ascend the throne, may you also seal the respective territorial lands for our kingdoms.’”
Thereupon, having listened to this advice, the six kṣatriya ministers at once visited the prince and advised him by explaining the
foregoing matters. The prince replied, “When I ascend the throne,
with whom, I wonder, should I consult in order to enumerate the
lands and allocate the countries?”
The king died suddenly soon after. The ministers of the state in
due order supported Pince Reṇu’s ascent to the throne. Having been
enthroned, the new king thought to himself, “I should now appoint
someone as my prime minister, following the fashion of the previous
ruler. Who is capable of this position? The great treasury councilor
who assisted my father before—he alone should be appointed as
my prime minister.”
King Reṇu summoned [the treasury councilor] and said to him,
“I now appoint you as prime minister and give you the ofﬁcial seal.
May you, with exertion and care, assume general oversight of the
governance of state affairs.”
Having heard to the king’s words, the great treasury councilor
accepted the seal. It was customary that whenever the king withdrew
to the rear palace for his pastimes he entrusted the task of governance
to the prime minister. The great treasury councilor again thought to
himself, “I should visit the six kṣatriya ministers now and ask them
if they remember what was said in the past about their feudal lands
and countries.”

181

32a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

At once he visited and said to the ministers, “Your honors, do
you still remember what was said in the past? Prince Reṇu has now
been enthroned. He withdraws to the rear palace to enjoy his ﬁve
senses in pastimes. Your honors should visit the king to enquire,
‘Your majesty has ascended the throne and enjoys the ﬁve senses
in pastimes. Does your majesty still remember what was said about
our feudatory lands and countries, sir?’”
Having heard his advice, the six kṣatriya ministers at once visited
the king and said to him, “Your majesty has ascended the throne
and enjoys the ﬁve senses in pastimes, but do you recall what was
said in the past regarding our feudal lands and countries? The
arrangement of lands and districts should be sealed for each of us
respectively, sir.” The king replied, “I have not forgotten what I said
in the past. It was for you, and for whom else should I speak about
such arrangements of lands and districts to be sealed?”
The king again thought to himself, “This Jambudvīpa continent
extends wider toward the north but is narrower toward the south.
Who would be able to divide this continent into seven equal parts?”
Again he thought to himself, “The great treasury councilor alone is
capable of such a task.” Thus he at once asked the treasury councilor,
“Please divide the Jambudvīpa continent into seven parts.” Accordingly, the great treasury councilor took up the task. First, he accomplished the administrative divisions of the territory that his king ruled
into cities, villages, towns, counties, and countries, and then, in a
similar manner, he accomplished the administrative divisions for the
six territories to be sealed for the six new kṣatriya rulers.
Delighted, King Reṇu said, “My wish has been granted.” The
six kṣatriyas were also pleased, and with satisfaction said, “Our
wishes have also been realized. It is due to the great treasury councilor’s talent that this deed has been accomplished.” The six kṣatriya
kings each thought again to themselves, “My country has just been
founded, and I need someone who can assist me as prime minister.
Who is really capable of this task? Our great treasury councilor
alone is capable of such a task.” Each of the six kṣatriya kings summoned the councilor, saying, “My state needs a prime minister. May

182

Sutra 3: A Great Treasury Councilor

you take on the general oversight of the governance of my state.”
Thereupon, all six kings each granted their ofﬁcial seals to the great
treasury councilor. As soon as the latter accepted the ofﬁcial seals,
the six kings retreated to their rear palaces to enjoy pastimes of
games and amusements. Thus, entrusted with the task of governance,
the great treasury councilor assumed general oversight of the governance of all seven countries. There was nothing whatsoever that
was left incomplete in his stewardship.
At that time, there were seven wealthy householders within the
country. The treasury councilor also managed their household affairs
for them, as well as teaching seven hundred brāhmaṇas how to recite
their sutras. The seven kings respectfully treated the great treasury
councilor as if he were a god, the seven wealthy householders
regarded him as if he were a great king, and the seven hundred brāhmaṇas looked up to him as if he were the god Brahmā. Then the
seven kings, seven householders, and seven hundred brāhmaṇas
respectively thought to themselves, “The great treasury councilor
always meets with the god Brahmā, exchanges words with him, and
sits down and stands up in intimate association with him.”
The great treasury councilor, however, who quietly knew the
thoughts of the kings, householders, and brāhmaṇas, thought to
himself, “According to their beliefs, I meet often with the god
Brahmā, exchange words with him, and sit down and stand up in
intimate association with him. In actuality, however, I have never
seen the god Brahmā, nor have I exchanged words with him, hence
I ought not to accept this praise by remaining silent. I also remember
the words of various learned elders that if one withdraws into a
secluded place during the four summer months and practices the
four kinds of immeasurable minds, the god Brahmā will descend
from his heaven to meet with the practitioner. I should now practice
the discipline of the four immeasurable minds and see if the god
Brahmā really will come down to meet with me.”
Having so decided, the great treasury councilor went to see each
of the seven kings, requesting of each, “Your majesty, may you take
over the general oversight of the governance [of your country], for

183

32b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

I wish to take a leave of absence for the duration of the four summer
months in order to practice the discipline of the four immeasurable
minds, sir.” The seven kings each answered, “You may go whenever
you are ready.” The great treasury councilor also said to the seven
wealthy householders, “You should look after your household affairs
by yourselves for the duration of the four summer months, because
I wish to practice the discipline of the four immeasurable minds
during that time.” The householders all answered, “Yes, sir. You
may go whenever you are ready, sir.”
He also said to the seven hundred brāhmaṇas, “You should be
busily engaged in the practice of recitation and also teach each other
among yourselves. I am planning to leave for the four summer
months in order to practice the discipline of the four immeasurable
minds.” The brāhmaṇas replied, “Yes, sir. Great teacher, you know
you may go whenever you are ready, sir.”
The great treasury councilor then built a secluded abode on the
eastern outskirts of the city and resided there while engaging in the
practice of the four immeasurable minds during the summer months.
Lord Brahmā, however, did not come to meet him. The treasury
councilor thought to himself, “According to my learning from the
words of some elders, if one practices the discipline of the four
immeasurable minds during the four summer months, Lord Brahmā
is supposed to descend, manifesting himself before the practitioner.
Now, however, in my state of quiescence, there is no trace at all of
such a vision.” Then, on the ﬁfteenth of the month, on the night of
the full moon, the great treasury councilor came out of his solitary
abode and sat in the outdoor alley. Soon after he sat down outdoors
there appeared a bright illumination. The great treasury councilor
quietly thought to himself, “Is this strange light the sign of Brahmā
descending?” Brahmā then transﬁgured himself into the form of a
boy and appeared with his pentagonal-shaped head and wildly
disheveled hair, and hovered in midair in a sitting posture above
the treasury councilor. On seeing this, the treasury councilor composed the following verse:

184

Sutra 3: A Great Treasury Councilor

What heavenly god is this form,
Sitting in midair,
Illuminating all four directions
Like a great ﬁre burning intensely?

The Brahmā youth responded in verse:

Only those gods of Brahmā Heaven
Know that I am Brahmā in the form of a boy.
The rest call me a god of ﬁre and
Enshrine me in the ﬁre god shrine.

The great treasury councilor continued in verse:

Now I wish to communicate with you,
Receive your instruction,
Pay my reverence and respect to you, and
Set forth a meal of superior taste for you, sir.
May I request, O god:
“May you fathom my mind of enquiry.”

32c

The Brahmā youth replied again in verse:

O treasury councilor,
While you are engaged in practicing some discipline,
What do you wish to seek for?
Since you have set forth this offering,
I shall accept it for your sake.

Again the god Brahmā said to the great treasury councilor, “If you
have any questions, ask me as freely as you wish. I shall answer them
for you.” Thereupon, the great treasury councilor thought to himself,
“Now, should I ask about the matter of the present life or that of the
future?” Again he thought to himself, “Sometime later I may ask
about present life matters. I should instead ask about the future life
after death.” He thus questioned the Brahmā youth in verse:
Now I shall ask the Brahmā youth,
“May you resolve my doubt

185

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

So as to free me of doubt.
By practicing (studying) what discipline and
Abiding in what kind of mental state (dharma),
Can I be born in Brahmā Heaven, sir?”

At that time, the Brahmā youth replied in verse:

You should forsake the thought of selﬁshness,
Abide in seclusion,
Practice the mind of benevolence,
Remove desires, and absent yourself from ﬁlthiness.
Then you may be able
To be born in Brahmā Heaven.

At that moment, when the great treasury councilor heard this reply,
he thought to himself, “The Brahmā youth replied in verse that one
should remove ﬁlthiness, but I do not understand what this means.
I must ask him again.” Then the great treasury councilor questioned
the god Brahmā in verse:
Your verse refers to ﬁlthiness.
May I now ask you to explain to me what this means?
Who opens the gate of this world
Through which one falls into evil courses of life and
Cannot be born in the world of heaven?

At that time, the Brahmā youth replied in verse:

Those who harbor deceit and jealousy,
Who are accustomed to self-conceit and undue self-esteem,
Who cherish avarice in the heart,
Desire, hate, anger, delusion, and arbitrariness,
These people are said to be ﬁlthy.
Now I let you know that these vices
Open the gate that leads to the fall
Into the evil courses of life,
And not to rebirth in heaven.

186

Sutra 3: A Great Treasury Councilor

At that time, having heard this verse, the treasury councilor thought
to himself, “I have now understood the meaning of ‘ﬁlthiness,’ but
it is not possible to remove it while living a householder’s life.
Shouldn’t I now renounce ordinary life, go forth from family ties,
shave my hair and beard, wear a mendicant’s robe, and practice the
path of religion?” At that moment, the Brahmā youth knew the councilor’s thoughts and related the following in verse:
You have good courage.
Your wish is superb.
It is what a man of wisdom does, and after death,
He will surely be born in Brahmā Heaven.

Thereupon, the Brahmā youth suddenly disappeared. The foremost
treasury councilor returned to visit the seven kings and said to them,
“Your majesties, may you make yourselves models in assuming
oversight of governing state affairs. I am planning to leave family
life, wear a mendicant’s robe, and practice the path of religion. The
reason is this, sirs. Recently I happened to listen to the god Brahmā’s
exhortation on the deﬁled state of life, and in my mind I despise it.
As long as I am in the householder’s life there is no possibility of
removing it totally from my life, sirs.”
At that time, the seven kings thought to themselves, “The brāhmaṇas in general desire riches and treasures. I should open up the
state’s storehouses and let him have whatever he wishes, so that he
will change his mind.” The seven kings said to the treasury councilor,
“If you need anything, I will give you whatever you wish. You
should not leave the householder’s life.”
The treasury councilor replied to the kings, “I have now already
received your generous offer. I have my own riches and treasures,
sirs, but I shall present all of them to your majesties as my gift. May
I request your majesties to accept my petition so that I may realize
the goal of my pursuit, sirs.”
Then the seven kings thought to themselves, “The brāhmaṇas
in general desire fancy food. I should provide him with some palace

187

33a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

ladies to satisfy his mind and taste, so that he may change his mind.”
Then each king told him, “If you need some palace ladies, you may
have any of them as you wish. You should not leave the householder’s life.”
The treasury councilor replied, “I have now already received
your generous offer, sirs. Though I have a number of palace ladies
in my household now, I have sent them all away in order to sever
the relation of love and affection, and am ready to go forth in the
practice of the religious path. The reason is this, sirs. Recently I
happened to listen to the god Brahmā’s exhortation on the deﬁlement
of life, and in my mind I despise it. As long as I am in the householder’s life there is no possibility of removing it totally from my
life, sirs.” Then the great treasury councilor said to King Reṇu in
verse:
May your majesty allow me my say:
The king is the most honorable among men.
Though you would provide me riches and ladies,
These treasures are not ones with which I can be satisﬁed.

King Reṇu replied in verse as well:

Kaliṅga and its capital city, Dantapura,
Aśvaka and its capital, Potana,
Avanti and its capital, Māhīṣmatī,
Aṅga and its capital city, Caṃpā,
The cities of Xiuo, Shumisaluo, and Roruka,
Vārāṇasī and its capital, Kāśī,
All these have been developed by you, the treasury councilor.
If you lack anything in your possessions
For the fulﬁllment of the senses,
I shall provide you with anything you need.
May you remain in the position and,
Together with me, handle the state’s affairs.
You need not go away,
Renouncing your family relations.

188

Sutra 3: A Great Treasury Councilor

At that time, the great treasury councilor responded in verse:
I have little desire to fulﬁll my ﬁve senses, and
Hence naturally I am not attached to my life
In the manner of other people.
I have already heard the words of the heavenly god.
Hence my mind will never remain in the householder’s life.

King Reṇu replied in verse:

From which god have you acquired, as you say,
The wish to forsake the objects
Of the ﬁve senses?
Now I ask you to reply to me at once.

The treasury councilor replied in verse:

Some time ago I sat alone and
Thought to myself in a secluded place.
Then the god Brahmā descended
With the splendid ray of light illuminating everywhere.
Ever since I learned things from him,
I have not been able to enjoy this world.

Then King Reṇu told him in verse:

Remain a short while, O great treasury councilor.
Let us together propagate the good inﬂuence of religion and
Then let us renounce family life together.
You are my teacher.
Just as lapis lazuli gems, pure and genuine,
Fill up the midair,
Now my faith, pure and genuine,
Is permeated with the teaching of the Buddha.

Then the great treasury councilor said in verse:

The heavenly gods and the people of this world
Should forsake the objects of the ﬁve senses,

189

33b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

Remove various deﬁlements, and
Carry out the practice of pure and genuine austerity.

At that time, the seven kings said to the great treasury councilor,
“You should remain seven years, enjoying entirely the ﬁve senses
in this world, and then abandon the country, leaving things to our
children and relations. Wouldn’t it be a good idea for you to renounce
family life together with us? We shall then follow you; whatever
you do, we shall do likewise.”
The great treasury councilor replied to the seven kings, “The
world is impermanent. Human life passes swiftly and cannot be
sustained [unchanged] even for a moment’s breath. Therefore, isn’t
the duration of seven years an awfully long time?”
The seven kings said again, “If you think that seven years is too
long a time, let us wait for six years, ﬁve years, nay even only one
year, staying in a quiet palace, exhaustively enjoying the ﬁve senses,
spending time together in pastimes; then, after that, let us renounce
our countries, leaving them to our children and relations. Wouldn’t
it be a good idea for you to renounce family life together with us?
Whatever you do, we shall do likewise.”
The great treasury councilor again spoke to the kings, saying,
“The world is impermanent. Human life passes swiftly and cannot
be sustained [unchanged] even for a moment’s breath. Therefore,
isn’t the duration of one year an awfully long time? In this matter,
seven months and so forth, even a month, is all the same and I cannot
wait for that period, sir.”
The kings said again, “For seven days we shall stay in the rear
palace and enjoy in every way the ﬁve senses in this world. After that
we shall renounce our states, leaving them to our sons and relations,
and together we shall renounce family life. Is this not a good idea?”
The great treasury councilor replied, “The duration of seven days
is not too long. By my own decision I shall remain, sirs. May I,
however, emphasize to your majesties that the words of your pledge
must be honored without fail, sirs. If after seven days your majesties
do not leave, I shall myself go forth alone, sirs.”

33c

190

Sutra 3: A Great Treasury Councilor

Thereupon, the great treasury councilor visited the seven wealthy
householders and said to them, “Dear householders, you should
handle your household affairs by yourselves. I shall be leaving
family life and will practice the path to realize the goal of unconditioned transcendence. The reason is that recently I happened to
listen to the god Brahmā’s exhortation on the deﬁlement of life, and
in my mind I despise it. As long as I am in the householder’s life
there is no possibility of totally removing it from my life.”
The seven householders replied to the treasury councilor, “Your
decision is splendid. You should know when it is the right time. We
wish to renounce our family ties at the same time, together with
you, sir. In whatever you do, we shall follow and do the same.”
Then the great treasury councilor also visited the seven hundred
brāhmaṇas and said to them, “Gentlemen, you should exert yourselves in the practice of reciting sutras, search for the meaning of
morality, and teach among yourselves. I shall be leaving family life
to practice the path and realize the goal of unconditioned transcendence. The reason is that recently I happened to listen to the god
Brahmā’s exhortation on the deﬁlement of life, and in my mind I
despise it. As long as I am in the householder’s life, there is no possibility of totally removing it from my life.”
The seven hundred brāhmaṇas said to the treasury councilor,
“Great teacher, you should not renounce family life. The householder’s life is much easier, and one is entitled to enjoy the ﬁve
senses. In the householder’s life many people attend and take care
of you, and you do not have to suffer or worry about anything. [In
contrast,] those who renounce family life have to live in the wilderness, neither desiring anything, nor grasping anything because of
desire.”
The treasury councilor replied, “If I consider the householder’s
life as a happy one, I would regard its renunciation as suffering,
and thus eventually discard such an idea myself. But it is solely
because I consider the householder’s life to be suffering and its
renunciation to be happiness that I shall take the course of forsaking
the householder’s life.”

191

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

The brāhmaṇas replied: “O great teacher, if you renounce family
life, we too shall renounce family life, sir. Whatever your reverence
does, we shall do likewise, sir.”’
Then the treasury councilor returned to his wives and said to
them, “Ladies, according to your preference, whoever wishes to
stay may stay, and whoever wishes to return [to their original home]
may do so. This is because I wish to renounce family life and practice
the path of religion in order to realize the unconditioned state of
transcendence.”
He discussed the matter and explained his intended renunciation
in detail. His wives then replied, “O great treasury councilor, you
have been in part my husband, and in part my father. Though you
are renouncing family life, we shall follow your path, sir. Whatever
the treasury councilor practices, we shall likewise practice, sir.”
In this way, after seven days had passed, the great treasury councilor shaved his hair and beard and departed, wearing the three
formal robes of a mendicant, leaving household life. The seven
kings, seven great householders, seven hundred brāhmaṇas, and
forty wives respectively increased the number of their companions
one after another, ﬁnally adding up to as many as eighty-four thousand people. All of them simultaneously renounced family life and
followed the treasury councilor.
Subsequently, the great treasury councilor wandered through
many different countries and beneﬁted people everywhere widely
by propagating the inﬂuence of the religious path.

34a

At that time, the god Brahmā said to the residents of Trāyastriṃśa Heaven:

This treasury councilor was none other than Śākyamuni Buddha himself,
you should never think otherwise. The World-honored One then
renounced his family life after seven days of waiting and, leading a
host of people, wandered through various countries, beneﬁting people
everywhere widely by propagating the inﬂuence of the religious path.
All of you, if you have any doubt regarding my words, since the Worldhonored One is sojourning at Vulture Peak you should visit him and
ask him about it directly. Whatever the Buddha says should be accepted.

192

Sutra 3: A Great Treasury Councilor

The visitor Pañcaśika said:

Because of this story I have come here, sir. Is it true that this great
treasury councilor is indeed the same as the World-honored One, sir?
World-honored One, after seven days of waiting, did your holiness
really renounce family life together with the seven kings, and so forth,
and also with a host of eighty-four thousand people who simultaneously
renounced family life? Did you really accomplish the propagation of
your religious path by wandering through various countries and beneﬁting people everywhere, sir?

The Buddha replied to Pañcaśika:

Indeed, the treasury councilor of that time was none other than myself,
Śākyamuni Buddha, you should never think otherwise. At that time
the people of that country all came out in procession, and excitedly,
despite some unavoidable damage, everyone raised their voices, chanting, “Homage to the great treasurer Mahāgovinda, the seven kings’
councilor! Homage to the great treasurer, the seven kings’ councilor!”
The chanting was repeated in this way three times.
O Pañcaśikha, although the great treasury councilor bore such great
virtue and power he could not teach the ultimate path of salvation for
the sake of his disciples, he could not help them practice the ultimate
discipline of austerity, and he could not lead them to the ultimate place
of safety and freedom. The doctrine he taught and which his disciples
followed in practice was that which said that when one’s body dissolved
at the end of life he would be born in Brahmā Heaven. If one’s practice
could not reach full realization but only the secondary level, then that
person would be born among the gods who control enjoyments that
are magically created by others, highest in the world of the senses; if
one’s practice reached the third level, that person would be born among
the gods who control enjoyments magically created by themselves,
and so on. In descending gradation, then, one would be born among
the gods of Tuṣita Heaven, Yāmadeva Heaven, Trāyastriṃśa Heaven,
in the realm of the four guardians, then among the kṣatriyas, the brāhmaṇas, the lay [Buddhist] householders (upāsakas and upāsikās), and

193

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

ﬁnally in any wealthy family able to acquire anything freely according
to their wish.
O Pañcaśikha, those who were the disciples of the great treasury
councilor, who renounced family life without confusion, were able to
acquire their rewards and teachings but because it was not the ultimate
path they could not be helped to practice the ultimate discipline of austerity, and hence they could not reach the ultimate place of safety and
freedom, nirvana. For whoever excelled well in this path was only destined to be born in Brahmā Heaven.
Now I have been exhorting the Dharma to my disciples in order to
help them realize the ultimate path, the ultimate practice of austerity,
and the ultimate place of safety and freedom, namely, the ﬁnal goal of
nirvana. Any disciple who accepts and practices my teaching of the
Dharma will be able to forsake the deﬁled state of conditioned existence
and accomplish the undeﬁled state of unconditioned transcendence,
realize the emancipation of mind and emancipation through analytical
insight, and will himself directly experience in the present life the
exhaustion of the cause of birth and death. [Furthermore, he will]
accomplish the practice of austerity, accomplish that which should be
done [for religious salvation], and become free from rebirth. Even for
the disciple who cannot reach this ﬁnal goal, insofar as his practice
reaches a secondary level he will still be able to terminate the ﬁve
deﬁlements that bind sentient beings to the lower sphere of desire, and
he will enter ﬁnal nirvana directly from the heavenly state in which he
is reborn without returning to this human world again (i.e., the state
of anāgāmin).
Those disciples who reach the third level will extinguish the initial
three of those ﬁve deﬁlements (i.e., the heretical belief in a real personality, doubt, and attachment to non-Buddhist practices and observances), and reduce the affectation of desire (rāga), hate (dveṣa), and
delusion (moha), returning only once to this world (i.e., the state of
sakṛdāgāmin) before realizing ﬁnal nirvana.
Those disciples who reach the fourth level will likewise terminate
three of the ﬁve deﬁlements, preventing themselves from falling into
the evil courses of life, will realize the saintly state of stream-enterer

194

Sutra 3: A Great Treasury Councilor

and, returning to this world seven times, shall surely realize ﬁnal nirvana
on the last return.
O Pañcaśikha, those among my disciples who have renounced family
ties in genuine faith will receive reward and instruction, investigate
the methods of the path, thoroughly carry out the practice of austerity,
seek the ultimate place of security and peace, and thus ﬁnally return
to nirvana.

At that time, having listened to the Buddha’s exhortation, Pañcaśikha was
delighted and respectfully followed what had been instructed.
[End of Sutra 3: A Great Treasury Councilor]

195

34b

Sutra 4
Janavasabha’s Exhortation

(Dīgha Nikāya 18: Janavasabha Suttanta)
Thus have I heard. At one time, the Buddha was sojourning at the resthouse
called Giñjakāvasatha in the village of Nādika, accompanied by a host of
one thousand two hundred and ﬁfty bhikṣus. At that time, Venerable Ānanda
was in meditation in a secluded room and quietly thought to himself:

It is remarkable and extraordinary that the Tathāgata assures people of
their destinies, thereby enormously beneﬁting them. When the minister
Kakkaṭa (or Kakkudha) died, the Tathāgata assured his destiny, predicting that upon his death he would terminate the ﬁve deﬁlements that
bind sentient beings in the lower world of desire, take the course of
entering nirvana from the heaven into which he was born, and hence
not return to this world again.
In a similar manner, when Kaliṅga, Nikaṭa, Lishu, Sāḷha, Poyalou,
Potoulou, Subhadra, Tuolishetu, Soudalishetu, Yaśas, and Yeshuduolou
(some of whom were ministers) died, the Buddha also assured that
they had terminated the ﬁve deﬁlements that bind sentient beings in
the lower world of desire, taking the course of entering nirvana from
the heaven into which they were born, and would not return to this
world again.
When a group of ﬁfty people died, the Buddha also assured that
they terminated the initial three of those ﬁve deﬁlements: heretical
belief in a real personality, doubt, and attachment to non-Buddhist
practices and observances, whereby they were freed from desire, hatred,
and delusion, and thus acquired the saintly state of stream-enterer, the
ﬁrst of the four states of spiritual development. They were obliged to
return to this world once in order to terminate the root causes of suffering. Also when [another] ﬁve hundred people died, the Buddha again
assured that they had terminated the initial three deﬁlements and had
acquired the ﬁrst saintly state of stream-enterer, and would not fall into

197

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

an evil course of life but return to the world seven times and would
surely terminate the root cause of suffering.
When the disciples died, the Buddha invariably assured their destinies without fail, predicting that so-and-so would be born in suchand-such place, so-and-so would be born in such-and-such place. The
Buddha assured without exception the destinies of those who died in
the sixteen major countries, such as Aṅga, Magadha, Kāśī, Kośala,
Vṛji, Malla, Ceḍi, Vatsa, Kuru, Pañcāla, Aśvaka, Avanti, Matsya,
Sūrasena, Gandhāra, and Kāmboja. However, he did not make any
assurance for the people of Magadha who were kṣatriyas and those
Magadhans who were trusted by the kings, even after their deaths.

Thereupon, Ānanda left the secluded room and came to the place of the
World-honored One. Having venerated the Buddha by bowing his forehead
to [the Buddha’s] feet, he withdrew to sit at one side and said to the Buddha:

A while ago, I was contemplating that it is remarkable and extraordinary
that the Tathāgata assures the destinies of people, thereby beneﬁting
them enormously. Your holiness assured without exception the destinies
of those who died in the sixteen major countries. The people of Magadha, however, even those who are kṣatriyas and are trusted by other
kings, alone have not been assured of their destinies, even upon their
deaths, sir. May I request, O World-honored One, that the destinies of
these people be assured, sir. May I repeatedly request that an assurance
be granted for their destinies, sir. Your holiness’ assurance will beneﬁt
people and gods for their ultimate quiescence.
Again the Magadhan faithful who realized the path and died in
their country have not yet been assured of their destinies. May I
request, O World-honored One, that their destinies be assured. O
World-honored One, may I repeat this request that your holiness
assure their destinies, sir. The king of Magadha, Bimbisāra, for
instance, became a faithful devotee of the Buddha and provided many
offerings before his death. Through this king, many were drawn to
the religion and dedicated themselves to the Three Treasures. Despite
this, sir, the Tathāgata has not given any assurance about his destiny.

34c

198

Sutra 4: Janavasabha’s Exhortation

I earnestly wish, O World-honored One, that an assurance be given
to [Bimbisāra] as well as others, so that all sentient beings may be
assured and heavenly beings may be at ease.

At that time, having made a request to the World-honored One on behalf
of the people of Magadha, Ānanda rose from his seat and, after venerating
the Buddha, left the room.
Thereupon, the World-honored One, donning his saṃghāṭī robe and with
his almsbowl in hand, went into the city of Nādika. After the almsround,
having come to the great forest, he sat under a tree and meditated on the
Magadhan devotees with respect to their deaths and births.
At that moment there was a spirit not too far away from the Buddha. He
introduced himself to the World-honored One, “I am Janavasabha, I am
Janavasabha” (“Victor over Delusion”). The Buddha said:
Why do you call yourself by the name Janavasabha? On the basis of
what religion do you use such a subtle expression that means “you
have witnessed the trace of the path”?

Janavasabha replied:

I am not from another place. I was formerly a king. I became a lay
devotee of the Tathāgata’s religion and ended my life with the earnest
recollection of the Buddha in my mind. Because of that, I was reborn
as the prince of the guardian god Vaiśravaṇa. Ever since, I have been
able to illuminate the various religious practices and realized the state
of stream-enterer, never falling into the evil courses of life. Thus
throughout seven rebirths in the human world I have always been called
Janavasabha, sir.

The Buddha stayed in the great forest as time allowed and then returned
to the brick resthouse in Nādika. After he took his seat in the prepared position,
he asked a bhikṣu, “Please convey my words to Ānanda: ‘Come see me.’”
The bhikṣu answered “Yes, sir” and went to call Ānanda. Having arrived at
the place of the World-honored One, Ānanda venerated him by bowing his
forehead to the Buddha’s feet and, withdrawing to sit at one side, he said to
the Buddha:

199

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

I notice that the Tathāgata’s complexion is especially superior today and
your sense faculties are most quiescent, sir. Through what kind of thought
has your holiness managed to attain such a good demeanor, sir?

The World-honored One said to Ānanda:

A while ago you came to see me concerning the people of Magadha
and requested me to assure their destinies. After you left, I donned my
robe and went into the city of Nādika for an almsround and then proceeded to the great forest. I sat under a tree to contemplate the destinies
of those Magadhan people with regard to their deaths and births. At
that moment, there was a yakṣa, a spirit, not too far from my place,
and he introduced himself to me by repeating his name, saying, “I am
Janavasabha. I am Janavasabha.” O Ānanda, have you ever heard the
name Janavasabha?

35a

Ānanda replied:

I have never heard that name, sir. Having heard the name now, I feel
a sense of thrill and my hair stands on end. O World-honored One, this
yakṣa must have great authority and virtue. Because of that he may be
called Janavasabha, sir.

The Buddha continued:

I then asked him, “Why do you call yourself by the name Janavasabha?
On the basis of what religion do you use such a subtle expression that
means you have yourself witnessed the trace of religious salvation?”
Janavasabha replied, “I am not from anywhere else, nor [was my
name given] on the basis of any other religion. I was formerly a king,
sir. I became a disciple of the World-honored One, and with earnest
faith, became a lay householder and ended my life with earnest recollection of the Buddha in my mind. Because of that, I was reborn as the
prince of the guardian god Vaiśravaṇa, realized the state of streamenterer, never falling into the evil course of life, and thus returned here
seven times in order to exhaust the root cause of suffering. Throughout
seven rebirths in the human world, I have always been called Janavasabha, sir.”

200

Sutra 4: Janavasabha’s Exhortation

[Janavasabha continued his story:]

At one time, the Buddha was seated under a tree in the great forest. I
happened to be riding on the heavenly thousand-spoked wheel to visit
the guardian god Virūḍhaka for some reason, and on the way I saw the
World-honored One seated under a tree in the great forest. His appearance
was handsome and his calm, restrained senses were like a deep pool of
still water, transparent, bright, and clear. Having seen the Buddha, I
thought to myself, “I should instead visit the World-honored One and
ask him where the Magadhan people will be reborn after their deaths.”
Again, on another occasion, the guardian god Vaiśravaṇa uttered a
verse among the gods:
We do not try to recollect the past or repeated things.
Now, as I have met the world-honored One,
[I feel that] my longevity has been increased.

Again on another occasion, the residents of Trāyastriṃśa Heaven were
assembled at one place for some reason. The four guardian gods were
seated in their respective positions: Dhṛtarāṣṭra sat to the east while
facing west; Indra was in front of him. Virūḍhaka sat to the south while
facing north; Indra was in front of him. Virūpākṣa sat to the west while
facing east; Indra was in front of him. Vaiśravaṇa sat to the north while
facing south; Indra was in front of him. Waiting for the moment when
all these four guardians took their seats, I then sat down.
There were also other great luminaries who had previously accomplished the practice of pure and genuine austerity under the Buddha’s
guidance. They were reborn in Trāyastriṃśa Heaven upon their deaths
and [now] help the residents of that heaven increase their ﬁve kinds
of beneﬁts: heavenly longevity, good complexion, prominence, happiness, and authority and virtue. [Accordingly,] the residents of that
heaven all rejoice with dancing and leaping, and praise them, “They
promote our well-being, thereby causing the advantage of the asuras,
our adversarial demigods, to diminish.” At that time, knowing the residents’ joy in his heaven, the god Indra composed the following verse
on behalf of those residents:

201

35b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

The residents of Trāyastriṃśa Heaven and
Their lord Indra rejoice together
In the harmonious life of pleasure and happiness and
Respectfully venerate the Tathāgata and
The truth of his Dharma.
[For] the heavenly citizens have been beneﬁted
With visible good fortune, such as
Longevity, good complexion, fame,
Happiness, and authority.
The contributors of these beneﬁts
Were previously trained under the Buddha’s guidance
In the practice of austerity, pure and genuine,
And because of that merit
They have been born in this heaven.
Some of these citizens,
Whose auras and complexions
Are exceedingly noble and august,
Were [previously] the disciples of the Buddha.
Having acquired insight and
Having been born into this heaven,
They too became prominent.
The Trāyastriṃśa residents and
The lord of this heaven, Indra,
Thinking of this state of happiness promoted by them,
Venerate respectfully the Tathāgata and
The truth of his Dharma.

The god Janavasabha continued:

The purpose for which the Trāyastriṃśa residents assembled at the Sudharma-sabhā hall was to conduct discussion together, to think together,
to evaluate together, to investigate together, and to instruct together.
After that, the assembly gave various instructions to the four guardians
of the heaven and, having thus received the instructions, the guardians
returned to their respective positions. Soon after they had settled in their
respective positions, an unusual ray of light illuminated all the regions.

202

Sutra 4: Janavasabha’s Exhortation

Then the Trāyastriṃśa gods, having seen this light, were all terriﬁed,
thinking, “What kind of ill omen does this unusual ray of light indicate?”
Some of the great deities endowed with supernormal powers were also
terriﬁed, wondering, “What kind of ill omen does this unusual ray of
light indicate?”
Then the god Brahmā assumed the form of a young boy, and with
his pentagonal head and his hair spread out over the host of gods, he
rose in midair. His appearance was exceedingly handsome, surpassing
that of the gods. His body was purplish gold, overwhelming the luminosity of all the heavenly beings. The Trāyastriṃśa residents did not
then stand up to welcome him, nor did they greet him or bid him to
take his seat. The Brahmā youth, however, took his seat in an available
space. He was delighted, as if an anointed kṣatriya had ascended to
the throne, and rejoiced with dancing and leaping. Soon after he sat
down he changed himself into the form of a young boy, with his head
in the shape of a pentagon and his hair spreading out over the host of
gods, sitting in midair, just as a wrestler sits in his permanent seat,
immovable like a mountain. He then uttered the following verse:
O foremost honorable one in the discipline of restraint,
May the source of wisdom arise in this world.
One who is endowed with the great insight
Exhorts the truth of the Dharma.
His practice of austerity has no equal companion.
May the sentient beings, pure and genuine
Be born in the heavens of purity.

Thereupon, having uttered this verse, the Brahmā youth said to the
gods of Trāyastriṃśa Heaven:

There are ﬁve kinds of pure and clear [qualities of] sound, which
are called the sounds of the god Brahmā. What are these ﬁve types
of sound? The ﬁrst is honest; the second, gentle; the third, thoroughly
clear; the fourth, deep and wide; and the ﬁfth, heard in all directions
and in the far distance. If a sound possesses these ﬁve qualities it
is regarded as Brahmā’s sound.

203

35c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

Let me further explain. Listen attentively. The disciples of the
Tathāgata, the Magadhan householders, realized either the saintly
state of nonreturner, the state of once-returner, or the state of streamenterer when they died, and were reborn in either the heaven of controlling enjoyments magically created by others, the heaven of controlling enjoyments magically created by themselves, Tuṣita Heaven,
Yāmadeva Heaven, Trāyastriṃśa Heaven, the realm of the four
guardians, among the kṣatriyas, the brāhmaṇas, the lay [Buddhist]
householders, or wealthy families. In all of these cases, they freely
enjoyed the ﬁve senses.

Then the Brahmā youth composed a verse:

I have been told that
As many as eighty-four thousand Magadhan lay householders,
Equally accomplished their paths when they died,
Realizing the saintly state of stream-enterer,
Thus not falling again into an evil course of life,
Equally riding on the right road,
Reaching the path and salvation.
These sentient beings,
Aided by their insight derived from their merits,
Were able to forsake their love and affection,
To liberate themselves from fraudulence
Through the repentance of inner
As well as outer senses of shame, and
Are reported by the Brahmā youth
To those Trāyastriṃśa gods
As having realized the state of stream-enterer,
All rejoicing.

Having heard this verse, Vaiśravaṇa was delighted and said:

It is extraordinary and it has never before happened that the Worldhonored One appeared in this world and taught such a true doctrine.
Originally I did not know that the Tathāgata appeared in this world,

204

Sutra 4: Janavasabha’s Exhortation

taught such a true doctrine, and made the residents of Trāyastriṃśa
Heaven greatly rejoice.

Then the Brahmā youth said to the god Vaiśravaṇa:

Why do you make such a statement? Why do you think it is extraordinary and that it has never before happened that the Tathāgata
appeared in this world and taught the true doctrine like this? The
Tathāgata taught through his power of expediency what is good and
what is bad; while thus giving detailed exhortation on this, he did
not make them as ultimately real by exhorting on the pure nature
of elements of existence as empty, whereby he accomplished some
attainment of real insight. This truth is delicate and subtle like the
ﬁrst taste of the cream of clariﬁed butter.

Then the Brahmā youth again said to the residents of Trāyastriṃśa
Heaven:

Listen attentively. Contemplate and remember what I am going to
explain to you. The Tathāgata who is “liberated from attachment”
teaches the set of four applications of mental awareness on four
conditions of existence through an efﬁcient analytical method. What
are these four? First, observation of one’s inner body or inner senses;
one should exert himself without slackening, being mindful of his
observations and keeping them in memory, thereby removing worldly
desires and worries.
Further, in observing his outer body or outer senses, one should
exert himself without slackening, being mindful of his observations
and keeping them in memory, thereby removing worldly desires
and worries. It is the same with the three remaining applications:
in observing one’s sense perception, mental intellect, and psychophysical elements, one should exert himself with no slackening,
being mindful of his observations and keeping them in memory,
thereby removing worldly desires and worries. When observation
into the outer body is completed there should arise insight into the
bodies of others; when observation of the inner sense perception is

205

36a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

completed, there should arise insight into the inner sense perception
of others; when observation into the inner mind is completed there
should arise insight into the minds of others; when observation into
the inner psychophysical elements is completed there should arise
insight into the psychophysical elements of others. The foregoing
are called the four applications of mental awareness on the four
conditions of existence in the Tathāgata’s efﬁcient analytical method.
Again, O residents of Trāyastriṃśa Heaven, listen attentively,
and I shall explain next the Tathāgata’s seven requirements of concentration (sapta-samādhi-pariṣkāra) in efﬁcient analytical method.
What are the seven? They are: right view, right conception, right
speech, right action, right livelihood, right endeavor, and right
mindfulness.
Next, O residents of Trāyastriṃśa Heaven, I shall explain the
Tathāgata’s four supernormal powers of concentration in efﬁcient
analytical method. What are the four? They are: ﬁrst, the supernormal
power derived from dispositional forces bearing the exertion of concentration motivated by desire; second, the supernormal power
derived from dispositional forces bearing the exertion of concentration motivated by mind; third, the supernormal power derived
from dispositional forces bearing the exertion of concentration motivated by endeavor; fourth, the supernormal power derived from
dispositional forces bearing the exertion of concentration motivated
by investigation. These are the four supernormal powers of concentration in the Tathāgata’s efﬁcient analytical method.
Again, may I tell you, O residents of Trāyastriṃśa Heaven, that
the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas of the past who relied on innumerable
expedients to produce immeasurable supernormal powers did so
fundamentally by deriving them from the four foregoing types of
supernormal powers (as variations). Therefore, those future śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas also should rely on innumerable expedients
to produce immeasurable supernormal powers, doing so fundamentally by inducing them from the four foregoing types of supernormal powers.

206

Sutra 4: Janavasabha’s Exhortation

At that moment the Brahmā youth transﬁgured himself into thirty-three
bodies which respectively sat together with the thirty-three gods, saying
to each of them, “Have you recognized my supernormal power of transﬁguration?” They replied, “Yes, we have seen it.” The Brahmā youth
said, “Since I practice the four types of supernormal powers I am able
to transﬁgure myself into innumerable forms.”
At that moment, each of the thirty-three gods thought to themselves,
“Now a single Brahmā youth sits alone in my seat and speaks these
words to me. Thus, the transﬁgured form of this Brahmā youth speaks
this way, and other transﬁgured Brahmā youths are also speaking.
When the original Brahmā youth becomes silent, all the transﬁgured
forms shall fall silent as well.”
The Brahmā youth then removed the spell of supernormal power,
seated himself in the position of Indra, and said to the residents of
Trāyastriṃśa Heaven:

I shall now explain to you. Listen attentively. The Tathāgata, who
is the Arhat, himself opened the three passages with his own power,
and himself realized the perfect enlightenment through such a passage. What are these three?
First, suppose a human being has strong desire and learns of bad
things. If he later associates with good friends and listens to words
on the Dharma, and then acquires the truth of that Dharma, having
done so he shall free himself of desires and abandon bad conduct,
obtain a feeling of delight, and joy and simply become happy. Also,
the way in which great joy arises from within happiness is like the
manner in which, having thrown away poor food after partaking of
a tasty meal, a person still seeks an even better meal. The practitioner
should be like this. Having forsaken morally bad elements one
obtains a state of joy and happiness, and yet within the state of happiness one ﬁnds further causes for the arising of great joy. This is
the stage in which the Tathāgata opened the initial passage of realization through his power, himself realizing perfect enlightenment
through this passage.

207

36b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

Second, again suppose some individual entertains a sense of hatred
and anger and does not forsake his bad physical, verbal, and volitional
habits. Later on, however, he meets some good friends and listens
to good words on the Dharma and then acquires the truth of the
Dharma. Having done so, he frees himself from bad physical, verbal,
and volitional actions, causes joy to arise in his mind, and simply
becomes happy. He then ﬁnds within the state of happiness further
cause for the arising of great joy. This is like the manner in which,
having thrown away poor food after partaking of a tasty meal, a person still seeks an even better meal. The practitioner should be like
this. Having forsaken morally bad elements one obtains a state of
joy and happiness, and yet within that state of happiness one ﬁnds
further cause for the arising of great joy. This is the second passage
of realization that the Tathāgata opened.
Third, again, some people are stupid and ignorant, do not know
what is good and what is bad, and cannot know the Four Noble
Truths, [the nature of] suffering, the causes, cessation, and the path
as they truly are. Later on, however, a person meets some good
friends and listens to good words on the Dharma and then acquires
the truth of the Dharma. Having done so, he frees himself from bad
physical, verbal, and volitional actions, causing joy to arise in his
mind, and he simply becomes happy. He then ﬁnds within the state
of happiness further cause for the arising of great joy. This is like
the manner in which, having thrown away poor food after partaking
of a tasty meal, a person still seeks an even better meal. The practitioner should be like this. Having forsaken morally bad elements
one obtains a state of joy and happiness, and yet within that state
of happiness one ﬁnds further cause for the arising of great joy. This
is the third passage of realization that the Tathāgata opened.

At that time, the Brahmā youth exhorted the foregoing doctrines to the
Trāyastriṃśa gods, and the guardian god Vaiśravaṇa became a follower of
his teaching and propagated the right Dharma along with him. The yakṣa
Janavasabha also exhorted this Dharma before the Buddha, and the Worldhonored One exhorted this Dharma to Ānanda. Ānanda then also exhorted

208

Sutra 4: Janavasabha’s Exhortation

this Dharma to the bhikṣus, bhikṣuṇīs, and male and female lay householders
(upāsakas and upāsikās). Having listened to this doctrine taught by the
Buddha, Ānanda experienced joy, respectfully received the teaching, and
carried out what was taught by the Buddha.
[End of Sutra 4: Janavasabha’s Exhortation]

209

Sutra 5
Lesser Causality

(Dīgha Nikāya 27: Aggañña Suttanta)
Thus have I heard. At one time, the Buddha was sojourning in the country
of Śrāvastī at Mṛgamātā’s lecture hall at the Nunnery of the Eastern Grove,
accompanied by one thousand two hundred and ﬁfty bhikṣus. At that time,
two brāhmaṇas, with ﬁrm faith in their hearts, visited the place of the Buddha,
renounced family life, and joined the Buddha’s religious path. One was called
Vāseṭṭha (Pāli) and the other was Bhāradvāja.
At that time, the World-honored One came out of the meditation room
and began his meditative walk back and forth on the hall’s terrace. Then,
having seen the Buddha practicing walking meditation, Vaseṭṭha quickly
went to Bhāradvāja and said to him:
Don’t you know that the Tathāgata has now come out of the meditation
room and has begun his meditative walk? We should go see the Worldhonored One, and we should listen to what the Tathāgata teaches us.

Then, as advised by his friend, Bhāradvāja followed Vāseṭṭha to visit the
World-honored One and, having venerated the Buddha by bowing their foreheads to his feet, both began to follow the Buddha in the practice of walking
meditation.
At that time, the World-honored One said to Vāseṭṭha, “O you two, born
in the brāhmaṇa class, with ﬁrm faith in the Dharma that I teach, have you
decided to forsake family life and practice the way?” Vāseṭṭha replied, “Yes,
we have so decided, sir.”
The Buddha said to them, “O you two, when you are practicing the path
of religion under my instruction, isn’t it likely that other brāhmaṇas will
accuse you and make complaints and warnings?” They answered, “Yes, sir,
our renunciation of family life and conversion to the path of practice under
the Buddha’s guidance will invite such accusations of us, sir.”
The Buddha asked, “Why do they accuse you?” At once they replied to
the Buddha:
211

36c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

They accuse us, saying, “Our brāhmaṇa class is superior while the rest
are inferior; our class is clean and white, while the rest are black and
dark; our class is derived from Brahmā, born of his mouth; and as our
class realizes pure and genuine emancipation in this present life, the
life to come will [therefore] also be pure and genuine. Why do you
abandon our pure and genuine class and join the different religion professed by Gautama?” O World-honored One, when they see our renunciation of family life and conversion to the practice of the Buddha’s
path, they will surely criticize us with these accusations, sir.

The Buddha said to Vāseṭṭha:

You may ﬁnd many people who are as stupid and ignorant as animals
and birds. Thus some claim, “Our brāhmaṇa class is superior while
the rest are inferior; our class is clean and white while the rest are black
and dark; our class is derived from Brahmā, born of his mouth; and as
our class realizes pure and genuine emancipation in this present life,
the life to come will [therefore] also be pure and genuine.”
O Vāseṭṭha, in the path of the highest truth that I now teach, no such
criterion invoking class difference is needed. The path I cultivate does
not rely on a mind of self-conceit. The secular world relies on such a
criterion, but not my religious salvation. If any śramaṇa or brāhmaṇa
relies on the class-status criterion, he cannot realize highest, perfect
enlightenment. Only when one casts away the class-status criterion
and removes the mind of self-conceit can one realize genuine enlightenment and accept the right Dharma that I teach. People do not like
those of inferior backgrounds. The Dharma that I teach does not so
discriminate.

37a

The Buddha said to Vāseṭṭha:

Even when the four class divisions are differentiated, I am obliged to
say that both good and bad are equally found in all of their members,
and the wise praise equally the good while accusing the bad in any
of these classes of people. What are the four [classes]? They are ﬁrst,
the kṣatriyas, with royal or warrior status; second, the brāhmaṇas, of
priestly or scholarly status; third, the vaiśya householders, who are

212

Sutra 5: Lesser Causality

farmers and merchants; and fourth, the śūdras, who are destitute or of
servile status.
O Vāseṭṭha, listen carefully. Within the kṣatriya class there are murderers, thieves, those who commit sexual abuse, speakers of falsehood,
double-dealers, speakers of harsh words, frivolous sycophants, those
who have covetous minds, those with malicious intent, and those with
wrong views. There are also these kinds of wrongdoers among the brāhmaṇa class, among the vaiśyas, and among the śūdra people as well.
O Vāseṭṭha, for any wrong action there will be a unfortunate retribution. When one commits an evil action, he will reap an evil retribution. If such causal effect occurs only among those of the kṣatriya,
vaiśya, and śūdra classes but not among the brāhmaṇas, then the brāhmaṇas could claim that their class is superior while the rest are inferior;
that their class is clean and white while the rest are black and dark;
that their class is derived from Brahmā, born of his mouth; and that
because their class realizes pure and genuine emancipation in the present
life, the life to come will also be pure and genuine. If, however, according to the same principle, for a wrong action there is an evil retribution;
that is, if one were to commit an evil action, black and dark in nature,
that person will receive an evil retribution equivalent in nature with
its action. This also invariably applies equally to those of the brāhmaṇa,
kṣatriya, vaiśya, and śūdra classses, and therefore the brāhmaṇas
cannot claim that their class alone is pure and genuine and superior.
O Vāseṭṭha, if, on the other hand, within the kṣatriya class there are
those who abstain from committing murder, theft, sexual abuse, speaking falsehoods, double-talk, using harsh words, frivolous sycophancy,
and who do not have a covetous mind, malicious intent, and wrong
views, then in a similar manner there are also those who abstain from
these wrong deeds among those of the brāhmaṇa, vaiśya, and śūdra
classes. If anyone who belongs to any of these classes should learn the
foregoing ten kinds of good deeds and actually put them into practice,
good rewards will necessarily follow. If one commits a good and genuine act, he will receive a good reward. If this principle of causal reward
applies only to the brāhmaṇa people and not to kṣatriyas, vaiśyas, or
śūdras, then the brāhmaṇas can claim that their brāhmaṇa class alone

213

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

is pure and genuine and superior. If, however, the same principle equally
and invariably applies to all four classes, then the brāhmaṇas cannot
claim that their class is pure and genuine and superior.

The Buddha said to Vāseṭṭha:

Now, we see no difference from others in the manner of childbirth in
marriage among the brāhmaṇa people, yet some of them falsely claim
that their brāhmaṇa class is born from the mouth of the creator Brahmā,
is pure and genuine in this life, and will also be pure and genuine in
the life to come. My disciples all vary as to their class status and backgrounds, yet even though they come from different classes and backgrounds, they have renounced family life and joined my religion, and
have received higher ordination in order to practice the path. If someone
asks them, “What class are you from?”, they should reply to this question by saying, “I am a son [or daughter] of the Śākya śramaṇa.”
One should also say, of his own initiative:

37b

We śramaṇas are all born from the parental mouth. Born out of our
religious conversion, we realize the pure and genuine life [now]
and the life to come will also be pure and genuine. The reason is
that the name “the great god Brahmā” is a title for the Tathāgata,
and the Tathāgata is the Eye of Wisdom of this world, the insight
of this world, the Dharma of this world, the Brahmā of this world,
the Dharma wheel of this world, the nectar of this world, and the
foremost religious master of this world.

O Vāseṭṭha, if one among the kṣatriya people devoutly believes in the
Buddha, he necessarily believes that the Tathāgata is endowed with
the ten supreme titles, such as the one liberated from attachment, the
fully enlightened one, and so forth. He who devoutly believes in the
Dharma believes that the Dharma of the Tathāgata, subtle and delicate,
pure and genuine, should be practiced and exhorted at all times, that
it is shown to be the essential nature of nirvana, and that it can be
known only by people of insight. It is not the kind of teaching that an
ordinary person can fathom. He who devoutly believes in the sangha
believes that the members of the sangha are good and honest, have

214

Sutra 5: Lesser Causality

realized the fruits of the path, and have acquired their own disciples
and followers, and, being true disciples of the Buddha, they have accomplished the truth of the Dharma. “Sangha” means realization of the
membership that embodies the discipline, concentration, analytical
insight, emancipation, and subsequent insight of emancipation. The
sangha consists of those who are spiritually ready for the state of streamenterer, and those who have realized it; those who are ready for the
state of once-returner, and those who have realized it; those who are
ready for the state of nonreturner, and those who have realized it; those
who are ready for the state of arhat, and those who have realized it.
Whoever devotedly believes in the sangha should have faith in these,
known as the four pairs of people or the eight distinguished persons,
the wise and holy disciples of the Tathāgata, worthy of honor and
respect as the best ﬁeld of merit for charity in the world. Therefore
when one has devout faith in the efﬁcacy of precepts and discipline
and holds steadfastly to them, without slackening, without dropping
out in hiatus, without deﬁlement, that person will be one who is praised
by the wise as perfectly endowed with goodness and quiescence.
O Vāseṭṭha, all people, whether they are members of the brāhmaṇa,
vaiśya, or śūdra class, should ﬁrmly believe in the Buddha, Dharma,
and Sangha and thereby realize the holy precepts and discipline that
are upheld by holy disciples.
O Vāseṭṭha, among those of the kṣatriya class, there are many who
dedicate themselves to the Arhat (i.e., the Buddha) with offerings of
food and service, reverence and veneration. In a similar manner, among
members of the brāhmaṇa, vaiśya, and śūdra classes too, there should
also be those who dedicate themselves to the Arhat with offerings of
food and service, reverence and veneration.

The Buddha said further to Vāseṭṭha:

Now, on the one hand, those kṣatriyas who are related to me as members
of the Śākya clan support King Prasenajit of Kośala as their common
ancestral monarch with propriety and respect, while, on the other hand,
King Prasenajit visits me with offerings of food and service, as well
as reverence and veneration. It is not because the king thinks to himself,

215

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

“The śramaṇa Gautama comes from a powerful clan, whereas I come
from a family inferior to his.” Nor is it because he thinks, “The śramaṇa
Gautama was born in a family endowed with great wealth and great
inﬂuential power, whereas I was born in a lowly, impoverished, and
uncultured family.” Nor is it because he makes offerings and service
to the Tathāgata that visits me with offerings and service. King Prasenajit
views things in reference to the Dharma and clearly recognizes the distinction between what is true and what is false. Because of his conviction
he began to develop pure and genuine faith, and now offers his respects
to the Tathāgata.
O Vāseṭṭha, I shall now inform you of the ultimate origin of the
four class-status differences. At the beginning of this new eon and at
the end of the former one, when the preceding eon was totally destroyed,
all sentient beings died and were reborn in Light-sound Heaven, where
light becomes word. They were physically transformed so as to be able
to live on ideas or thoughts as food, emitting light automatically, and
ﬂying in midair with supernormal speed. Later on, the surface of the
earth changed into water all around. There was no sun, moon, or stars,
neither day or night, year or month; total darkness prevailed. Later on,
when the water had changed into solid ground, the heavenly beings in
Light-sound Heaven naturally lost their merit after their deaths and
they came to be born in this new land. Although they were reborn in
a different world they still continued to live on thoughts, ﬂy with supernormal speed, their bodies automatically emitting light, and they continued to exist in that new world for some time. They called themselves
“sentient beings.”
Later on, however, a fountain of sweet water sprang up, just as
cream arises from butter or honey springs up from underground. Some
of the ﬁrstborn, whose natures were imprudent, having seen the fountain quietly thought to themselves, “I shall taste this water to ﬁnd out
what it is.” Immediately they stuck their ﬁngers into the fountain and
tasted the water, and in this way, having repeated this a few times,
they were addicted to the sweetness of the taste and openhandedly
indulged themselves, partaking of it with insatiable desire. This kind
of attachment, addicted to pleasure, can hardly be ended through a

37c

216

Sutra 5: Lesser Causality

sense of weariness due to overabundance. Other sentient beings also
imitated these beings in tasting the water, and after a few tastes they
too were invariably soon addicted to it as well. Even before they felt
fully satisﬁed, because of this diet their bodies became coarse and their
ﬂesh became stiff, losing its heavenly subtle color. They no longer had
the supernormal speed of ﬂight and were only able to crawl on the surface of the ground. Their bodily light was totally diminished, and
heaven and earth were nearly all dark.
O Vāseṭṭha, you should know of the regularity of heaven and earth,
such that after the great darkness there will appear the sun, moon, and
stars in mid-space; later there will appear day and night and brightness
and darkness, respectively; and ﬁnally, days, months, and years. At
that time the sentient beings ate only from the earth and thus existed
a while on the surface of the ground. Whoever ate more of the food
developed a sickly complexion with rough and ugly skin, whereas
whoever ate less of it continued to bear a pleasant complexion. Varieties
of appearance, such as pleasant, ugly, noble, and handsome, all began
from that circumstance.
Some of those whose appearance was more handsome than ordinary
became conceited and slighted those whose appearance was ugly. In
return, those whose appearance was ugly felt jealous and covetous,
and hated those whose had a better appearance. The sentient beings
began to dispute among themselves. At that time, the sweetwater fountain dried up of its own accord, but the area naturally produced outgrowths upon the ground, which were of pleasant color and taste, good
scent and cleanliness, and could be eaten. At that time, the sentient
beings continued to live again by partaking of these outgrowths from
the ground. Whoever ate [of these outgrowths] excessively lost their
good complexion, their skin becoming rough and ugly, while whoever
ate less retained their pleasant complexion. The beings who managed
to keep their pleasant appearance became conceited and disdained
those who looked ugly, while the latter became jealous and covetous
and hated the former. The sentient beings thus once again began to dispute among themselves.

217

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

At that time the outgrowths ceased to be produced, and in the ground
there grew instead coarse, thick outgrowths, some of which had good
scent and taste and could be eaten, though these were far fewer in quantity. The sentient beings continued to live again by partaking of these
outgrowths from the ground. Whoever ate excessively lost their good
complexion, their skin becoming rough and ugly, while whoever ate
much less maintained a pleasant complexion. As before, the problem
of good or bad with regard to those whose appearance was handsome
and those whose appearance was ugly [once again] led to disputes.
Then those outgrowths ceased to be produced. In the ground there
instead grew a nonglutinous rice crop. Since its grains had no husks
but were of good color and taste and were quite edible, the sentient
beings again continued to live for some time by partaking of this rice
crop. While their subsistence on the rice crop continued in the world,
male and female beings were attracted to each other, resulting in the
natural arousal of carnal desire and mutual intimate relations. Having
seen them together, the others warned them, saying, “What you are
doing is not right. You are excommunicated and driven out of our human
community. Come back when the duration of three months has passed.”

38a

The Buddha continued:

What had once been regarded as bad then came to be regarded as good.
Those sentient beings learned the pleasure of sexual intercourse, pursued
emotion, and fulﬁlled desire in every way without control, without
restriction. Because of their mutual shame they began to construct private houses. This was the beginning of the institution of housing. As
they indulged in sexual intercourse, this naturally reinforced their carnal
desire to increase in intensity. Thus developed the womb, due to unclean
behavior, and this was the functional beginning of the human reproductive organs.
At that time, the sentient beings partook of rice grain grown naturally.
They harvested it as needed throughout the day, and hence it was never
overharvested. Then a lazy person quietly thought to himself, “Harvesting rice for breakfast in the morning and again for dinner in the
evening is too much work. I will take at one time enough rice for both

218

Sutra 5: Lesser Causality

meals.” Later, one of his friends called him to go harvest rice together.
The former replied, “I have [already] harvested enough rice to be used
for two meals today. If you wish to harvest, go by yourself.” The man
then thought to himself, “How cunning he is! He harvested more rice
than he needed for one meal and stored it until it was needed. I too will
now harvest and store enough rice for three days.” Thus, that man [harvested and] stored enough rice for three days’ meals. Then another
man asked him to harvest rice together. He replied, “I have already
harvested and stored the amount I need for three days. If you wish to
go harvest rice, go by yourself.” So this man too thought to himself,
“He is cunning; he harvested enough rice to serve for three days and
keeps it in storage. I will try to best him by harvesting and storing
enough rice for ﬁve days.” At once he harvested rice to serve for ﬁve
days. Soon all the sentient beings tried to outdo the others in harvesting
rice. Thus, overharvested, the rice crop became barren and weed-ridden
and began to produce husks. Once cut down it did not grow again.
The sentient beings were not pleased at all and were worried and
bewildered. They thought:
When originally born, I initially lived on thoughts as food, ﬂew
with supernormal speed in midair, my body automatically emitted
light, and I continued to exist in this world. Later on a sweetwater
fountain sprang up. Since it was like cream from butter or honey
with its good scent and taste, it was edible and we partook of it
together at all times. As things went on in this manner for some
time, whoever partook of it more began to look ugly with a bad
complexion, whereas those who partook of it less maintained their
good appearance and pleasant complexion. Because of this difference
in diet, our appearances began to vary as to fair or ugly. We sentient
beings thus held different judgments and hated each other.
Then the sweetwater fountain dried up all by itself, and some
outgrowth from the soil of this land then developed. Since the taste
of this outgrowth was endowed with good color, ﬂavor, and scent
and it was edible, we began to partake of it again for some time to
come. Whoever partook of it more began to look ugly with a bad

219

38b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

complexion, whereas those who ate less of it maintained their good
looks and pleasant complexion. Because of this difference in our
diets our complexions began to vary as to fair or ugly. The sentient
beings thus held different judgments and hated each other.
At that time, the [previous] outgrowth from the ground ceased
to grow, replaced instead by a coarse, thick outgrowth. Since some
of this outgrowth was of good scent and taste and was edible, we
again began to partake of it. Because of this difference in diet, our
complexions began to vary as to fair or ugly. The sentient beings
thus held different judgments and hated each other.
Then that outgrowth ceased to be produced and a nonglutinous
rice crop grew instead. Since the grains had no husks, all of us sentient beings again continued to live by partaking of this rice for
some time to come. Then some lazy ones among us tried to outdo
the others in harvesting it and storing the rice. Thus, overharvested,
the rice crop became barren and weed-ridden and began to produce
husks, and once cut down it ceased to grow again. What should we
do now?

[The sentient beings] then said to each other, “We should divide the
land for each of us and put up signs [demarcating ownership].” At
once, they divided the land among different owners and erected signposts on their parcels of land.
O Vāseṭṭa, this was the origin of the term “rice paddy,” a plot of
land for cultivating the rice crop. At that time, when the sentient beings
established the boundaries for the respective plots of land assigned to
them, the thought of stealing the crops belonging to others gradually
developed. Having seen such behavior, the other sentient beings said,
“What you have done is not good. Your conduct is wrong because even
though you have your own plot of land you steal others’ crops. From
now on you should not do such a thing.” Yet there was no end to the
thought of theft among those sentient beings. Nor was there an end on
the part of other sentient beings of accusing those who had misbehaved.
Sometimes they punished those who had misbehaved by striking them
and reporting to the others, “This man, who has his own plot of land,
has stolen things belonging to others.” The accused, on the other hand,
220

Sutra 5: Lesser Causality

also reported to the others, “This man struck me.” At that time, having
seen such disputes, everyone was distressed and they said:
The sentient beings are deteriorating morally, just as a rolling stone
[degrades], and because of such wrong actions the deﬁlement of ﬁlth
has developed in this society. This is the cause of birth, old age,
illness, and death, and the effect of the suffering of deﬁlement is to
fall into the three evil courses of life. These disputes arose because
of the parceled lands of rice crops. We would be better off if we
elected someone as our leader and let him deal with these disputes.
He should protect those who are worthy of protection and punish
those who should be punished. Every member of the community
shall give a portion of their rice harvest as payment for the service
undertaken by the appointed person in dealing with these disputes.

Then they chose someone from among themselves who was tall and
physically imposing, handsome in appearance, and who projected an
aura of authority. They said to him, “We wish you to become our leader
as elected by us, equal voters, to protect those who need protection,
punish those who should be punished, and leave alone those whose
lives need not be interrupted. We shall collect a portion of each of our
rice harvests for your stipend.” The person thus chosen by the members
of the community listened to the people’s words, took on the role of
chieftain, and dealt with the various disputes, while the community
collected a portion of each member’s rice harvest and provided it to
their leader. The [leader] consoled the public with good words. Having
heard his words, the people greatly rejoiced and praised him, “Very
good, mahārāja (“great king”).”
This was the origin of the title of “king” in the human world. Because
the king ruled his citizens in reliance on the right Dharma, he was
called a kṣatriya. This was the very beginning of the kṣatriya class in
the human world.
There was one person among the members of the community who
thought to himself, “Household life is a great danger; it is a poisonous
thorn. I should abandon my household and stay in the mountain forests,
practicing austerity in a secluded place.” This man thus renounced

221

38c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

household life, entered the mountain forests, and practiced contemplation
in total quietude and silence. When the proper time came, he picked up
an almsbowl and went to a nearby village for an almsround. On seeing
him, the people willingly offered him food and praised him with delight,
“Very good, sir. You courageously renounced family life to reside in
the mountain forests, practicing austerity in total silence, in order to
free yourself from all kinds of evil inﬂuences.” This was the origin of
the word brāhmaṇa in human society. Among these brāhmaṇas there
were some who did not enjoy the life of meditation and contemplation
in a secluded place, so they returned to ordinary society, making a profession of learning and reciting sutras, and thus said of themselves, “I
am a nonpractitioner of meditation.” Because of this, people called such
a person a “nonpracticing brāhmaṇa.” When such a person lives among
ordinary people he is called an ordinary human brāhmaṇa. Thus there
came to be the brāhmaṇa class in human society.
Among the sentient beings there were some types of people in human
society who enjoyed conducting business and amassing riches and
wealth. Because of this activity, people called them vaiśya, householders. Again, among the people there were those who excelled in various
activities such as engineering, craftsmanship, and so on, and they were
the producers of many things. Because of this, there came to be the
name śūdra, craftsman.
O Vāseṭṭha, I have now explained the four kinds of classes, but there
was another, ﬁfth classiﬁcation, called śramaṇa. The reason that this
term came to be used, Vāseṭṭha, is that among the kṣatriyas there was
a man who disliked his own family’s profession, shaved his hair and
beard, donned the robe of a mendicant, and practiced austerity. This
was the beginning of the word śramaṇa. Regardless of whether one is
of the brāhmaṇa, vaiśya, or śūdra class, therefore, when he does not
wish to pursue his duty or profession, shaves his hair and beard, dons
the mendicant robe, and practices austerity, he is to be regarded as a
śramaṇa.
O Vāseṭṭha, if someone of the kṣatriya class physically commits a
wrong action, verbally commits a wrong action, or volitionally commits
a wrong action, when his body comes to dissolution and his life ends

222

Sutra 5: Lesser Causality

he is bound to receive the retribution of suffering. In like manner, if
someone of the brāhmaṇa, vaiśya, or śūdra classes commits wrong
physical, verbal, or volitional actions, then when his body comes to
dissolution and his life ends he is bound to receive the retribution of
suffering.
O Vāseṭṭha, if someone of the kṣatriya class performs good physical,
verbal, or volitional actions, when his body comes to dissolution and
his life ends he is bound to receive the reward of happiness. In like
manner, if someone of the brāhmaṇa, vaiśya, or śūdra classes performs
good physical, verbal, or volitional actions, then when his body comes
to dissolution and his life ends he is bound to receive the reward of
happiness.
O Vāseṭṭha, if someone of the kṣatriya class commits a good or bad
action physically, verbally, or mentally, when his body comes to dissolution and his life ends he is bound to receive one of two types [of
result]: either the reward of happiness or the retribution of suffering.
In like manner, if someone, whether he is of the brāhmaṇa, vaiśya, or
śūdra class, commits good or bad physical, verbal, or mental conduct,
when his body comes to dissolution and his life ends he is bound to
receive either the reward of happiness or the retribution of suffering.
If someone of the kṣatriya class shaves his hair and beard, dons the
mendicant robe, and practices the path, and if he is engaged in the practice of the seven auxiliary practices of enlightenment, it will not be long
before he realizes the path. Why is that so? When someone of the kṣatriya
class decides to wear the mendicant robe, renounce family life, and
practice foremost austerity, he is certain to experience directly in the
present life the exhaustion of the cause of birth and death, the accomplishment of the practice of austerity, the accomplishment of what should
be done [for religious salvation], and freedom from further rebirth. In
the same way, when someone, whether he belongs to the brāhmaṇa,
vaiśya, or śūdra class, decides to shave his hair and beard, wear the
mendicant robe, and practice the seven auxiliary practices of enlightenment, it will not be long before he realizes the path. Why? Because
if he wears the mendicant robe, renounces family life, and practices
foremost austerity, he is certain to experience directly in the present life

223

39a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

the exhaustion of the cause of birth and death, the accomplishment of
the practice of austerity, the accomplishment of what should be done
[for religious salvation], and freedom from further rebirth.
O Vāseṭṭha, those śramaṇas who come out of those four different
classes and are destined to realize insight and practice in perfect accordance, and thereby attain the ultimate state of arhatship, should indeed
be regarded as primary among the ﬁve classes of people.

The Buddha said to Vāseṭṭha, “The god Brahmā uttered the following
verse:”
Among all the sentient beings,
The kṣatriyas are superior
In their decisive renunciation of class status.
They are foremost in the human world
In regard to their capacity
Of matching insight and practice.

The Buddha said to Vāseṭṭha:

What this Brahmā god said is good, it is not misleading. What this
Brahmā god understood is not wrong, it is not a mistaken meaning. I
shall now immediately approve his statement. Why? Because as Tathāgata I am ready to assert the same statement.

Among all the sentient beings,
The kṣatriyas are superior
In their decisive renunciation of class status.
They are foremost in the human world
In regard to their capacity
Of matching insight and practice.

At that time, the World-honored One completed the foregoing exhortation.
Vāseṭṭha and Bhāradvāja realized freedom from the inﬂuence of deﬁlements
and attained the state in which their minds were totally liberated. Having listened to the Buddha’s teaching, the two were delighted with the teaching
and followed it.
[End of Sutra 5: Lesser Causality]

224

Sutra 6
The Universal Ruler’s
Practice

(Dīgha Nikāya 26: Cakkavati-sīhanāda Suttanta)
Thus have I heard. At one time, the Buddha was sojourning in the communities
of the Mātulā country (in Magadha), and after a leisurely journey accompanied
by one thousand two hundred and ﬁfty disciples, he arrived at the country of
Mātulā. At that time, the World-honored One said to his disciples:

You should make yourself your [own] lamplight, make the Dharma
your lamplight, but you should not make anything else your lamplight.
Rely on yourself as your refuge and rely on the Dharma as your refuge,
but do not rely on anything else as your refuge. What do you think this
means, O bhikṣus, to say that you should make yourself your [own]
lamplight, make the Dharma your lampight, but not make anything
else your lamplight, and that you should make yourself your refuge,
make the Dharma your refuge, but not make anything else your refuge?
Here, each bhikṣu should observe his inner body or inner senses in
concentration; he should exert himself with no slackening, be mindful
of his observations and keep them in memory, and thereby remove worldly
desires and worries. In observing his outer body or outer senses, and also
observing both the inner and outer body, each bhikṣu should exert himself
with no slackening, be mindful of his observations, and keep them in
memory, and thereby remove worldly desires and worries. It is the same
with observing one’s sense perception, intellect, psychophysical aggregation of elements, and analytical introspection. This is what I mean
when I say that each monk should make himself his [own] lamplight,
make the Dharma his lamplight, but not make anything else his lamplight,
and to make himself his refuge, make the Dharma his refuge, but not
make anything else his refuge. Any practitioner who steadfastly keeps
the above principle cannot be deceived even by the Evil One, and that
practitioner’s merit will increase every day. Why is that so?

225

39b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

Once, during a period in the immemorial past, there was a king,
Daḷhanemi (Pāli) by name, who was of the kṣatriya class, anointed on
his head, and duly enthroned. He became the holy cakravartin, the
universal ruler who turns the golden wheel, and he ruled all four quarters
of the continent. The king spontaneously ruled the continent in reliance
on the Dharma and was endowed with the seven extraordinary treasures:
ﬁrst, the heavenly wheel; second, the white elephant; third, the dark
blue horse; fourth, the divine gem; ﬁfth, the jadelike queen; sixth, the
gentleman householder; and seventh, the military commander. He had
one thousand sons, courageous and valiant, who could defeat any adversary and enabled peace to prevail spontaneously everywhere without
the use of weapons.
King Daḷhanemi thus ruled for a long time, but ﬁnally he was
approaching the end of his life. Then the golden wheel suddenly left
its usual position, hovering in midair. The ofﬁcial in charge of the
golden wheel at once reported this to the king, “Your majesty, the
golden wheel has now moved away from its usual position in midair,
sir.” Having heard this report, the king thought to himself:
I once heard from some learned elders that when the golden wheel
changes its position it means that the king’s life span is near its end.
Though I have already enjoyed extraordinary rewards foremost
among men, I aspire to a heavenly happiness through further expediency. I should have the prince enthroned as the ruler of all the
quarters of the continent, except for a village that I may spare for
my barber, and have him shave my hair and beard. I will don the
three mendicant robes, go forth from family life, and practice the
path of religion.

Then King Daḷhanemi at once summoned the prince and said to him:

I wonder if you know this. I was told by some learned elders that
when the golden wheel changes its position, the king’s life span is
close to its end. Though I have already enjoyed extraordinary rewards
foremost among men, I aspire to a heavenly happiness through further
expediency. Now, I am going to shave my hair and beard, wear the

226

Sutra 6: The Universal Ruler’s Practice

three mendicant robes, renounce family relations, and practice the
path of religion. I entrust to your rule the four quarters of the continent.
You should exert yourself in inquiring after the populace and assisting
them in their well-being and the security of their possessions.

The prince accepted all the instructions the king left for him. Thereupon,
King Daḷhanemi shaved his hair and beard, donned the three robes,
and renounced family life for the practice of the path. After seven days
had passed since the king’s renunciation of household life, the golden
wheel suddenly disappeared. The ofﬁcial in charge of the wheel reported
this to the new king: “Your majesty, the golden wheel has suddenly
disappeared, sir.” The king was not pleased and at once visited the [former] king Daḷhanemi and said to him, “O father-king, the golden wheel
has suddenly disappeared, sir.” Daḷhanemi replied to his son:

Do not be worried or displeased. This golden wheel is no longer
[my] possession. When you have accomplished your rule with exertion, according to the right Dharma that is to be upheld by the holy
ruler, you should bathe in scented warm water on the full-moon
night, the ﬁfteenth of the month, and ascend to the top of the Sudharma-sabhā hall surrounded by the palace ladies. The golden
wheel will [then] spontaneously appear before you. The golden
wheel has a thousand spokes, rich in color and splendor. It was built
by a heavenly master and does not belong to the human world.

The son asked his father, the [former] king, “What is the right Dharma
of the holy king cakravartin, sir? O father-king, please tell me what I
should do, sir.” The [former] king said to his son:

Dear king, you should commit yourself to making the Dharma your
reliance, uphold it and let it accompany you as your assistance; you
should pay respect and reverence to the Dharma and honor it, carefully evaluate its practical application, make the law primary, and
thus protect the right Dharma. Again, you should teach the palace
ladies according to the Dharma, and also keep a protective watch
over them; you shall instruct the princes, ministers, fellow ofﬁcials,
and all bureaucratic members as well as various people, śramaṇas

227

39c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

and brāhmaṇas, and keep a protective watch over all of them, even
down to the level of birds and animals.

The king said again to his son:

Again, if you ﬁnd within your territorial conﬁnes some śramaṇas
and brāhmaṇas who faithfully carry out pure and true conduct, who
exert themselves without slackening in the removal of self-conceit,
who uphold perseverance and benevolence and with self-motivation
practice in solitary seclusion, realizing quiescence and nirvana; and
who, having removed their avarice and desire, help others remove
their avarice and desire; and, having removed their hatred and anger,
help others remove their hatred and anger as well as to remove their
delusion; who on meeting with passion are yet unaffected by it, on
meeting with evil are yet unaffected by it, on meeting with delusion
are yet free from it, on meeting with something with which to become
attached they remain unattached to it; who on meeting with something
upon which to dwell are not drawn to it and on meeting with something with which to be occupied do not become preoccupied with
it; who are honest in their physical, verbal, and volitional deeds; who
are pure and genuine in their physical deeds, verbal expressions, and
mental thoughts, as well as in right thought; who never weary of
compassion and wisdom; who are satisﬁed with their food and robes
and know how to be content; who go with an almsbowl on almsrounds, blessing the donors who offer charity—if you ﬁnd such practitioners, endowed with all of the foregoing virtues, you should visit
them from time to time and question them:
As to the disciplines that one practices, what is good and what
is bad? What should and should not be regarded as committing
an offense? With what should one associate and with what
should one not associate? What should one do and not do?
What kind of principles should one apply in implementing policy in order to secure happiness for a long time?

After asking these questions, you should evaluate their answers in
your mind and execute whatever should be done and abandon whatever

228

Sutra 6: The Universal Ruler’s Practice

should not be done. If there are elderly people without children, the
state should provide for them. When those who are covetous, impoverished, destitute, and lowly come to take things, you should refrain
from rejecting them. You should not change the ancient laws that have
existed in the state. These are the major principles that the universal
ruler, worthy of turning the golden wheel, should practice. May you
respectfully accept these principles and carry them out.

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

Having listened to his father’s instructions, the new universal ruler
carried out his practice of governance in compliance with his father’s
admonitions. Later, on the ﬁfteenth day [of the month], the full-moon
day, he bathed in scented warm water and ascended to the top of the
Sudharma-sabhā hall, surrounded by the palace ladies. The treasured
wheel then suddenly appeared before the king of its own accord. The
wheel had a thousand spokes, rich in color and splendor. It was built
by a heavenly master and was not of this world. It was made of genuine
gold and had a diameter of thirty-two feet. The universal ruler quietly
thought to himself:
I once heard from my virtuous elder the following words: “When
a king of the kṣatriya race, anointed on his head and thus duly
enthroned, bathes in scented warm water on the full-moon day, the
ﬁfteenth of the month, and ascends to the top of the pavilion, surrounded by the palace ladies, then at that moment the golden wheel
will appear before him spontaneously. The wheel, rich in color and
splendor, has a thousand spokes. It was built by a heavenly master
and does not belong to this world. It is made of genuine gold and
has a diameter of thirty-two feet. Thereupon, the king is called the
cakravartin, or the one who turns the sacred wheel.”
I see this wheel before me, but who knows if it really works? I
should now test this wheel treasure.

Then the king cakravartin called the four divisions of the army to
assemble. He faced the golden wheel directly, and rearranging his garment to expose his right shoulder and kneeling with his right knee

229

40a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

touching the ground, he rubbed the wheel with his right hand and said
to the wheel, “Let the wheel turn itself toward the east, turning as it
should, without losing regularity.” The wheel at once began to roll
toward the east. King Mahāsudarśana followed after the wheel, leading
the four divisions of his army. As the golden wheel rolled forward the
four guardian gods were in charge of guiding it. Wherever the wheel
stopped, the king stopped his chariot.
At that time, having seen the great king approaching, the rulers of
the small countries in the eastern regions prepared a golden bowl ﬁlled
with silver grains and a silver bowl ﬁlled with golden grains, sapproached the king, and, with their heads bowed, said to him:
Welcome, great king. The eastern countries are now blessed with
an abundance of harvests and produce, the people are prosperous,
the nature of the populace is friendly and harmonious, and all are
ﬁlial to their parents and loyal to their rulers. O holy ruler, your
majesty is recommended to govern these lands through ofﬁces established here. We shall closely attend your majesty and will execute
your commands as you wish, sir.

At that time, King Mahāsudarśana replied to the rulers of the small
countries:

Enough, dear wise kings, your offerings have already been appreciated by me. Your majesties rule these countries on the basis of the
right Dharma, so that neither injustice nor wrong action can take
place in your countries. I say that these two principles embody my
governance.

After listening to his exhortation, the kings of the small countries
accompanied King Mahāsudarśana on his inspection tour until they
reached the eastern ocean The great king then proceeded toward the
south, then to the west, then to the north, and in whatever direction the
wheel rolled they followed. The kings of the small countries in these
regions all abnegated their dominions for the sake of the great ruler,
just as the eastern rulers had done.

230

Sutra 6: The Universal Ruler’s Practice

At that time, King Mahāsudarśana, having made a complete round
of the four oceans following the golden wheel, educated the populace
in the path of morality, provided security in their lives, and then returned
to his own country. The golden wheel continued to hover in midair
above the palace gate. Rejoicing by dancing and leaping, King Mahāsudarśana said, “This treasure, the golden wheel, is truly my blessing.
Now I am truly the universal ruler who turns this sacred wheel.” This
is called the realization of the ﬁrst treasure, the golden wheel. Since
that time, the king ruled the continent for the full duration of his life.
The golden wheel then suddenly shifted its position from where it
had been before. The ofﬁcial in charge of the golden wheel at once
reported this event to the king: “Your majesty, the golden wheel has
now moved away from its usual position, sir.” Having heard this report,
the king thought to himself:

I once heard from some learned elders that when the golden wheel
changes its position it means that the king’s life span is near its end.
Though I have already enjoyed extraordinary rewards foremost among
men, I aspire to a heavenly happiness through further expediency. I
will have the prince enthroned as ruler of all the [four] quarters of
the continent, except for a village I will spare for my barber, who will
shave my hair and beard. Wearing the three mendicant robes, I will
go forth from family life and practice the path of religion.

Then the king at once summoned his prince and told him:

I wonder if you know of this. I was told by some learned elders that
when the golden wheel changes its position the king’s life span is
near its end. Though I have already enjoyed extraordinary rewards
foremost among men, I aspire to a heavenly happiness through further expediency. Now I am going to shave my hair and beard, don
the three mendicant robes, renounce family relations, and practice
the path of religion. I shall entrust to your rule the four quarters of
the continent. You should exert yourself in inquiring after the populace and assisting them in their well-being and the security of their
possessions.

231

40b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

The prince accepted all the instructions the king left for him. Thereupon,
King Daḷhanemi shaved his hair and beard, donned the three robes,
and renounced family life for the practice of the path. When seven
days had passed since the king’s renunciation of household life, the
golden wheel suddenly disappeared. The ofﬁcial in charge of the wheel
reported this to the new king, “Your majesty, the golden wheel has
suddenly disappeared, sir.” The king was not worried and he did not
immediately go visit his father, the king. The father-king then suddenly
passed away.
Before the new king, the preceding six cakravartin rulers had handed
down the principles of governance from one to another and ruled the
continent on the basis of the right Dharma. But the new king of the
present time relied solely on his own principles and did not rely on the
ancient principles for governing the continent. As a result, his reign
became unfair and unjust and the entire continent under the heavens
was ﬁlled with grievances and protests. The land was damaged, its
productivity diminished, and the populace declined. A brāhmaṇa minister visited the king and advised him:
Your majesty, know that the land has now been damaged, its productivity has been diminished, and the populace has declined, sir.
Your majesty, we have still some people who, being learned and
knowledgeable, know the history of the past and present, and in
addition they know the legacy of the previous king’s governance.
Why not summon them and listen to what they advise, sir? They
can reply directly to your majesty.

Thereupon, the king invited the retainers and questioned them about
the legacy of the previous king’s governance. These wise and knowledgeable men answered his questions in detail. Following their advice,
the king adopted the ancient principles of governance in an effort to
protect the world through the Dharma. But he could not extend the
reign’s service and protection either to elderly people who were without
support or to those who lived in abject poverty and destitution.
The citizens of the country became increasingly impoverished and
ﬁnally began committing various crimes of mutual encroachment and

232

Sutra 6: The Universal Ruler’s Practice

seizure by violence, and theft and robbery became more frequent than
ever. Then an accuser, hoping to regain his possessions, brought a criminal before the king, asserting: “This man is a thief, sir. Please punish
him.” The king questioned the [accused] man, “Did you really commit
theft?” He replied, “Yes, sir. I am poor, destitute, and unable to survive.
Hence, I could not help doing it, sir.” The king provided the man with
some money from his treasury, admonishing him, “With this you should
support your parents and rescue your family. From now on, do not
commit theft.”
Some of those who heard this story then deliberately committed
theft, and the king also gave them money from his treasury. Thus, again,
when someone was robbed of his possessions, in the hope of regaining
his losses he brought the robber before the king, asserting, “This man
robbed me, sir. Please, punish him.” The king questioned the accused,
“Did you really commit robbery?” He replied, “Yes, sir. I am poor, destitute, starved, and cannot otherwise survive, sir. I could not help it, sir.”
The king then provided the man with some money from his treasury
and admonished him, “With this, you should support your parents and
rescue your family, and from now on do not commit robbery.”
Having heard that the king gave money to a man who had committed
robbery, some again openly plundered others’ possessions. Those who
had been robbed, hoping to regain their losses, brought the criminals
before the king, saying: “This man is a robber, sir. Please punish him.”
The king questioned them, “Did you really commit robbery?” and they
replied, “Yes, sir. I am poor, destitute, starved, and I could not otherwise
survive, sir. I could not help it, sir.” The king, however, thought to himself:
I saw a dire state of poverty and destitution in those earlier cases
of robbery, and thought that if some means were granted these people
then their criminal behavior would end. Yet it seems that having
heard about the earlier cases from one another, some of these miscreants have imitated the others and criminal behavior has increased.
The way I have tried to rectify this situation is no longer working.
Therefore, I should now have this man bound on a wooden rack,
issue an announcement of his execution to the public on every street

233

40c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

corner, and then have him transported in a carriage from the city to
the wilderness for execution. This might prevent future occurrences
of robbery.

The king thus ordered his aides to have the man chained and pulled
all around the city streets, accompanied by the sound of drumming
and the announcement of his crime, and then had him transported out
of the city and executed in the wilderness.
Then the people all knew, “Whoever steals will be caught by the
king’s forces, pulled through the streets with his crime announced to
the citizens, and then executed in the wilderness.” The news spread
by word of mouth, “If anyone commits robbery, their fate will be exactly
like that of the criminal who has been executed.” In this situation, the
people began to equip themselves with various weapons in order to
protect themselves, such as ﬁghting sticks, knives, swords, and bows
and arrows, and they began injuring, murdering, attacking, plundering,
and violently robbing one another.
From the time of this king poverty and destitution became a part of
human society for the ﬁrst time; because of poverty and destitution,
for the ﬁrst time there came to be crimes of theft and robbery; because
of robbery or plunder, for the ﬁrst time there occurred armed conﬂict;
because of armed conﬂict, for the ﬁrst time there occurred murders;
and because of murder the people suffered from bad complexions and
exhaustion and their life spans decreased. At that time, the human life
span was as long as forty thousand years. Thereafter, it quickly shortened
and the average person’s life span became twenty thousand years. The
age of people then became limited, they met untimely deaths, and suffered unhappiness. Then those suffering people began to have passion
for sexual indulgence and insatiable material desire and contrived
fraudulent ways to steal others’ things. The sentient beings of that time
indeed underwent the depredations of poverty and destitution, robbery
and theft, armed conﬂict and murder, one after another, rapidly and
frequently.
Human life span was now decreased to ten thousand years. During
the age when the life span was reduced to ten thousand years, the sentient

234

Sutra 6: The Universal Ruler’s Practice

beings were also engaged in robbery and theft. When an accuser brought
a criminal before the king in the hope of regaining his lost possessions,
and appealed to him, “This man robbed me, may the king punish him,”
and the king then questioned the criminal, “Have you really robbed?”,
the criminal replied, “No, sir.” Thus, the vice of speaking falsehoods
arose in human society. At that time, because of poverty and destitution
many sentient beings were engaged in criminal acts of robbery and
theft. Because of robbery by bandits, there occurred armed conﬂict.
Because of armed conﬂict, murders occurred; because of murders, the
insatiable desire for material goods and sexual indulgence occurred;
because of insatiable desire for material goods and passion for sexual
indulgence, the vice of falsehood occurred; because of the vice of falsehood, human life span rapidly decreased down to one thousand years.
During the period when the life span was one thousand years, three
wrong verbal behaviors arose for the ﬁrst time: deceptive speech, verbal
abuse, and sycophancy, or ﬂattering words. These wrong behaviors
spread widely. As a result, the human life span was reduced to ﬁve
hundred years of age. During the period when the life span was ﬁve
hundred years, there arose three other wrongdoings: immoral sexual
behavior, avarice, and erroneous views. These three wrong behaviors
spread widely. As a result human longevity futher decreased to three
or two hundred years. The present people of our age live only up to a
hundred years of age, only a few people live beyond one hundred while
the majority live less than that.
In this manner, wrongdoings arose and spread without end and human
life span decreased further, eventually down to ten years of age. During
the period when human life span is ten years, only ﬁve months after birth
a female would be of marriageable age. The society of this time would
not know of items such as butter, cooking oil, molasses, raw sugar, or
any foods of various sweet tastes. The rice grains or rice crop would turn
to grass and weeds. Clothing made of silken fabric, silk brocade, twilled
fabric, cotton, or white wool, all well known in the present age, would
be unknown to those sentient beings. They would make only a rough
woven cloth of woolen yarn for wrapping around their upper bodies.

235

41a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

At that time, the ground would be covered with all kinds of thorny
plants and the number of all kinds of poisonous insects such as mosquitoes and gadﬂies, as well as ﬂies and lice, snakes and vipers, and
bees and maggots would multiply. Well-known precious materials,
such as gold, silver, lapis lazuli, jade, and pearls, would all sink deep
down underground, and only clay, rocks, sand, and gravel would surface.
In that age, sentient beings would not have heard of the ten good deeds
for a long time. Only the ten bad deeds would prevail and overwhelm
their society. There would be no name that refers to any of the good
laws or norms of conduct. Indeed, how could these people discipline
themselves with good conduct when there is no idea of good whatsoever? The sentient beings of that age would commit all kinds of
wretched, hideous crimes.
They would not be ﬁlial to their parents, nor would they pay respect
to their teachers and elders, nor would they be loyal, nor would they
have any sense of commitment. Thus only treacherous and unprincipled
people would be praised, in exact contrast to the present day, where
respect and reverence accrue only to those who are ﬁlial to their parents,
respectful toward teachers and elders, loyal and faithful, and who practice the disciplines according to the principle of righteousness and
morality. The sentient beings of that age would indeed commit the ten
evil deeds and thus fall into evil courses of life. Whenever people meet
they would wish to kill one another, just as a hunter today would wish
to kill deer when encountering a group of them. The earth would be
ﬁlled with ditches and pits, creeks and torrential mountain rivers, deep
valley crevices, and the terrain would mostly be desert with scarcely
any people; it would be extremely frightening to travel throughout the
land. In that time, whenever an armed conﬂict or uprising occurred
people would fashion spears and lances out of plants and wood, and
mutual slaughter and killing would begin and spread widely for seven
days. Then some wise one would escape far away from the killing
grounds and hide in a pit or cave, and with his mind ﬁlled with fear,
he would utter words of friendly love, “If you do not injure me, I too
shall not injure you.” Eating fruit and the roots of grass and trees, he
would maintain his life for seven days. Finally, emerging from the

41b

236

Sutra 6: The Universal Ruler’s Practice

shelter and ﬁnding someone who had survived, he would exclaim in
joy, “You have not been killed!” and the two would rejoice and congratulate each other. Such joy may be compared to the parents’ joy
when their child has been separated from them for some time but they
ﬁnally ﬁnd him and are reunited. The person in question would feel
exactly like that, and [the survivors] would mutually congratulate each
other. They would then return to their homes, only to ﬁnd that many
of their relations had died.
Again, for seven days, they would cry in sorrow, wailing and mourning. Having passed the initial seven days like this, upon meeting each
other and other survivors, once again they would congratulate one
another and enjoy and rejoice in their survival. They would then think
to themselves, “Our accumulation of evil causes is extensive. Because
of this, we have met the disaster of all our relations having died and
our households reduced to nothing. Now we should practice good
together. What kind of good deeds do we need to do? It must be the
principle of not taking life.” At that time, all sentient beings would be
determined to cherish friendly love and not kill each other. Under this
circumstance, the life span of sentient beings would rapidly increase
from ten to twenty years.
The people of this period, whose life span is only twenty years, would
think to themselves, “We have upheld the practice of good, namely not
taking life, so our life spans have increased to twenty years. Now we
should practice still more good. What kind of good should we practice?
We have already upheld not killing, hence it should now be the principle
of not stealing.” Having thus practiced the principle of not stealing,
their life spans would be able to increase to forty years. The people of
this period would then think to themselves, “Because of our practice
of an additional good principle, we have been able to lengthen our life
spans. Now we should increase the number of good principles again.
What kind of good should we practice? It should be not to indulge in
immoral sex.” Thus, whoever refrained entirely from wrong sexual conduct would to have his life span extended to eighty years.
The people of this period would then think to themselves, “Because
of our practice of another good principle we have lengthened our life

237

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

spans. Now we should increase the number of good principles again.
What kind of good should we practice? It should be not to speak falsehood.” Thus, whoever refrained entirely from speaking false words
would have their life span extended to one hundred and sixty years.
The people of this period would then think to themselves, “Because
of our practice of another good principle, we have lengthened our life
spans. Now we should increase the number of good principles. What
kind of good should we practice? It should be not to speak deceptively.”
Thus whoever refrained entirely from deceit would have their life span
extended to three hundred and twenty years.
The people of this period would then think to themselves, “Because
of our practice of another good principle we have lengthened our life
spans. Now we should increase the number of good principles. What
kind of good should we practice? It should be not to speak abusive
words.” Thus whoever has refrained entirely from speaking abusive
words would have their life span extended to six hundred and forty years.
The people of this period would then think to themselves, “Because
of our practice of another good principle we have lengthened our life
spans. Now we should increase the number of good principles. What
kind of good should we practice? It should be not to speak ﬂattering
words.” Thus, whoever refrained entirely from false ﬂattery would
have their life span extended to two thousand years.
The people of this period would then think to themselves, “Because
of our practice of another good principle we have lengthened our life
spans. Now we should increase the number of good principles. What kind
of good should we practice? It should be not to be greedy.” Under this
circumstance, whoever refrained entirely from being greedy and practiced
liberal charity would have their life span extended to ﬁve thousand years.
The people of this period would then think to themselves, “Because
of our practice of another good principle we have lengthened our life
spans. Now we should increase the number of good principles. What
kind of good should we practice? It should be not to be jealous but to
practice instead friendly love.” Thus, whoever refrained entirely from
being jealous and practiced friendly love would have their life span
extended to ten thousand years.

41c

238

Sutra 6: The Universal Ruler’s Practice

The people of this period would then think to themselves, “Because
of our practice of another good principle we have lengthened our life
spans. Now we should increase the number of good principles. What
kind of good should we practice? It should be not to insist on an erroneous perception but to practice right perception.” Thus, whoever practiced right perception and entirely refrained from erroneous perception
would have their life span extended to twenty thousand years.
The people of this period would then think to themselves, “Because
of our practice of another good principle we have lengthened our life
spans. Now we should increase the number of good principles. What
kind of good should we practice? It should be to end three kinds of
wrongdoings: immoral sex, immoral greed, and wrong views of life.”
Thus, whoever entirely abandoned these three wrongdoings would have
their life span extended to forty thousand years.
The people of this period would then think to themselves, “Because
of our practice of another good principle we have lengthened our life
spans. Now we should increase the number of good principles. What
kind of good should we practice? It should be to be ﬁlial to our parents
and respectfully serve our teachers and elders.” Thus, whoever was
ﬁlial to his parents and respectfully served his teachers and elders would
have their life span extended to eighty thousand years. When the human
life span increases to eighty thousand years, a woman would be married
for the ﬁrst time at the age of ﬁve hundred years.
[Even though] at that time there would be nine causes of sickness
for humans (cold, heat, hunger, thirst, excretion, urination, desire, covetousness, and aging), the ground would be smooth, even, and orderly
with no ditches or pits, no barren hills or wastelands, no thorny trees
or plants. There would not be any mosquitoes or gadﬂies, snakes or
vipers, or poisonous insects, and clay, rocks, and gravel would turn to
lapis lazuli. The population would increase and there would be no limit
to the degree of bountiful produce of all kinds of crops for each member
of society, even those of the lowest classes. At that time, eighty thousand
large cities would be built. Since cities and villages would be close to
one another the sound of the roosters crowing in the morning would
be heard from one town to the next.

239

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

At that time, there will appear a buddha. He will be called Maitreya
Tathāgata, well endowed with the ten supreme titles, such as Arhat, Perfectly Enlightened, and so forth, just as the present Tathāgata is endowed
with all these titles. He will directly accomplish his ultimate experience
before the gods Indra and Brahmā, the Evil One [Māra] and his retainers,
śramaṇas, and brāhmaṇas, just as I have accomplished the ultimate
experience before the gods Indra and Brahmā, the Evil One and his
retainers, śramaṇas, and brāhmaṇas. This future buddha will teach the
doctrine of his Dharma. His teaching will be lovely at the beginning,
lovely in the middle, and lovely at the end; his words will be endowed
with the well-matched meaning and subjective sense; and he will carry
out the practice of pure and genuine austerity. It shall be just as my
words of teaching today are true and right at the beginning, in the middle,
and at the end, well endowed with meaning and sense, and just as I have
engaged in the practice of pure and genuine austerity.
His disciples will be innumerable, thousands of tens of thousands,
just as I have today innumerable disciples. The people of that age shall
call his disciples the sons and daughters of Maitreya, just as my disciples
today are called the sons and daughters of the Śākya. The king of that
age shall be called Suṃkha, a kṣatriya anointed on his head for enthronement. This universal king will rule the four quarters of the continent on
the basis of the principle of the right Dharma. There will be no other
king who can contest his rule and he will be endowed with the seven
treasures of the golden wheel, the white elephant, the dark blue horse,
the divine gem, the jadelike queen, the householder gentleman, and the
military commander. The king will have a thousand children, courageous
and valiant, who will repulse any adversaries or invaders. Thus all four
quarters of the continent will pledge respectful allegiance, causing no
wars, and peace will naturally prevail everywhere.
At that time, the holy ruler cakravartin will erect a streamer post
made of precious gems, with a circumference of one hundred twenty
feet and eight thousand feet tall, embellished with a thousand varieties
of colors. There will be a hundred corners on the top of the tower post,
each corner divided into three branches, from which hang streamers
woven out of precious metal threads and studded with various precious

42a

240

Sutra 6: The Universal Ruler’s Practice

gems. After it is completed, the holy ruler will dismantle the tower. The
entire structure will be donated to the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas as well
as to those who are in poverty, and thereafter the cakravartin will shave
his head, don the three robes, renounce family life, engage in the practice
of the highest path, and will directly experience in the present life the
exhaustion of the cause of birth and death, the accomplishment of the
practice of austerity, the accomplishment of what should be done [for
religious salvation], and freedom from further birth.

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

You should practice good as strictly as possible. When one practices
good norms his life span will increase, his complexion improves, and
he will enjoy his life in peace and happiness. You may acquire abundant
treasures and will be endowed with the power of authority. As successive
rulers complied with the ancient rules of the cakravartin, their life spans
increased, their complexions improved; they enjoyed their lives in peace
and happiness; and they were endowed with abundant riches and treasures
and vested with the power of authority. It is the same with the bhikṣus.
You should practice good. Your life span will increase, your complexion
will improve, and you will enjoy lives of peace and happiness.
How can a bhikṣu increase his life span? Each bhikṣu should rely
on the practice of concentration motivated by desire, applying his effort,
without slackening, to the cessation of dispositional forces and to the
practice of the supernormal power thereby attained. In a similar manner,
one should rely on the practice of concentration motivated by endeavor,
motivated by mind, and motivated by thought, applying his effort,
without slackening, to the cessation of dispositional forces and to the
practice of the supernormal powers thereby attained. This is called the
extension of one’s religious life.
How can the bhikṣus increase their good appearance? If a bhikṣu is
well endowed with the precepts and disciplines he will realize the manner and aura of authority. He experiences great fear over even a minor
offense, learns all the precepts and complies with all of them equally,
and satisﬁes all of them meticulously. This is the bhikṣu’s realization
of increased good appearance.

241

42b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

How can the bhikṣus enjoy lives of peace and happiness? A bhikṣu
should abandon sexual desire and abandon such wrong passion. He
realizes the ﬁrst meditative state of absorption in which there is an
awareness of an object and an act of examining, while the sense of
joy and bliss increase through removal of the cause of birth (i.e., reaching the supramundane sphere). Next, eliminating the awareness of an
object and the subjective act of its examination, with increasing tranquility or self-conﬁdence, continually applying concentration of the
mind, he proceeds to the second meditative state of absorption in
which there is neither the awareness of an object nor a subjective act
but the sense of joy and bliss predominate in the arising state of concentration. Next, with the fading away of the sense of joy but dwelling
in a sense of equanimity, fully aware of subtler bliss, he reaches the
third meditative state of absorption in which one experiences the mindfulness and bliss sought by a wise and holy practitioner. Next, transcending both pain and pleasure, removing sorrow and joy, he realizes
the fourth meditative state of absorption in which there is neither pain
nor pleasure but an increase in the state of equanimity that consolidates
pure and genuine mindfulness. This is the bhikṣu’s realization of a
life of peace and happiness.
How can a bhikṣu be endowed with abundant riches and treasures?
A bhikṣu learns and practices the mind of friendly love, ﬁrst by permeating his mind of friendly love inﬁnitely in one direction, then likewise
in the remaining three directions. Thus he extends his immeasurable
mind of benevolence universally in all directions, neither divided nor
bound to limitation. Casting away various feelings of hatred, leaving
no ill-will in his mind, the bhikṣu enjoys the state of tranquility and
silence, compassion and tenderness. He also completes the remaining
three practices: the immeasurable mind of compassion, the immeasurable
mind of sympathetic joy, and the immeasurable mind of equanimity.
This is the bhikṣu’s realization of abundant riches and treasures.
How can the bhikṣus be endowed with the power of authority? A
bhikṣu sees the noble truth of suffering as it really is, and likewise sees
as they really are the remaining three [noble truths]—[the truth of] the
cause of suffering, [the truth of] the cessation of suffering, and [the

242

Sutra 6: The Universal Ruler’s Practice

truth of] the path to the cessation of suffering. This is the bhikṣu’s realization of the power of authority.

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

I have observed all kinds of holders of supernormal power, but none
of them surpasses the power of the Evil One [Māra]. Yet a bhikṣu who
has annihilated the inﬂuences of deﬁlement has power that is superior
to that of the Evil One.

At that time, having listened to the Buddha’s exhortation, the bhikṣus
rejoiced, respectfully received it, and carried it out.
[End of Sutra 6: The Universal Ruler’s Practice]

243

Sutra 7
Pāyāsi’s Dialogue

(Dīgha Nikāya 23: Pāyāsi Suttanta)
At one time, Kumara-Kāśyapa was leisurely traveling through the country
of Kośala together with ﬁve hundred bhikṣus and arrived at the village of
Śvetavyā. Kumara-Kāśyapa then stayed in a forest of śiṃśapā trees to the
north of the village. There happened to be a brāhmaṇa, Pāyāsi by name, who
resided in this village. The village was prosperous with bountiful harvests,
populous, and full of luxuriant trees. King Prasenajit had granted the brāhmaṇa
Pāyāsi the village as a special ﬁef and exempted it from tax collection. The
brāhmaṇa always held an unusual view of life and taught it to others: “There
is no world after death, nor is there rebirth, nor even any reward for good or
bad deeds done in this world.”
The people of Śvetavyā village, having heard that Kumara-Kāśyapa had
arrived at the śiṃśapā forest together with ﬁve hundred bhikṣus from the
country of Kośala, said to each other:
This bhikṣu Kumara-Kāśyapa is renowned for his realization of the
state of arhatship. Being a bhikṣu of advanced, senior rank, learned
and erudite in stature, he can respond to anyone with his sagacity, intelligence, and eloquence, and he is especially good at doctrinal debate.
It would be great if we could see him.

The people of the village then visited the bhikṣu every day in due order.
At that time Pāyāsi was watching the villagers from the top of a high tower
as they proceeded one after another in groups, but he was unable to see where
they were going. He asked his attendants, who were holding parasols over
him on each side, “Where and why are these people forming groups and
going one after another?” The attendants replied:

We were told that the bhikṣu Kumara-Kāśyapa, with ﬁve hundred
bhikṣus, has been traveling through the country of Kośala and just
arrived at the śiṃśapā forest. We have also heard that being a bhikṣu

245

42c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

of advanced, senior rank, learned and erudite in stature, he can respond
to anyone with his sagacity, intelligence, and eloquence, and that he
is especially good at doctrinal debate. These people are forming groups
and going, one after another, to see the bhikṣu Kāśyapa, sir.

Thereupon, the brāhmaṇa said to his attendants:

Go quickly to these villagers and tell them, “Wait awhile. Pāyāsi will
come with you to see the bhikṣu. Why? [I wish to know] if the bhikṣu
is a fool, because he is deceiving the people by asserting that there is
an afterlife, that there will be rebirth, or that there will be retribution
for good or bad conduct, whereas in actuality there is neither afterlife,
nor rebirth, nor reward for good or bad deeds.”

43a

As instructed, the messenger at once ran after the villagers and told them,
“I am conveying to you that the brāhmaṇa asks you to wait awhile, because
he wishes to go with you to see the bhikṣu.” The villagers replied, “Certainly,
that is splendid. If he comes here, we shall go together.”
The messenger returned and reported to Pāyāsi, “The villagers are waiting
for you, sir. If you wish to go with them, you may go.” The brāhmaṇa came
down from the high tower, had his attendant drive the carriage, and surrounded
by villagers in front as well as behind, proceeded toward the śiṃśapā forest.
Having reached the forest, he descended from the carriage, proceeded on
foot, approached the place of Kāśyapa, and, after exchanging greetings with
him with a bow, withdrew to one side to take his seat. Some of the villagers,
brāhmaṇas and householders, venerated the bhikṣu and then sat; some greeted
him with a bow and sat; others announced their names and sat; some respectfully joined their palms together and sat; and some quietly sat down without
saying anything.
Thereupon, the brāhmaṇa Pāyāsi said to Kumara-Kāśyapa, “I am obliged
to question you. Can you spare me some time for my questions?” Kāśyapa
replied, “Let me ﬁrst hear your question. Then I will know if I can [give you
some time].”
The brāhmaṇa said, “Now, as to my own view of life, I hold that there is
neither afterlife, nor rebirth, nor reward for good or bad action. What is your
theory, sir?” Kāśyapa replied:

246

Sutra 7: Pāyāsi’s Dialogue

I shall question you now, and please reply accordingly, as you wish.
Now, do the sun and moon above us belong to this human world or
another world? Are they heavenly things or human things?

Pāyāsi answered, “The sun and moon belong to the other world and not
to this world. Heavenly things are not human things.”
Kāśyapa said, “According to your reply, there is necessarily another world;
there is also rebirth, as well as the moral retribution of good and bad.”
The brāhmaṇa said:
Although you assert that there is another world, rebirth, and reward
and retribution of good and bad, my reply to your previous question,
that the sun and moon belong to the other world, leads to my theory
that these three (i.e., afterlife, rebirth, and reward or retribution for
good or bad) are impossible.

Kāśyapa asked, “Do you have some causal reasons by which to know that
there is neither afterlife, nor rebirth, nor reward or retribution for good or
bad actions?”
The brāhmaṇa replied, “I have some reason for ascertaining my theory.”
Kāśyapa asked, “On what causal reason do you assert that there is no
afterlife?”
The brāhmaṇa replied:

O Kāśyapa, I have some relations and friends who are suffering because
they have encountered some calamities and also because they have
been ill. I visited and asked them, “Some śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas
respectively teach their different doctrines, such as ‘Whoever is guilty
of committing murder, enegaging in theft, immoral sex, double-dealing,
harsh words, false speech, frivolous sycophancy, or who have a covetous
mind, malicious intent, or wrong views will fall into hell when his
body dissolves and his life ends.’ I cannot believe this kind of thing
from the outset, because I have never known anyone who, after death,
returned to tell us where his [new] life is. If someone were to return
after death and tell me where he has been, then I will certainly believe
it. Now, you have done all ten kinds of wrongdoings, just as I have
done. If the teaching of the śramaṇa is correct, when you die you will

247

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

fall into the great hell. I will believe decisively whatever you say. When
you actually ﬁnd hell, return to tell me and let me know about it. Then
I will deﬁnitely believe it.”
O Kāśyapa, after someone died he did not return, even today. He was
my close relation and certainly would not lie to me. The fact that he has
not returned to let me know [about the afterlife] means that there is no
such afterlife.

Kāśyapa responded:

43b

Many wise people acquire their wisdom by way of analogy. I shall
now give you an analogy to help you understand. For instance, people
such as thieves or robbers always contrive cunning schemes in violation
of the king’s law. When such a person is caught redhanded, with clear
evidence, he is brought before the king and charged: “This man committed robbery. May your majesty punish him.” The king then orders
his aides, “Chain him to the wooden rack, pull him all around the city
streets, announcing his crime to the public, then transport him out of
the city and hand him over to the executioner.” Thus, as instructed, the
king’s aides carry out the order and ﬁnally transfer the criminal to the
executioner. The criminal speaks in an insinuating voice to the guards,
“You should let me go. I must go see my family in order to say goodbye.
After that, I will return here.” What do you think, O brāhmaṇa, would
that guard agree to let him go?

The brāhmaṇa replied, “No, he would not.”
Kāśyapa continued:

There are many people like this criminal in the world, and no guard
would let such a person go. How much more so with someone like
your kinsman, who committed all ten kinds of wrongdoing and was
predestined for hell after his body dissolved and his life ended. The
hellish guards are merciless, nonhuman; they are in the world of the
dead, distinct from the world of the living. If your kinsman had spoken
to those guards in an insinuating voice, “Please let me go for a while.
I will return to the living world and see my relations in order to say

248

Sutra 7: Pāyāsi’s Dialogue

goodbye, and then return here,” what do you think—would those guards
have let him go?”

The brāhmaṇa said, “No, sir.”
Kāśyapa continued:

If you compare both cases, it would be sufﬁcient for you to know that
it is reasonable [that there is such an afterworld]. Why do you insist
on a delusion that leads to a wrong view [that there is no afterlife]?

The brāhmaṇa countered, “Although you assert that there is an afterlife
by referring to such an analogy, I would still say that there is no such world
after death.”
Kāśyapa asked again, “Do you have any other reason on the basis of which
you know that there is no afterlife?”
The brāhmaṇa replied, “I have another reason to infer that there is no
afterlife.”
Kāśyapa asked, “What is the reason?”
The brāhmaṇa replied:

O Kāśyapa, one of my relations was seriously ill. I visited him and
said to him, “Some śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas respectively teach their
different doctrines, saying that there is an afterlife, such that whoever
has abstained from committing murder, engaging in theft, immoral
sex, double-dealing, harsh words, false speech, frivolous sycophancy,
and who does not have a covetous mind, malicious intent, and wrong
views will be born among heavenly beings after his body dissolves
and his life ends. I cannot believe this kind of thing from the outset,
because I have never known anyone who, after death, returned to tell
us where his [new] life is. If someone was to return after death and tell
me where he has been, I will certainly believe it. Now, you are my
close relation and have maintained all ten kinds of good deeds. If the
teaching of the śramaṇa is correct, after death you will surely be reborn
in the heavenly world. I will believe decisively whatever you say, and
if it is apparent that you have received the reward of heavenly birth,
return to tell me and let me know about it. Then I shall believe it.”

249

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

O Kāśyapa, after his death he has not returned, even now. He was
my close relation and certainly would not lie to me. The fact that he
has not returned to let me know [about the afterlife] means that there
is no such afterlife.

Kāśyapa again said:

43c

Many wise people acquire their wisdom by way of analogy. I shall now
make an analogy to help you understand. For instance, a man fell into
a deep latrine and his entire body sank up to his neck. The king ordered
his attendants to pull him out, take a bamboo spatula and scrape the
ﬁlth off of his body three times, wash his body with bean soap and wood
ash, then bathe his body with scented warm water, apply scented powder
and various incense to his body, have a barber wash his hair and beard,
and then wash his body again, three more times. After having his body
cleansed with scented warm water, scented powder applied to his body,
clothed in a renowned upper garment; and having allowed him to enter
the palace and enjoy all the ﬂavors of good food and games and amusements, would he then return to the latrine?

The brāhmaṇa replied, “No, he would not. That was a ﬁlthy and smelly
place. Why would he return to such a place?”
Kāśyapa said:

It would be the same with heavenly beings. This Jambudvīpa continent
is smelly and ﬁlthy and impure. The heavenly beings are far distant,
one hundred yojanas above us, and yet they can sense human odors
and smell human waste. O brāhmaṇa, one of your relations or friends,
well endowed with the ten kinds of good deeds, was necessarily born
among the gods and is now enjoying the best of all pleasures through
the ﬁve senses. So how could he think of returning to this world, which
is like a lavatory?

The brāhmaṇa replied. “He could not, sir.”
Kāśyapa said again, “If you compare both cases, it is self-evident. Why
do you insist on delusion and cherish a wrong view?”
The brāhmaṇa, however, argued, “Though you assert that there is an

250

Sutra 7: Pāyāsi’s Dialogue

afterlife on the basis of the foregoing analogy, I still insist that there is no
such world after death.”
Kāśyapa again asked, “Do you have any other reason on the basis of which
you also know that there is no afterlife?”
The brāhmaṇa replied, “I have another reason to infer that there is no
afterlife.”
Kāśyapa asked, “What is that reason?”
The brāhmaṇa replied:

O Kāśyapa, someone among my relations was been seriously ill and
was about to die. I visited him and said to him, “Some śramaṇas and
brāhmaṇas respectively teach their different doctrines, asserting that
there is an afterlife such that whoever has abstained from committing
murder, enaging in theft, sexual indulgence, false speech, or ingesting
intoxicants will be born in Trāyastriṃśa Heaven.” I cannot believe this
kind of thing from the outset, because I have never seen anyone who,
after death, returned to tell us in which course of life he has been. If
someone were to return after death and tell me where he has been, I
will certainly believe it. Now, you are my close relation and you have
upheld well the ﬁve precepts, so [according to the teaching of the śramaṇa] you will be born in Trāyastriṃśa Heaven after death. I will
believe decisively whatever you say, and if it is apparent that you have
received the reward of heavenly birth, return to tell me and let me know
about it. Then I will believe it.”
O Kāśyapa, after his death he has not returned, even now. He was
my close relation and certainly would not lie to me. The fact that he
has not returned to let me know [about the afterlife] means that there
is no such afterlife.

Kāśyapa replied:

One hundred years on earth is only a single day and night in Trāyastriṃśa Heaven. In this manner, thirty days make up a month, twelve
months make a year, and the life span of the residents of Trāyastriṃśa
Heaven is said to be one thousand years. O brāhmaṇa, your close relation who upheld the ﬁve precepts was necessarily reborn in that heaven

251

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

when his body dissolved and his life ended. But suppose that after
being born in that heaven he thought to himself, “Since I have been
born here for the ﬁrst time, I should enjoy my stay here for a few days.”
If he then comes back to report to you about his experience, would he
be able to ﬁnd you here?

The brāhmaṇa replied. “No, he would not. It would already be long after
the time of my death. How could he ﬁnd me?” Still, Pāyāsi insisted, “I cannot
believe your story. Who could come down from Trāyastriṃśa Heaven and
tell you that there is such a heaven and that the life span there is such-andsuch?”
Kāśyapa said:
Many wise people acquire their wisdom by way of metaphors. I shall
now make another analogy for you to help you understand. For instance,
a man who has been blind since his birth cannot know the difference
between the ﬁve colors of blue, yellow, red, white, and black, nor could
he know by sight the rough or ﬁne surface of objects or the length or
size of objects, nor could he see the sun or moon, the shapes of the
stars, or hills or ditches. Someone asks him, “What are the ﬁve colors
of blue, yellow, red, white, and black?” The blind person replies, “There
are no such ﬁve colors, nor is there anything, rough or ﬁne, long or
short, nor is there anything such as sun, moon, the shapes of stars, or
hills and ditches.” O brāhmaṇa, would his answer be correct?

44a

[Pāyāsi] replied:

No, it is not correct, because we know that there are actually ﬁve different colors, blue, yellow, red, white, and black, [and that there are]
rough or ﬁne and long or short objects, [and that] the sun, moon, the
shapes of the stars, and hills and ditches exist, even though he denies
their existence.

Kāśyapa continued:

You are also like this blind man. The life span of the residents of Trāyastriṃśa Heven is real and not unreal. But you deny it just because you
have not seen it yourself.

252

Sutra 7: Pāyāsi’s Dialogue

The brāhmaṇa said, “Though you assert that there is an afterlife, I still
cannot believe it.”
Kāśyapa again asked the brāhmaṇa, “On the basis of what other reason
do you know that there is no afterlife?”
The brāhmaṇa replied:

O Kāśyapa, among the people of the village that I received as my ﬁef
there are some who have committed robbery. The villagers caught one
thief redhanded and, with clear evidence, they brought him before me,
demanding, “This man committed robbery. Please punish him.” I
replied, “Tie him up, put him into a large cauldron, set its lid tightly
and seal it thickly with mud, so that nothing leaks out.” I ordered men
to surround the cauldron and build a ﬁre underneath it. At that time I
wished to test if the person’s spirit could escape from the cauldron and
I walked around it, followed by my retainers, but I did not see any evidence of the person’s spirit coming out from that cauldron. Nor did I
see any spirit coming or going when I examined the interior by opening
the lid. For this reason, I came to know that there is no afterlife.

Kāśyapa continued:

Now I shall question you. Answer me if you can, in any way you wish.
O brāhmaṇa, when you rest and fall asleep on the high ﬂoor of your
residence, have you ever dreamed of mountain forests and rivers, park
groves and bathing ponds, country villages and city streets?

He answered, “Yes, I have.”
Kāśyapa again asked him, “O brāhmaṇa, when you dream, do your family
and members of your household guard you closely for your safety?”
[Pāyāsi] answered, “Yes, they do.”
[Kāśyapa] again questioned him: “O brāhmaṇa, do your household members see your spirit of consciousness going and coming?”
The brāhmaṇa answered, “No, they don’t.”
Kāśyapa said:

You cannot see the spirit of living consciousness going and coming.
How much less could you see the spirit of a dead man. You should not
try to observe the destined afterlife in reference to actual phenomena
253

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

appearing before your eyes. O brāhmaṇa, the bhikṣus reduce the time
of sleep during the hours before and after midnight, and without slackening they exert themselves to be mindful of the auxiliary disciplines
of the path and exercise supernormal vision through the power of concentration. It is through this supernormal vision that they see the destinies
of sentient beings in terms of having died here and having been born
there, dying there and being born here, having lived a long life or a
short life, having had a good or bad complexion, beautiful or ugly features, having acquired rewards from good or bad deeds, and having
entered good or bad courses of life. You should not try to see through
ordinary human eyes that are deﬁled. You deny it because your human
vision cannot penetrate the courses of life to which sentient beings are
respectively destined. O brāhmaṇa, because of this, you should know
that there is necessarily an afterlife.

44b

The brāhmaṇa said, “Though you assert that there is an afterlife by making
an analogy, according to my view, an afterlife is still impossible.”
Kāśyapa again said to the brāhmaṇa, “Do you have any other reason on
the basis of which you know that there is no afterlife?”
The brāhmaṇa replied, “Yes, I do.”
Kāśyapa asked, “What is the reason?”
The brāhmaṇa replied:

O Kāśyapa, among the people of the village that I received as my ﬁef,
some committed robbery. The villagers caught one thief redhanded,
and with clear evidence, they brought him before me, demanding,
“This man committed robbery. Please punish him.” I ordered my aides
to tie him up and skin him alive, and [while this was being done] I
sought to ﬁnd the spirit of his consciousness but I could not ﬁnd it. I
also ordered my aides to cut open the ﬂesh and I looked there to ﬁnd
the spirit of consciousness, but again I could not ﬁnd it. I also ordered
my aides to sever the sinews and I sought to ﬁnd the spirit of consciousness between the bones, but still I could not ﬁnd it. I also ordered
my aides to crush the bones and squeeze the marrow out and I sought
to ﬁnd the spirit of consciousness within the marrow, but again I could
not ﬁnd it. For this reason, I know that there is no afterlife.

254

Sutra 7: Pāyāsi’s Dialogue

Kāśyapa again said:

Many wise people acquire their wisdom by way of analogy. I will now
give another analogy to help you understand. Once in the immemorial
past there was a country where the land was barren and ruined, and
could no longer be used for normal cultivation. Then a group of merchants with ﬁve hundred carriages passed through that land. There was
a brāhmaṇa who always stayed in the forest to conduct the ﬁre rite in
service to the ﬁre god. All the traveling merchants stopped to rest
overnight and departed early the next morning. The brāhmaṇa thought
to himself, “Last night, many merchants stayed in the forest and they
departed early this morning. They might have left some things behind.
I shall just go and see.” At once he went to the place where they had
camped. He found nothing left behind, but there was a small child, as
young as a year old, sitting alone. The brāhmaṇa thought to himself,
“I cannot bear to see this child die before my eyes. I must take this
child to my place to raise him.” So he picked up the child and returned
to his place to rear the child. The child grew quickly and grew to be
some ten years of age.
At that time the brāhmaṇa, wishing to go to town for some minor
reason, said to the boy, “I must leave on some business and will be
gone from here for a while. You should guard this ﬁre and never let it
be extinguished. If the ﬁre happens to go out, you should use this drill
to bore wood and make ﬁre by friction, kindling it into ﬂames again.”
Having instructed the boy in detail, the brāhmaṇa left the forest on his
journey. After his departure, however, the boy indulged in his pastimes
and forgot to tend the ﬁre as frequently as he should have. The ﬁre
eventually went out. Returning from his play, the boy noticed that the
ﬁre had gone out and, distressed, he thought to himself, “What I have
done is not good. When my father left he instructed me in detail how
to guard this ﬁre and prevent its extinction. But I indulged in my pastimes and allowed the ﬁre to go out. What should I do now?”
At once, the boy tried to rekindle the ﬁre by blowing on the embers,
but he could not ﬁnd the ﬁre there. He cut wood with a hatchet, seeking
ﬁre, but he could not ﬁnd it inside the wood. Then he chopped up some
wood and pounded it in a mortar, but he still could not get ﬁre.
255

44c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

At that time the brāhmaṇa returned from town and entered the forest.
He said to the boy, “I instructed you before to guard the ﬁre. I hope
that the ﬁre has not gone out.” The boy replied, “While I was playing
I failed to guard it at times; the ﬁre is extinct, sir.” The brāhmaṇa asked
him, “In what way have you tried to make ﬁre?” The boy replied,
“Since ﬁre comes from wood, I split wood with a hatchet, but I could
not obtain it. I also chopped up wood and pounded it in the mortar, but
I could not obtain ﬁre there either, sir.” Thereupon, the brāhmaṇa
picked up the drill to bore wood and made ﬁre by friction, piling sticks
on it for kindling. He then told the boy, “When you wish to make a
ﬁre you should do so in this manner. You cannot get ﬁre by splitting
wood or pounding it.”
O brāhmaṇa, you too are like that boy, lacking a proper way. By
skinning a dead corpse, and so forth, you seek the spirit of consciousness. Concerning sentient beings, you cannot know it just by looking
at the actual phenomena before your human eyes. O brāhmaṇa, the
bhikṣus reduce the time of sleep during the hours before and after midnight, and exert themselves without slackening to be mindful of the
auxiliary disciplines of the path and exercise supernormal vision through
the power of concentration. It is through this supernormal vision that
they see the destinies of sentient beings in terms of their having died
here and having been born there, dying there and being born here, having lived a long or short life, having had good or bad complexion,
beautiful or ugly features, having acquired rewards or retribution from
good or bad deeds, and having entered good or bad courses of life. You
should not try to see through ordinary human eyes that are deﬁled. You
deny it because your human vision cannot penetrate the courses of life
in which sentient beings are respectively destined. O brāhmaṇa, because
of this, you should know that there is necessarily an afterlife.

The brāhmaṇa said, “Though you assert that there is an afterlife by quoting
an analogy, according to my view, an afterlife is still impossible.”
Kāśyapa again asked the brāhmaṇa, “Do you have any other reason on
the basis of which you also know that there is no afterlife?”
The brāhmaṇa replied, “Yes, I do.”
Kāśyapa asked, “What is that reason?”
256

Sutra 7: Pāyāsi’s Dialogue

The brāhmaṇa replied:

O Kāśyapa, among the people of the village that I received as my ﬁef
there are some who committed robbery. The villagers caught one thief
redhanded, and with clear evidence they and brought him before me,
demanding, “This man committed robbery. Please punish him.” I
instructed my aides to measure the man’s weight on a scale. When they
completed the measurement of the criminal’s weight, I further instructed
them, “Take him away and execute him through the easiest means, but
do not damage the skin or ﬂesh.” He was executed without any damage
to his body. I instructed my aides to measure the weight of the corpse,
which resulted in an indication that the corpse was heavier than the
living body.
O Kāśyapa, when the criminal was measured while still alive and
the spirit of consciousness was still in his body, his physical complexion
was pleasant and good, he was able to talk, and his body was also
lighter. After death, however, with the spirit of his consciousness gone,
with no particular complexion, and speechless, the corpse turned out
to be heavier than the living body. Because of this, I know that there
is no afterlife.

Kāśyapa said to the brāhmaṇa:

Now I shall question you. Answer me if you can, in any way you wish.
O brāhmaṇa, your experience is comparable to the case in which men
measure the weight of iron ore. First, they measure it while it is cool,
and then they measure it after it has been heated. Why is iron lighter
when it is heated, becoming bright and pliable? Why is it heavier when
it is cold and has become dark, hard, and rigid?

The brāhmaṇa replied, “Heated iron is bright in color, pliable, and lighter,
whereas cooled iron has no bright color, is rigidly hard, and is heavier.”
Kāśyapa said:

Human beings are also like this. When a person is alive he has color
in his complexion and his body is ﬂexible, but after death the body
loses color and becomes stiff and heavier. Because of this, you should
know that there is necessarily an afterlife.
257

45a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

The brāhmaṇa said, “Though you assert that there is an afterlife by quoting
an analogy, according to my view, an afterlife is still impossible.”
Kāśyapa again asked the brāhmaṇa, “Do you have any other reason on
the basis of which you also know that there is no afterlife?”
The brāhmaṇa replied:
I had a relation who became ill, [and when his illness] became critical
I visited him and spoke with him. When I helped him lie down on his
right side, the movement of his eyes, his limbs stretching and bending,
and even his speech was just the same as when he was well. Again, when
I helped him turn onto his left side , the turning and twisting of his body,
the stretching and bending of his limbs, his eyes’ movement, and even
his speech were all ordinary. Then he died. Again I had some men turn
his body over to lay it with the right side down and then back the other
way, with the left side down. I observed [the body] carefully but it did
not stretch or bend, there was no eye movement, and there was no speech.
Because of this, I know that there is necessarily no afterlife.

Kāśyapa said again to the brāhmaṇa:

Many wise people acquire their wisdom by way of analogy. I shall
now give another analogy to help you understand. Once there was a
country where the sound of the conch shell was never heard. At that
time a skillful conch horn player reached that country and, entering a
[border] village, he blew the conch horn three times and then set the
conch shell on the ground. Having heard the sound, the villagers, men
and women, were all surprised and asked among themselves, “What
was that sound? It was both soft and pleasant and yet thoroughly clear!”
The man pointed at the conch shell on the ground and said, “It was the
sound of this thing.” Then the village people touched the shell with
their hands, saying, ‘O you, make a sound, make a sound!” The shell
did not make any sound at all. The owner of the conch shell picked it
up and blew it three times, then set it back down on the ground. The
villagers said, “The beautiful sound we heard was not because of this
shell’s power. It is due to the hands that support it, the mouth that blows
air into it, and the air blown through it that it thereby makes a sound.”

258

Sutra 7: Pāyāsi’s Dialogue

A human being is also like this. If he has a span of life still to live
and posesses consciousness, and is breathing in and breathing out, he
should be able to stretch or bend his body, look at things by moving
his eyes, and speak. On the other hand, when his life span is exhausted
and his consciousness is gone, neither breathing in nor breathing out,
he can neither stretch nor bend his body, nor move his eyes, nor speak.
Kāśyapa thus said to the brāhmaṇa, “You should abandon your wrong
view. You should not prolong your suffering and bring yourself distress.”
The brāhmaṇa replied, “I cannot abandon my theory, because from the
time of my birth I have continued to intone and repeat it for a long time. Why
should I now abandon it?”
Kāśyapa said:

Many wise people acquire their wisdom by way of analogy. I will now
give another analogy to help you understand. Once in the immemorial
past there was a country in a frontier region that had been mostly
deserted by people. There were two friends in that country; one was
called “Wise” and the other was called “Fool.” They said to each other,
“I am your friend; I will go out of the city with you and we shall seek
our fortune together.” Thus they traveled together. They came to an
open space [in a village] and saw a heap of hemp that had been thrown
away. Wise talked to Fool and they decided that they would both take
the hemp. Carrying packs of hemp on their backs, they passed the next
village and saw another pile of discarded hemp thread. Wise said, “This
hemp thread is well made, lightweight and of ﬁne texture. We should
pick it up.” The other fellow, however, said, “I am already carrying a
load of hemp, bound tightly and ﬁxed into a pack; I cannot throw it
away.” The wise one at once threw away his load of hemp and picked
up the hemp thread as his new load.
Again both proceeded on their way and they next found a pile of
hemp cloth. The wise one said, “This hemp cloth is well made, lightweight and of ﬁne texture. We should pick it up.” The other fellow,
however, said, “I am already carrying a load of hemp bound tightly
and ﬁxed into a pack; I cannot throw it away.” Thus, the wise one threw
down his load of hemp thread and picked up a new load of hemp cloth.

259

45b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

Again they proceeded onward and then found a pile of cotton cloth.
The wise one said, “Cotton cloth is costly, and this cloth is well made,
lightweight, and of ﬁne texture. We should pick it up.” The other fellow
said, “I am already carrying a load of hemp bound tightly and ﬁxed
into a pack; I carried it for a long distance, so I cannot throw it away.”
Thus, only the wise one discarded his hemp cloth and picked up the
new load of cotton cloth. They proceeded in this manner, coming upon
a pile of cotton thread, next a pile of white cotton blankets, then a pile
of copper, silver, and ﬁnally gold.
“The wise one said, “If there is no gold, we should pick up silver;
if no silver, we should pick copper, and so forth; we should pick up
hemp thread, and if there is no hemp thread, as the last choice, we
should pick up the hemp material. This village is located above a pile
of amassed gold treasure. You should throw away the hemp. I too will
throw away my silver. Both of us should pick up this gold and carry
it on our backs on our return.” The other fellow, however, said, “I am
already carrying a load of hemp, bound tightly and ﬁxed into a pack;
I cannot throw it away. If you wish to pick up the gold, go ahead.” The
wise one threw away his silver, picked up the gold, and carried it on
the return home. The wise one’s relatives, having seen the gold treasure
he was carrying, were delighted and welcomed his return. The wise
one who carried a load of gold was also delighted to see his relatives
and to be welcomed on his return. On the other hand, the relatives of
the foolish man who returned with a load of hemp were not pleased,
nor did they come out to welcome him back. Thus, the one who had
carried the hemp felt even more regret and distress.
O brāhmaṇa, you should now abandon your obstinate insistence
and wrong view. Do not increase your suffering for such a long time.
Do not be the foolish man who carried the hemp material, whose obstinate nature was ﬁrm to the extent that he did not pick up the gold but
continued to carry the hemp material all the way back. He wasted his
energy for nothing, his relations were displeased, and his poverty persisted for a long time, thus increasing his distress and suffering.

45c

The brāhmaṇa said:

260

Sutra 7: Pāyāsi’s Dialogue

I cannot abandon this view of mine after all, because I have been teaching others from this point of view. When the kings of all the other
regions hear my name, without exception, they know me as the one
whose view of life is that there is no afterlife.

Again Kāśyapa said:

Many wise people acquire their wisdom by way of analogy. I shall
now quote another analogy to help you understand. Once in the immemorial past there was a country in a frontier region that had been
mostly deserted by the people. A group of merchants, driving a thousand carriages, were traveling through the region, but they did not
have enough water and grain, ﬁrewood, and grass. The leader of the
merchants thought to himself, “Since we have too many accompanying
members, and we do not have sufﬁcient water or grain, ﬁrewood, or
grass, we shall divide the caravan into two parts.” The ﬁrst caravan
departed as the advance party. The leader of this party saw a huge,
tough-looking man, red-eyed, dark-faced, his body smeared witth
mud, approaching from the far distance. The leader asked him, “From
where have you come?” The man replied, “I have come from the last
village, where you are heading.” Again the leader asked, “Is there
adequate water, grain, ﬁrewood, and grass available in that village?”
The man replied, “The place I came from had plenty of water, grain,
ﬁrewood, and grass. There is no scarcity. During my journey there
was a heavy rainstorm and the area should be abundant with water as
well as ﬁrewood and grass.” He also told the merchant, “If you are
hauling grain and grass in your carriages you should discard all of it.
Since everything is plentiful where you are going, why should you
travel with heavy carriages?”
The leader of the advance party then said to the merchants in the
caravan, “I saw a man who approached from the direction in which
we are going. I asked this man, who had red eyes, a dark face, and a
mud-smeared body, ‘Where have you come from?’ The man replied,
‘I have come from the last village, where you are going on your path.’
Again I asked him, ‘Is there enough water, grain, ﬁrewood, and grass

261

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

available in that place?’ He replied, ‘Everything is plentiful there.’
He also said to me, ‘A while ago, I encountered a rainstorm on my
way and the area should be abundant with water as well as ﬁrewood
and grass.’ In addition, he further told me, ‘If you are carrying grain
and grass in the carriages you should discard it all. Since everything
is plentiful where you are going, why should you drive heavy carriages?’ You should discard all of the grain and grass here, and we
will travel through with lightened carriages.” Proceeding onward,
they did not see any water or grass for a whole day, a second day, a
third, and so forth, until a seventh day had passed. The merchants
became trapped in a desert marsh, or quicksand, and they were
devoured by evil spirits.
Later on, the second party also departed, continuing their journey.
The leader of this caravan also saw a man approaching from the direction in which they were headed. He was red-eyed, dark-faced, and had
a mud-smeared body. The merchant leader asked him, “Where have
you come from?” The man replied, “I have come from the last village,
where you are going.” Again I asked him, “Is there enough water, grain,
ﬁrewood, and grass available in that village?” He replied, “Everything
is plentiful there.” He also said, “A while ago I encountered a rainstorm
on my way and the area should be abundant with water as well as ﬁrewood and grass.” Moreover, he told me, “If you are carrying grain and
grass in the carriages you should discard it all here. Since everything
is plentiful there, why should you drive heavy carriages?”’
Then the merchant leader said to his caravan members, “I have seen
a traveling man who told me ‘If you are carrying grain and grass in
the carriages you should throw all of it away. Since everything is plentiful where you are heading, why should you drive heavy carriages?’
The merchant leader, however, instead advised the members of the
caravan, “Refrain from discarding the grain and grass. Only when a
new supply has been obtained should you throw out the old stuff,
because by replacing old with new continuously we may be able to
cross this wilderness.”
Thus, the second caravan went on, driving heavily laden carriages.
They did not see water or grass for an entire day, a second day, a third,

46a

262

Sutra 7: Pāyāsi’s Dialogue

and so forth, until a seventh day had passed. On the way they saw scattered all over the ground the skeletons of many people who had been
devoured by evil spirits.
O brāhmaṇa, that red-eyed, dark-faced man was a cannibal demon.
Those who follow your teaching will receive suffering for a long time
to come, just like the victims of that demon. The merchants of the
advance party, lacking wisdom, followed the words of the [foolish]
leader and perished. O brāhmaṇa, if they had instead heeded the words
given through the exertion and insight of those śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas and followed their teaching, they would have been safe. Just
like the leader of the second caravan, if one is endowed with wisdom
he can escape from crisis or danger. O brāhmaṇa, you should abandon
your wrong view now. You must not increase the suffering and agony
of a long night.

The brāhmaṇa replied:

I cannot abandon my point of view after all. Even if someone comes
to reprimand me, this only creates indignation on my part. I cannot
abandon my view.

Kāśyapa again said:

Many wise people acquire their wisdom by way of analogy. I will give
another analogy to help you understand. Once in the immemorial past
there was a country in a frontier region where the land had been mostly
deserted by people. There was a man who was engaged in raising pigs.
He visited another village and found dried cow dung in an open public
space. At once he thought to himself, “Here is plenty of cow dung.
Since my pigs are starving, I should wrap this dung in grass and carry
it on my head.” At once, he collected grass, wrapped up the cow dung,
and loaded it onto his head. On the way back, however, he encountered
heavy rain and the dung melted, running down his body, down to his
heels. Seeing him like that, people regarded him as insane, saying,
“Smeared with dung, smelling hideous, it would be terrible to carry
such a load on one’s head even on a sunny day, how much more so the
impossibility of carrying such a load on one’s head on a rainy day like

263

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

this!” Infuriated, the man spoke angry words at them: “You are stupid,
because you don’t know how hungry my pigs are. If you knew, you
wouldn’t laugh at me.”
O brāhmaṇa, you should abandon your wrong view. You should
not invite protracted suffering by upholding your delusion. It is like
the foolish man who carries cow dung on his head. Even when people
gave him warning he became angry at them instead, pointing to their
ignorance!

46b

The brāhmaṇa said to Kāśyapa:

You people (i.e., śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas) insist on saying that if one
does good he will be born in heaven, and in that case his afterlife will
be better than the present life. If this is so, you should all commit suicide
with a knife, or swallow poison, or bind your bodies and throw yourselves from a cliff. But you seem to be desirous of life, unable to commit
suicide. This means that you know that the afterlife is not better than
this life.

Kāśyapa continued:

Many wise people acquire their wisdom by way of analogy. I will now
give another analogy to help you understand. There once lived a brāhmaṇa in Śvetavyā village. He was an established and erudite man, one
hundred twenty years of age, and had two wives. One of his wives had
a son, while the other had become pregnant for the ﬁrst time. The brāhmaṇa passed away soon after. The ﬁrst wife’s child said to the second
wife, “My father’s wealth should be given to me in its entirety; none
should be spared for you.” The second wife said, “You should wait
until my baby comes. If it is a boy, the wealth should be divided, and
if a baby girl is born I will remarry to obtain wealth for her.” The boy,
however, politely asked her the same thing repeatedly, and the woman
replied in the same way as before. The child insisted on asking her for
the same thing. The woman then cut open her own body in order to
see if her baby was a boy or a girl.

Kāśyapa said to the brāhmaṇa:

264

Sutra 7: Pāyāsi’s Dialogue

The mother killed herself and [in doing so] she killed her fetus as well.
O brāhmaṇa, your suggestion implies a similar case. By killing yourself
you would also kill others as well. If the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas
who are well endowed in exertion, good discipline, and the virtue of
precepts abide in this world for a long time it will be of greater beneﬁt
to this world, since the gods and human beings will thereby be secured
under their guidance.
I will give a ﬁnal analogy to help you understand what disasters
may be incurred by holding wrong views. Once there were two gamblers
who played dice in the village of Śvetavyā. When the two competed,
one of them won; the other who did not do well said to the winner, “Let
us stop playing today. Tomorrow we shall try again to see who is more
skillful.” The man who did not do well returned home and applied
poison to the dice and dried them in the sun. The next day, taking the
dice with him, he visited the house of the other fellow who had won
the day before and said to him, “Let us compete again to see who is
more skillful.” To begin the game, the man who did not do well gave
the dice to the winner who, on receiving them, licked them to moisten
them before casting. Then the man who had poisoned the dice picked
them up and moistened them by licking them. The poison began to work
in him faster, causing his body to tremble. The one who had poisoned
the dice cursed at the other in verse:

I applied poison to the dice.
You licked them without knowing it.
Playing for a short time,
Since you have already touched them,
You will soon know its effect.

46c

Kāśyapa said to the brāhmaṇa:

You should abandon your wrong view. Do not increase the poison of
suffering by prolonging your delusion. You are like that dice player
who ingested the poison without knowing it.

At that time the brāhmaṇa said to Kāśyapa:

265

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

Venerable, when you gave the analogy of the moon, I already understood it. That I tried to refute your exhortation back and forth has been
to examine your rhetorical skill and insight, thereby causing the arising
of ﬁrm belief in myself. Now I believe what you have said, O Kāśyapa,
and I wish for you to be my refuge.

Kāśyapa said, “Do not make me your refuge. You should take the Highest
and Most Venerable One, who is also my own refuge, as your refuge.”
The brāhmaṇa said, “I do not know where the Highest and Most Venerable
One to whom you refer is at this time.”
Kāśyapa replied, “My master, the World-honored One, entered ﬁnal nirvana
not long ago.”
The brāhmaṇa said:
If the World-honored One was still alive I would not hesitate, whether
close or distant, to visit him directly and venerate him as my refuge.
Unfortunately, as I have now heard, the Tathāgata has entered cessation.
I will now uphold the Buddha who entered nirvana, the Dharma, and
the Sangha as my refuge. O Kāśyapa, please permit me to become a
lay devotee of the right Dharma. From now until the end of my life I
will uphold the ﬁve precepts: abstention from killing life, from stealing,
from sexual misconduct, from speaking falsehoods, and from ingesting
intoxicants. I will now also offer general charity to all beings.

Kāśyapa said to him:

If you kill sentient beings, beat young boys, and then offer charity, this
is not pure and genuine charity. Just as thorny plants prevail in a poor
land with rocks and shallow soil, there will be no good harvest even
if you were to sow seeds or plant trees there. If you kill animals, beat
young boys, and offer charity to the sangha while holding a wrong
view, neither is this a pure and genuine charity. If, however, you offer
general charity, neither killing living beings nor beating children with
sticks, but make offerings to the sangha with delight, then there will
be a great reward, just as one obtains real fruit by sowing seeds or
planting trees in good soil, as they wish.

266

Sutra 7: Pāyāsi’s Dialogue

The brāhmaṇa said, “O Kāśyapa, from now on, I will continue to make
offerings to the sangha at all times without fail.”
At that time there was a young brāhmaṇa, Mānava by name, standing
behind Pāyāsi. Pāyāsi, looking back at him, said, “I wish to offer universal
charity. Please organize an event to offer charity on my behalf.” Having heard
Pāyāsi’s instruction, the young brāhmaṇa organized and completed the event
of universal charity, and then announced, “May Pāyāsi not be rewarded with
any fortune in this life as well as in the hereafter.”
Pāyāsi was informed that when the event of offering charity had been
completed the young brāhmaṇa had said, “May Pāyāsi not be rewarded with
any fortune in this life as well as in the hereafter.” Pāyāsi questioned the
man, “Did you really say such words?” He replied:

Yes, sir. I did indeed make such a wish, sir, because the food prepared
for the charity event was of poor quality, and this bad-tasting food was
what was offered to the sangha. If the same food were presented before
your lordship you would not even touch it, much less partake of it.
What was provided is not the kind of food with which one could be
pleased or enjoy eating. How could anyone who offers such poor food
acquire a good reward in the afterlife, sir? Moreover, your lordship
offered robes to the sangha but the clothes were made of hemp. If such
clothing were shown to your lordship you would have kicked them
away without even touching them, much less wearing them. What has
been offered is not the kind of clothing with which one may be pleased
or enjoy wearing. How could anyone who offers such poor clothing
acquire a good reward in the afterlife, sir?

Pāyāsi then said to the young brāhmaṇa, “From now on, please prepare
and offer to the sangha the same kinds of food I eat and clothing of similar
quality to what I wear.”
Thus instructed, the young brāhmaṇa then made offerings to the sangha
of exactly the same quality of food and clothing as those enjoyed by Pāyāsi.
Thus, the brāhmaṇa, on the basis of his genuine offering, was born in Vimāna
Heaven after his body dissolved and his life ended. The brāhmaṇa youth
who had organized the event of universal charity was born in Trāyastriṃśa
Heaven upon the dissolution of his body and the end of his life.

267

47a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

At that time, having listened to this teaching, the brāhmaṇa Pāyāsi, the
young brāhmaṇa, as well as the householders of Śvetavyā village, all rejoiced
and respectfully received it and carried it out.
[End of Sutra 7: Pāyāsi’s Dialogue]

268

Sutra 8
Sandhāna

(Dīgha Nikāya 25: UdumbarikaSīhanāda Suttanta)
Thus have I heard. At one time, the Buddha was sojourning at the Saptaparṇa
Cave on Vulture Peak in the city of Rājagṛha, together with one thousand
two hundred and ﬁfty disciples. There was a householder, Sandhāna by name,
in that city, who enjoyed making an excursion every day to go out of the city
and visit the Buddha. One such day, when the householder looked up at the
sun’s position, he quietly thought to himself:
Now would not be a proper time for me to visit the Buddha. By this
time, his holiness is surely retired in a secluded room for his daily contemplation and concentration. The disciple bhikṣus should also be
engaged in their practice of quiet meditation. I should instead visit
Queen Udumbarikā’s pleasure garden set aside for brāhmaṇa wanderers.
When the proper time comes, I will visit the World-honored One and
greet him with devotion and respect, and in addition also visit the
bhikṣus to greet them with respect.

At that time, a brāhmaṇa, Nyagrodha by name, was staying in that grove
together with ﬁve hundred brāhmaṇa ascetics. The brāhmaṇa ascetics had
gathered there and were involved in massive arguments with loud voices on
various nonreligious topics, thus passing many hours, all day long. Some
argued about matters of state, while others argued about battles and weapons,
still others on matters of justice and peace between the states, or on matters
of ministers and people, or on such topics as carriages, horses, and excursions
to groves and forests, or seating, clothing, food and drink, or about women,
or about mountains, oceans, and the carapace of a turtle. They thus spent the
whole day doing nothing but talking about such nonreligious matters.
The brāhmaṇa Nyagrodha saw from afar the householder Sandhāna
approaching them and at once ordered the members of the assembly to be

269

47b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

quiet, saying, “The lay disciple of the śramaṇa Gautama now coming from
outside is the foremost among Gautama’s lay devotees. He surely will come
here, you should all quiet down.” Then all the brāhmaṇas stopped talking.
The householder Sandhāna reached the place of the brāhmaṇa Nyagrodha,
and, after greeting him, sat to one side and said to him:
My master, the World-honored One, always enjoys leisure and quietude
and does not like noisy confusion like this. He does not act in the way
that you do, putting yourself among your disciples who are arguing in
loud voices on various nonreligious topics.

The brāhmaṇa responded to the householder:

Śramaṇa Gautama has never debated with others. [So] how can the
public know that the śramaṇa is [really] in possession of great insight?
Your teacher prefers to stay alone in a secluded place, just like a oneeyed cow that roams alone and onesidedly turns [in a circle] only the
part of the grass ﬁeld that comes into its vision. Your teacher Gautama
is like that cow, because he likes to stay alone in an isolated place
where no other person is around. If your teacher happens to come here,
I shall call him “One-eyed cow.” He always claims that he has great
insight. [But] with a single word I will surely cause him to be at a loss
and pursue him until he surrenders like a turtle withdrawn into its carapace. I say that with a single shot of an arrow it would be no trouble
to cause him to be at a loss for a way out.

At that time, the World-honored One was alone in his meditation room
and, he heard through his supernormal hearing what the brāhmaṇa told the
householder. He at once came out of the Saptaparṇa Cave and traveled to
the Udumbarikā Grove. The brāhmaṇa saw the Buddha from a distance
approaching the Udumbarikā Grove. He ordered his disciples:

All of you, be silent. The śramaṇa Gautama seems to be coming here.
Neither pay respect to him by standing up, nor venerate him, nor invite
him to take a seat. A separate seat [apart from us] can be offered, and
as soon as he sits down, you should question him: “O śramaṇa Gautama, from the beginning of your career, for what kind of religion have

270

Sutra 8: Sandhāna

you originally taught your disciples so that they may acquire the state
of comfort and tranquility and practice moral and religious austerity?”

The Buddha eventually reached the grove. Then, unintentionally, the brāhmaṇa himself stood up, received the World-honored One, and uttered the
following words of welcome:

O Gautama, welcome. O śramaṇa, welcome. I have seen you for a
long time. For what purpose have you come here, sir? Please take a
seat here at the front.

The World-honored One at once sat on the seat as invited, and laughed
cheerfully. He quietly thought to himself:

These foolish men cannot even uphold their [intended] actions on their
own terms. Despite planning a cool reception for me, they have behaved
contrary to their intent. It is because, before the Buddha’s supernormal
power, their minds of ill intent have spontaneously been broken.

The householder Sandhāna venerated the Buddha by bowing to his feet
and then sat to one side. The brāhmaṇa Nyagrodha greeted the Buddha with
a bow, then sat on the other side and asked him:
O śramaṇa Gautama, from the beginning of your career, upon what
religious teaching have you originally instructed your disciples and
trained them to acquire the state of comfort and tranquility and to genuinely practice moral and religious austerity?

The World-honored One responded to the brāhmaṇa:

Please stop for a moment, O brāhmaṇa. My religious teaching is profound and vast. From the beginning of my career I have guided my
disciples on the basis of this teaching and trained them to acquire the
state of comfort and tranquility and to genuinely practice moral and
religious austerity. It cannot be compared with what you are doing.

He continued:

What exactly causes your teacher as well as your disciples (i.e., the

271

47c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

tradition as a whole) to practice the disciplines of the path to comprise
purity as well as impurity? I can explain them exhaustively.

Then all ﬁve hundred disciples of the brāhmaṇa clamored in raising their
voices, saying:

O śramaṇa Gautama, you boast of your greatness and supernormal
power, to the extent that when you are asked about your teaching, you
set aside [the queston] and instead challenge us to explain our teaching!

The brāhmaṇa Nyagrodha then said to the Buddha, “Very well, Gautama,
please analyze and explain what you mean by that.”
The Buddha said to the brāhmaṇa, “Listen attentively. I shall explain it
for you.” The brāhmaṇa replied, “Delighted, sir. I am ready [to listen], sir.”
The Buddha said to the brāhmaṇa:

What you practice is entirely base and vulgar. You remove all your
clothing and go about naked, covering your front with your hands. You
accept food neither from a jug or from a serving vessel, nor do you
accept food placed inside the threshold, food placed between two
people, food placed between two sticks, food placed between two
plates, or food placed near people who are eating; nor will you accept
food from a pregnant woman or from a house where there is a dog, or
from a house with swarming ﬂies; nor do you accept food for which
you have been invited or food from a family with whom another ascetic
is acquainted; nor do you accept ﬁsh, meat, intoxicants, or anything
that has been placed between two cooking vessels (e.g., mortar and
pestle). You accept meals and a drinks, and so on, as many as up to
seven portions. But when you receive almsfood or helpings you do not
go beyond a seventh portion. You partake either one meal a day or a
meal every two days or three days, or four, ﬁve, or six days, or every
seven days. Or else you partake of fruit and potherbs, you drink ricewater froth, eat sesame seeds or hemp grains, or partake of wild rice,
cow dung, or antelope dung. Or you eat plant roots, branches, and
leaves, or fruit that has fallen to the ground.
You wear any kind of poor-quality clothing, or clothes made of kuśa
grass ﬁber, or bark garments, or you cover your body with grass, or

272

Sutra 8: Sandhāna

you wear an antelope hide. You let your hair grow, or cover your body
with a net made of hair, or you wear clothing taken from a corpse.
Some of you keep your arms lifted at all times, or never sit on a couch
or chair but only in a squatting position. Even if you shave your head
you keep both moustache and beard. You lay on a bed of thorns or on
a ﬂoor covered with plant husks, or you lay down naked in cow dung,
or you bathe three times a day or three times during the night. You
mortify your body with extreme physical pain and suffering. How
indeed, O Nyagrodha, are these forms of practice regarded as genuine,
pure disciplines?

The brāhmaṇa replied, “These disciplines are pure and genuine and are
not contrary, sir.”
The Buddha sid to the brāhmaṇa, “Though you claim that these forms of
practice are pure and genuine disciplines, I will explain to you why they are
morally deﬁled.”
The brāhmaṇa replied, “Very well, Gautama, explain why our forms of
practice are morally impure and deﬁled. I wish to know about it.”
The Buddha continued:

The ascetics engaged in self-mortifying forms of practice invariably
entertain an expectation in their mind, thinking, “My ascetic practice
should persuade people to make offerings with respect and admiration
[for my austerities].” This expectation is by nature a moral deﬁlement.
Having received an offering, satisﬁed and reinforced, these extreme
ascetics are ﬁrmly attached to their extreme forms of practice, neither
knowing how it is important to distance oneself from worldly matters,
nor knowing what the essential path of salvation is. This wrong orientation is a moral deﬁlement.
If they see anyone near them or approaching them from a distance,
these extreme ascetics invariably assume their [arduous] practice of
meditation, but in the absence of other people they resume their undisciplined behavior, idly sitting or lying about according to their inclination. This is a moral deﬁlement.
Even when they hear a precise exposition of their doctrine by others,
they do not acknowledge that it is correct. This is a moral deﬁlement.

273

48a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

When a proper question about their doctrine is presented to them,
these extreme ascetics keep their mouths shut and do not answer or
explain it. This is a moral deﬁlement.
When they see people making offerings for the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, these extreme ascetics accuse the donors to prevent their acts
of charity. This is a moral deﬁlement.
When they see the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas partake of various
seed items that regrow as food (i.e., rice grains), these extreme ascetics
accuse them. This is a moral deﬁlement.
Even when they receive excess food that is not suitable for them,
these ascetics do not offer it to others. When they obtain food that is
suitable for them they greedily partake of it all by themselves, neither
seeing their own fault of greediness nor knowing that freedom from
attachment is essential to salvation. This is a moral deﬁlement.
These extreme ascetics praise their own goodness (regarding their
acts of self-mortiﬁcation), and discredit the practices of other schools.
This is a moral deﬁlement.
These extreme ascetics commit some of these wrongdoings: injuring
life, taking what is not given, engaging in sexual misconduct, engaging
in deceptive speech, verbal abuse, using false words, ﬂattery, greediness,
jealousy, and wrong views. This is a moral deﬁlement.
These extreme ascetics take delight in idleness and forgetfulness
of the practice of meditation, acquiring no insight, just like birds and
animals. This is a moral deﬁlement.
These extreme ascetics project a lofty air of self-conceit and arrogance. This is a moral deﬁlement.
These extreme ascetics not only have neither the virtue of faithfulness, nor of repeated practice, nor of genuine precepts, but they also
do not seriously listen to others’ admonitions. As they always associate
with wrong kinds of people, they continue to do wrong things without
ever despising their actions. This is a moral deﬁlement.
These extreme ascetics are prone to anger and resentment and they
contemplate treacherous schemes against others, trying to show off
their views and ﬁnding fault with others. They always entertain wrong
opinions and agree with one-sided views. This is a moral deﬁlement.

274

Sutra 8: Sandhāna

How then, Nyagrodha, can these manners of practice be said to be
morally free of blemish?

The brāhmaṇa replied, “These are morally deﬁled and cannot be said to
be pure and genuine [practices], sir.”
The Buddha continued, “Now, in reference to each of those morally deﬁled
forms of practice, I shall explain what the morally pure and genuine nature is.”
The brāhmaṇa replied, “Please explain them one by one, sir.”
The Buddha continued:

These ascetics should cherish no expectation in their minds and abandon the thought, “My practice should bring me offerings, respect, and
admiration.” This nonanticipatory practice is free from moral deﬁlement.
After receiving offerings, these ascetics should not greedily attach
themselves to extreme forms of practice.They should become aware
of the importance of distancing themselves from worldly matters,
knowing what the essential path of salvation is. This right orientation
is free from moral deﬁlement.
These ascetics should maintain regularity in the practice of meditation, whether or not other people are present or absent. This form of
discipline is free from moral deﬁlement.
These ascetics should be delighted when followers of other schools
have a correct understanding of their doctrines, and they should readily
acknowledge this. This discipline is free from moral deﬁlement.
These ascetics should be delighted when an appropriate question
is presented and they should openly answer and explain it. This discipline is free from moral deﬁlement.
Seeing others offering charity to the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas,
these ascetics should rejoice in the moral and religious advancement
expressed in such acts of charity, instead of discouraging the donors.
This discipline is free from moral deﬁlement.
Seeing the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas who partake of various seed
items that regrow as food, these ascetics should not accuse them. This
discipline is free from moral deﬁlement.

275

48b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

These ascetics should neither be stingy with excess food that is not
suitable for them, nor should they be overwhelmed by greedy attachment when they receive suitable food, thus reﬂecting upon their own
faults and knowing the essential path to salvation. This discipline is
free from moral deﬁlement.
These ascetics should not boast of their scrupulousness in practices
of self-mortiﬁcation, nor should they despise the practices of other
schools. This discipline is free from moral deﬁlement.
These ascetics should not commit any of the ten kinds of wrongdoing:
injuring life, taking what is not given, engaging in sexual misconduct,
deceptive speech, verbal abuse, false words, ﬂattery, greediness, jealousy,
and wrong views. This discipline is free from moral deﬁlement.
These ascetics should not be forgetful but diligently engage in the
practice of meditation and acquire many levels of insight, not regressing
to the state of ignorance, like animals. This discipline is free from
moral deﬁlement.
These ascetics should refrain from projecting a lofty air of self-conceit and arrogance. This discipline is free from moral deﬁlement.
These ascetics should always enhance the virtues of faithfulness, continuous practice, and genuine precepts; they should listen seriously to
others’ admonitions, and by associating always with good people never
cease to do good things. This discipline is free from moral deﬁlement.
These ascetics should neither cherish anger and resentment, nor
contemplate treacherous schemes against others, nor show off their
own achievements while trying to ﬁnd fault in others, nor should they
entertain wrong opinions along with one-sided views or prejudices.
This discipline is free from moral deﬁlement.
Brāhmaṇa, are these forms of practice to be regarded as the way to
acquire morally blameless practice?

48c

The brāhmaṇa replied, “Yes, these should be regarded as the way to
acquire morally blameless practice, sir.” He further asked the Buddha, “If
anyone upholds this kind of ascetic practice, is he regarded to have achieved
the utmost essence of the practice, sir?”
The Buddha replied, “No, not yet. This is only the beginning, only the
outer bark portion of a tree.”
276

Sutra 8: Sandhāna

The brāhmaṇa said, “May I request you to explain the progressive stages
of restraint in the ascetic practice in analogy with a tree.”
The Buddha said, “Listen carefully. I shall explain it to you.”
The brāhmaṇa said, “Yes, sir. I am ready.”
The Buddha continued:

O brāhmaṇa, each of these ascetics does not himself commit murder
nor persuade others to do so; neither does he himself commit theft nor
persuade others to do so; neither does he himself commit sexual misconduct nor persuade others to do so; neither does he himself speak
falsehoods nor persuade others to do so. Instead he permeates friendly
love inﬁnitely in one quarter of the world, then likewise in the remaining
three quarters. Thus he extends his immeasurable mind of benevolence
universally in all directions, undivided and not bound to limitation.
Without enmity, his mind of benevolence permeates throughout the
human world, and so do his immeasurable mind of compassion, his
immeasurable mind of sympathetic joy, and his immeasurable mind
of equanimity [pervade] in a similar manner throughout the human
world. These are regarded as the progressive stages of restraint in the
tree analogy of ascetic practice.

The brāhmaṇa said to the Buddha, “Please explain the essence of ascetic
practice, sir.”
The Buddha said to the brāhmaṇa, “Listen attentively. I shall explain it
to you.”
The brāhmaṇa said, “Yes, World-honored One, I am ready, sir.”
The Buddha continued:
Each of these ascetics neither himself commits murder nor persuade
another to do so; neither does he himself commit theft nor persuade
others to do so; neither does he himself commit sexual misconduct nor
persuade others to do so; neither does he himself speak falsehoods nor
persuade others to do so. Instead he permeates friendly love inﬁnitely
in one quarter of the world, then likewise in the remaining three quarters.
Thus he extends his immeasurable mind of benevolence universally in
all directions, undivided and not bound to limitation. Without enmity,
his mind of benevolence permeates throughout the human world, and

277

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

so do his immeasurable minds of compassion, of sympathetic joy, and
of equanimity [pervade] in a similar manner throughout the human world.
This ascetic becomes aware of things that happened since immemorial past eons, and entirely knows all those events during his initial
life, second life, and so forth, up to his innumerable positions in the
life cycle. Throughout those periods from the beginning to the end of
many eons he himself knows through direct perception: “I was once
born in such-and-such a class status, had such-and-such name, ate
meals consisting of such-and-such food, lived so-and-so many years
of age, and experienced such-and-such happiness and suffering. I was
reborn from that state to this one, then reborn from that to this, and in
this manner I recollect exhaustively all the things that happened throughout immeasurable numbers of eons.”
This, O brāhmaṇa, is the essential core of ascetic practice that is
imperishable.

The brāhmaṇa spoke to the Buddha, “What is the primary of ascetic practice, sir?”
The Buddha replied, “O brāhmaṇa, listen attentively. I shall explain it to
you.”
The brāhmaṇa said, “Yes, World-honored One, I am ready, sir.”
The Buddha continued:

Each of these ascetics neither himself commits murder nor does he persuade another to do so; neither himself commits theft nor persuade
others to do so; neither himself commits sexual misconduct nor persuades
others to do so, neither himself speaks falsehoods nor persuades others
to do so. Instead he permeates friendly love inﬁnitely in one quarter of
the world, then likewise in the remaining three quarters. Thus he extends
his immeasurable mind of benevolence universally in all directions,
undivided and not bound to limitation. Without enmity, his mind of
benevolence permeates throughout the human world, and so do his
immeasurable minds of compassion, of sympathetic joy and of equanimity [pervade] in a similar manner throughout the human world.
This ascetic becomes aware of things that have happened since
immemorial past eons, and entirely knows all those events during his

278

Sutra 8: Sandhāna

initial life, second life, and so forth, up to his innumerable positions
in the life cycle, throughout the periods from the beginning to the end
of many eons. He also knows through direct perception: “I was once
born in such-and-such class status, had such-and-such family name,
ate meals consisting of such-and-such food, lived to so-and-so many
years of age, and experienced such-and-such happiness and suffering.
I was reborn from that state to this one, and reborn from that to this,
and in this manner I recollect exhaustively all the things that happened
throughout immeasurable numbers of eons.”
With his pure and genuine heavenly vision he exhaustively perceives
and knows the kinds of sentient beings as passing away here and being
reborn there, as endowed with good complexions, handsome or ugly,
with resulting courses of life due to their good or bad deeds, wherever
they fall due to their deeds. Also he knows how some of those sentient
beings who committed wrong physical, verbal, and mental deeds, speaking slanderous remarks against the wise and holy and believing in perverse, wrong views, fell into the three evil courses of life when their
bodies dissolved and their lives ended. He also knows how other sentient
beings who have accumulated good physical, verbal, and mental deeds,
who speak no evil against the wise and holy and hold the right view,
are born among heavenly gods when their bodies dissolved and their
lives ended. Thus, each practitioner, endowed with pure and genuine
heavenly vision, perceives [the destinies or fates of] sentient beings,
wherever they fall according to their deeds, and there is nothing he
cannot see. This is the primary essence of ascetic practice.

The Buddha said to the brāhmaṇa:

In this foremost primary type of ascetic practice, there is again a superior
one, on the basis of which I always teach my disciples (śrāvakas). Their
discipline of austerity is based on this superior type of ascetic practice.

At that moment all of the ﬁve hundred disciples of the brāhmaṇa raised
their voices, saying to each other, “Now the World-honored One seems to
be the highest, foremost venerable, with whom even our teacher cannot be
equaled.”

279

49a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

Then the householder Sandhāna said to the brāhmaṇa:

You said to me before, “If Gautama comes here, I will call him ‘Oneeyed Cow.’ Now that the World-honored One is here, why don’t you call
him [by that name]? Also, you said before, “I surely will cause him to
be at a loss with a single word, and pursue him until he surrenders like
a turtle withdrawn into its carapace. It will be no trouble for me, with a
single shot of an arrow I can surely cause him to be at a loss for a way
out.” Why can you not now, with a single word, cause the Tathāgata to
be at a loss?

The Buddha said to the brāhmaṇa, “Do you remember that you said such
a thing before?”
He replied, “I really said so, sir.”
The Buddha said to the brāhmaṇa:

Haven’t you heard from your brāhmaṇa elders that buddhas and tathāgatas reside alone in forest hermitages and enjoy a secluded location,
just as I enjoy a life of seclusion, quite opposite to your way of living
in which you enjoy congestion, noisiness, speak of useless matters,
and thereby pass the hours of the day?

The brāhmaṇa said:

Yes, sir. I have heard that the buddhas of the past enjoyed seclusion
and quietude and lived their solitary lives in forest hermitages, just as
the World-honored One does. It is certainly not like our way of living
in which we enjoy congestion and noisiness, speak of useless matters,
and thus pass the hours of the day, sir.

The Buddha further said to the brāhmaṇa:

You should keep the following in your mind: the śramaṇa Gautama
teaches the doctrine of enlightenment well, has himself accomplished
self-control and helps others learn self-control, has himself realized
mental calmness and helps others calm their minds, has himself crossed
the water to reach the yonder shore and helps others cross to the yonder
shore, has himself attained liberation of his consciousness and helps

280

Sutra 8: Sandhāna

others liberate their consciousnesses, and has himself realized the ultimate goal of nirvana and helps others realize ultimate nirvana.

At that moment, the brāhmaṇa rose from his seat, venerated the Buddha
by bowing to the Buddha’s feet and, holding the Buddha’s feet in his hands,
he announced his name, saying, “I am a brāhmaṇa, Nyagrodha by name. I
now venerate the World-honored One by bowing to his feet.”
The Buddha said to the brāhmaṇa, “Stop, Nyagrodha. Remain seated,
and just let your liberated mind pay veneration and respect toward me.”
The brāhmaṇa, however, completed a second veneration to the Buddha’s
feet and then returned to his seat.
The Buddha said to the brāhmaṇa:

You should never say that the Buddha exhorted his doctrine of practice
for the sake of material gain. You should not think so. If there is any
material donation for [my teaching] I will give all of it to you as charity.
The doctrine I have exhorted, subtle and foremost, is set forth for the
sake of terminating wrong practices and promoting good ones.

Again he said to the brāhmaṇa:

You should never say that the Buddha exhorted his doctrine because
he wished to protect his fame and keep his name as a religious master,
or because he wished to acquire new converts [from among your disciples] and the members of the sangha. You should not think so. All
of your disciples are yours. The doctrine I have exhorted is set forth
for the sake of terminating wrong practices and promoting good ones.

Again he said to the brāhmaṇa:

You should never say that the Buddha abandoned you in the assembly
of bad and ignorant people. You should not think so. As far as those
bad and ignorant members are concerned, you should exclude them
from your assembly. I have taught only on the essential nature of the
good practice.
Again the Buddha said to the brāhmaṇa:

281

49b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

You should never say that the Buddha has taken these good and genuine
members away from you. You should not think so. You should carry
out your practice diligently among those who carry out good practice
and who are genuine. I have exhorted you on the nature of ascetic practice that is good and genuine so as to terminate wrong practices and
promote good ones.

At that time, the ﬁve hundred disciples of the brāhmaṇa listened eagerly
and attentively to what the Buddha was teaching. The Evil One Pāpīyān
thought to himself, “These ﬁve hundred disciples of the brāhmaṇa are now
eagerly and attentively listening to the Buddha’s teaching. I should go and
disrupt their minds.” Thereupon, the Evil One disrupted the minds of those
in the assembly.
At that moment, the Buddha said to Sandhāna:

While the brāhmaṇa’s ﬁve hundred disciples were eagerly and attentively listening to my teaching, the Evil One Pāpīyān has now disrupted
their minds. Now I wish to return. You should leave here with me.

Then the World-honored One touched the householder Sandhāna with his
right hand, held him within his palm, and ﬂew through space. The householder
Sandhāna, the brāhmaṇa Nyagrodha, as well as the ﬁve hundred brāhmaṇa
disciples who had heard the Buddha’s exhortation, rejoiced, respectfully received
the teaching, and carried out what was taught by the Buddha.
[End of Sutra 8: Sandhāna]

282

Sutra 9
Numerically Assembled
Doctrines

(Dīgha Nikāya 33: Saṅgīti Suttanta)
Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha sojourned in the Mallan country
accompanied by one thousand two hundred and ﬁfty bhikṣus. He arrived at
the mango grove that belonged to Cunda in the city of Pāvā. On the ﬁfteenth
day of the month, the full moon night, the World-honored One sat in the open
ground, surrounded by the assembly of bhikṣus on all sides. The World-honored One spent hours of the night teaching the Dharma, and he then said to
Śāriputra:
Now many disciples have assembled from all quarters and, being diligent, they are disregarding the hours of sleep. Since I have pain in my
back and should rest for a while, please conduct the teaching session
for the sake of these bhikṣus.

Śāriputra replied, “Yes, sir. I shall do as instructed.” Then the World-honored
One folded his outer robe into four layers, spread it on the ground, and lay
down on his right side, with one foot placed upon the other, like a lion.
Śāriputra said to the bhikṣus:

The head of the Nirgrantha (Jain) school resided in this city of Pāvā,
and not long ago he passed away. After that, his disciples divided into
two groups, each of which looked for its own advantage and found
fault with the other, mutually disdaining and accusing each other as to
what is right or wrong, arguing, “We know the right thing, whereas
you do not. You hold a wrong view, whereas we hold the right one.”
Their words and language are all confused without logical sequence.
Each party claims that their own statements are regarded as true and
right, saying, “What we say is superior, while what you said is inferior.”
Now, I am going to conduct this session of doctrinal discussion. Whoever has questions, please come up and question me.

283

49c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

O bhikṣus, the countrymen who have been supporting the Nirgrantha
religion are weary of the mutually contesting voices of the [two schools].
This inner conﬂict seem to show that the religion they proclaim is not
really true and right. Unless a religion is true and genuine, it cannot
be an essential path of deliverance, just as a dilapidated tower with a
crumbling inner structure cannot be repaired only by means of external
reinforcement. Their religion is quite different from the religion taught
to us by the Perfectly Enlightened One. O bhikṣus, the religious path
that our foremost Venerable Śākyamuni has taught to us is the most
true and genuine, because through practicing it we are able to realize
religious salvation. It is like a new tower that can be easily embellished
with external ornaments. This has been taught by the Perfectly Enlightened One. All of the bhikṣus should collect the doctrines and disciplines
so as to prevent future disputes and controversies, to consolidate the
practice of austerity for a long time to come, and so that various beneﬁts
derived thereby will increase the well-being of gods and humans.
O bhikṣus, the Tathāgata taught the singular doctrines of his right
Dharma: (1) All sentient beings subsist on food for maintaining life.
(2) There is another single doctrine that asserts that all sentient beings
exist due to their dispositional forces. The foregoing are the right doctrines taught by the Tathāgata. We should collect these doctrines in
memory to prevent dispute or controversy, to consolidate the practice
of austerity for a long time to come, and so that the various beneﬁts
will thereby increase the well-being of gods and humans.
O bhikṣus, the Tathāgata taught the double doctrines of his right
Dharma: (1) There is a doctrine that explains ﬁrst, the category of
names; second, the category of forms.
(2) Again there is another double doctrine that explains ﬁrst, ignorance; second, craving for existence.
(3) Again there is another double doctrine that explains ﬁrst, the
view of existence as eternalism; second, the view of nonexistence as
view of nihilism.
(4) Again there is another double doctrine that explains ﬁrst, shamelessness as to self-reﬂection; second, shamelessness before others.

284

Sutra 9: Numerically Assembled Doctrines

(5) Again there is another double doctrine that explains ﬁrst, shamefulness as to self-reﬂection; second, shamefulness before others.
(6) Again there is another double doctrine that explains ﬁrst, knowledge of the total eradication of deﬁlement; second, knowledge of the
nonorigination of the states of existence.
(7) Again there is another double doctrine that asserts that two causes
and two conditions give rise to desire and craving: ﬁrst, pure, subtle
form, and second, indifference.
(8) Again there is another double doctrine that asserts that two causes
and two conditions give rise to hate: ﬁrst, enmity; second, indifference.
(9) Again there is another double doctrine that asserts that two causes
and two conditions give rise to wrong views: ﬁrst, informed by others;
second, wrong thought.
(10) Again there is another double doctrine that asserts that two
causes and two conditions give rise to right views: ﬁrst, informed by
others; second, right thought.
(12) Again there is another double doctrine that asserts that two
causes and two conditions give rise ﬁrst to the realization of deliverance
with further training, and second to the ultimate realization of deliverance without further training.
(13) Again there is another double doctrine that asserts that two
causes and two conditions give rise ﬁrst, to the sphere of conditioned
phenomena; second, to the sphere of the unconditioned.
O bhikṣus, these are the right doctrines taught by the Tathāgata. We
should collect these doctrines [in memory] to prevent disputes and
controversy, to consolidate the practice of austerity for a long time to
come, and so that the various beneﬁts derived thereby increase the
well-being of gods and humans.
O bhikṣus, the Tathāgata has taught the [following] triple doctrines
of his right Dharma:
(1) A triple doctrine explains three kinds of unfavorable roots: greed,
hatred, and delusion.
(2) Again there is another triple doctrine that explains three good
roots: absence of greed, absence of hatred, and absence of delusion.

285

50a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

(3) Again there is another triple doctrine that explains three kinds
of wrong actions: wrong physical action, wrong verbal action, and
wrong mental action.
(4) Again there is another triple doctrine that explains three kinds
of wrong actions: physically wrong physical action, wrong verbal
action, and wrong mental action.22
(5) Again there is another triple doctrine that explains three kinds of
evil actions: evil physical action, evil verbal action, and evil mental action.
(6) Again there is another triple doctrine that explains three kinds
of good actions: good physical action, good verbal action, and good
mental action.
(7) Again there is another triple doctrine that explains three kinds
of unfavorable awareness: awareness of sexual desire, awareness of
malice, and awareness of an intent to harm.
(8) Again there is another triple doctrine that explains three kinds
of favorable awareness: ﬁrst, indifference to worldly desire, second,
absence of malice, and third, absence of an intent to injure.
(9) Again there is another triple doctrine that explains three kinds
of unfavorable thoughts: the thought of desire, the thought of malice,
and the thought of intent to harm.
(10) Again there is another triple doctrine that explains three kinds
of good thoughts: the thought of indifference to worldly desire, absence
of malice in thought, and absence of an intent to harm in thought.
(11) Again there is another triple doctrine that explains three kinds
of meritorious action: charity, moral precepts, and repeated practice.23
(12) Again there is another triple doctrine that explains three kinds
of sensation or sense perception: pleasure, pain, and neither pleasure
nor pain.
(13) Again there is another triple doctrine that explains three kinds
of craving: craving for desire, craving for existence, and craving for
nonexistence.
(14) Again there is another triple doctrine that explains three kinds
of worldly deﬁlement: deﬁlement derived from desire, deﬁlement
derived from attachment to existence, and deﬁlement derived from
ignorance of the Four Noble Truths.

286

Sutra 9: Numerically Assembled Doctrines

(15) Again there is another triple doctrine that explains three kinds
of passion: passion derived from love, passion derived from hatred,
and passion derived from delusion.
(16) Again there is another triple doctrine that explains three kinds
of pursuit for fulﬁllment: pursuit for fulﬁllment of desire, pursuit for
fulﬁllment of existence, and pursuit for fulﬁllment of the practice of
austerity.
(17) Again there is another triple doctrine that explains three kinds
of dominant inﬂuence: the dominant inﬂuence of the self, the dominant
inﬂuence of society, and the dominant inﬂuence of religious truth.
(18) Again there is another triple doctrine that explains three immoral
spheres of existence: the sphere of desire, the sphere of hatred, and the
sphere of the intent to harm.
(19) Again there is another triple doctrine that explains three spheres
of existence: the sphere of indifference to desire, the sphere of no
hatred, and the sphere of no intent to harm.
(20) Again there is another triple doctrine that explains three spheres
of existence: the sphere of form, the sphere of formlessness, and the
sphere of cessation.
(21) Again there is another triple doctrine that explains three kinds
of religious training: training in precepts, training in states of concentration, and training in analytical insight.
(22) Again there is another triple doctrine that explains three kinds
of practice through cultivation: the practice of precepts through cultivation, the practice of concentration through cultivation, and the practice
of analytical insight through cultivation.
(23) Again there is another triple doctrine that explains three kinds
of concentration: the concentration on the emptiness of the self and
things attributed to it, the concentration on the objectless or goal-free
state of existence, and the concentration on signlessness or the nondifferentiation of things.
(24) Again there is another triple doctrine that explains three characteristics: quiescence, exertion, and equanimity.
(25) Again there is another triple doctrine that explains three kinds
of knowledge: knowledge in recollection of past lives, knowledge

287

50b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

derived from the supernormal power of vision, and knowledge of total
annihilation of the inﬂuence of deﬁlements.
(26) Again there is another triple doctrine that explains three kinds
of extraordinary occurrence: magical performance through supernormal
powers, reading the minds of others in preaching, and the miracle of
admonition that destroys someone’s vice.
(27) Again there is another triple doctrine that explains three kinds
of fulﬁllment in the sphere of desires: fulﬁllment due to one’s present
desire to be born in the human world as well as in the four lower deva
worlds, fulﬁllment due to one’s desire to be born in the heavenly world
where one enjoys his own magical creations, and fulﬁllment due to
one’s desire to be born in the heavenly world where one enjoys the
magical creations created by others.
(28) Again there is another triple doctrine that explains three kinds
of happiness: the happiness that sentient beings spontaneously experience due to fulﬁllment of all things, just as was experienced by the
attendants of the god Brahmā at the time of the lord’s initial appearance
in Ābhāsvara Heaven; the happiness enjoyed by sentient beings with
the spontaneous utterance of “Good,” just as is uttered by the gods of
Ābhāsvara Heaven; and the happiness experienced by sentient beings
in the third meditative absorption in the heaven of total purity.
(29) Again there is another triple doctrine that explains three kinds
of suffering: suffering due to predisposition, suffering due to existing
suffering, and suffering due to incessant change.
(30) Again there is another triple doctrine that explains three kinds
of faculty: the faculty to know what is not yet known, the faculty of
perfect knowledge, and the faculty of possession of perfect knowledge.
(31) Again there is another triple doctrine that explains three kinds
of abodes: the abode of the wise and holy, the abode of the gods, and
the abode of the god Brahmā.
(32) Again there is another triple doctrine that explains three kinds
of accusation: an accusation based on witness, an accusation based on
information, and an accusation based on doubt due to likelihood.
(33) Again there is another triple doctrine that explains three
kinds of doctrinal debate: the doctrinal debate on subject matter and

288

Sutra 9: Numerically Assembled Doctrines

controversy in the past, the doctrinal debate on subject matter and controversy in the future, and the doctrinal debate on subject matter and
controversy in the present.
(34) Again there is another triple doctrine that explains three kinds
of sentient beings: those who are predicted to attain nirvana, those who
are not so predicted, and those whose destiny is uncertain.
(35) Again there is another triple doctrine that explains three kinds
of sorrow and lamentation: physical, verbal, and mental.
(36) Again there is another triple doctrine that explains three kinds
of elders: elders by way of seniority, elders by way of religion, and
elders by way of consent or choice.
(37) Again there is another triple doctrine that explains three kinds
of visual faculty: the physical faculty of sight, the supernormal faculty
of sight, and the faculty of transcendental insight.
O bhikṣus, these are the right doctrines taught by the Tathāgata. We
should collect these doctrines [in memory] so as to prevent disputes
and controversies, to consolidate the practice of austerity for a long
time to come, and so that the various beneﬁts derived thereby will
increase the well-being of gods and humans.
O bhikṣus, the Tathāgata taught the fourfold doctrines of his right
Dharma:
(1) There is a fourfold doctrine that explains four kinds of ignoble
verbal actions: speaking falsehoods and engaging in double talk, abusive
speech, and ﬂattery.
(2) Again there is another fourfold doctrine that explains four kinds
of noble actions: abstinence from speaking falsehoods, from double talk,
from harsh speech, and from ﬂattery.
(3) Again there is another fourfold doctrine that explains four kinds
of ignoble speech: the false assertion that one has seen something that
one has not actually seen, that one has heard something that one has
not actually heard, that one has been aware though actually one has
not been aware, and that one has known something though actually
one has not known.
(4) Again there is another fourfold doctrine that explains four kinds
of noble speech: the true assertion that one has seen when one has actually

289

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

seen, the true assertion that one has heard something that one has actually
heard, the true assertion that one has been aware when one has actually
been aware, and the true assertion that one has known when one has actually known.
(5) Again there is another fourfold doctrine that explains four kinds
of food: edible, material food that is either nutritious [and gives strength]
or is exquisite; nutriment that is ingested by tactile contact; nutriment
derived from volition and thought; and nutriment derived from consciousness.
(6) Again there is another fourfold doctrine that explains four kinds
of causal relationships between suffering and happiness: [the causal
relationship between] hard exertion now and an unhappy effect later;
[the causal relationship between] hard exertion now and a happy effect
later; [the causal relationship between] easy exertion now and an
unhappy effect later; and [the causal relationship between] easy exertion
now and a happy effect later.
(7) Again there is another fourfold doctrine that explains four kinds
of grasping or attachment: attachment to desires, attachment to the
self, attachment to the vow of precepts, and attachment to views.
(8) Again there is another fourfold doctrine that explains four kinds
of fetters: the fetter of covetousness, the fetter of malice, the fetter of
the practice and observance of wrong precepts from other schools, and
the fetter of the inclination to assert “Only this is the truth” (i.e., strong
attachment to a particular dogmatic view).
(9) Again there is another fourfold doctrine that explains four kinds
of obstacles:24 the obstacle of desire, the obstacle of malice, the obstacle
of wrong view, and the obstacle of self-conceit.
(10) Again there is another fourfold doctrine that explains four kinds
of living creatures: creatures born oviparously, creatures born from a
womb, creatures born of moisture, and creatures born through incarnation (e.g., gods, ghosts, etc.).
(11) Again there is another fourfold doctrine that explains four kinds
of application of mental awareness. First, when a bhikṣu observes his
inner body (sense faculties) in concentration he should exert himself
with no slackening, being mindful of his observations to keep them in

50c

290

Sutra 9: Numerically Assembled Doctrines

memory, and thereby remove worldly desires and worries. Second,
observing his outer body (outer sense stimuli) he should exert himself
with no slackening, being mindful of his observations to keep them in
memory, and thereby remove worldly desires and worries. Third, while
observing both the inner and outer body he should exert himself with
no slackening, being mindful of his observations to keep them in memory, and thereby remove worldly desires and worries. It is the same
with the second application, observing one’s sense perceptions; with
the third application, observing one’s mind (intellect); and with the
fourth application, observing one’s psychophysical elements.
(12) Again there is another fourfold doctrine that explains four kinds
of vigorous effort: a bhikṣu applies vigorous effort to prevent unfavorable mental elements from arising, vigorous effort to terminate unfavorable mental elements that already have arisen, vigorous effort to
help favorable mental elements to arise, and vigorous effort to contemplate favorable mental elements that have arisen so as to help sustain
and increase them.
(13) Again there is another fourfold doctrine that explains four kinds
of supernormal powers: ﬁrst, a bhikṣu realizes supernormal power
derived from dispositional forces bearing the effort of concentration
motivated by desire. It is the same with the other three cases: through
concentration motivated by mind, motivated by endeavor, and motivated
by investigation.
(14) Again there is another fourfold doctrine that explains four
kinds of meditative absorption (dhyāna-samādhi): ﬁrst, a bhikṣu contemplates the eradication of deﬁlements, such as desire, evil, and unfavorable things, and realizes the ﬁrst meditative state of absorption, in
which there is awareness of objects and the act of examining while
the sense of joy and bliss increases. Second, he eliminates awareness
of objects and the subjective act of examination, with increasing tranquility or self-conﬁdence, continually applying concentration of the
mind, and proceeds to the second meditative state of absorption in
which there is neither the awareness of an object nor subjective acts
but a sense of joy and bliss predominate in the arising state of concentration. Third, he distances himself from a sense of joy but dwells

291

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

in a sense of equanimity, fully aware of subtler bliss, reaching the third
meditative state of absorption in which one experiences the mindfulness,
equanimity, and bliss sought by a wise and holy practitioner. Fourth,
he transcends both pain and pleasure and removes sorrow and joy, thus
realizing the fourth meditative state of absorption in which there is
neither pain nor pleasure but an increase in the state of equanimity that
consolidates pure and genuine mindfulness.
(15) Again there is another fourfold doctrine that explains four kinds
of immeasurable mind: the immeasurable mind of friendly love and
benevolence (maitrī), the immeasurable mind of compassion (karuṇā),
the immeasurable mind of sympathetic joy (muditā), and the immeasurable mind of equanimity (upekṣā).
(16) Again there is another fourfold doctrine that explains four kinds
of formless concentration. First, a bhikṣu transcends all thoughts of
forms [in the objective sphere], totally exhausts all malicious thoughts
[in the subjective sphere], and thus is freed from any other thought in
the sphere of inﬁnite space. Second, coming out of [this concentration]
he then enters the sphere of inﬁnite consciousness. Third, coming out
of [this concentration] he then enters the sphere of nothingness or nonutility. Fourth, coming out of [this concentration] he then enters the
sphere of neither ideation nor nonideation.
(17) Again there is another fourfold doctrine that explains four
kinds of foundations of religious consciousness: the absence of covetousness and malice and the presence of right mindfulness and right
concentration.
(18) Again there is another fourfold doctrine that explains four kinds
of noble genealogy. First, a bhikṣu knows how to be content with [simple] robes or garments; he is neither delighted by obtaining good material nor dspleased by obtaining poor material, neither affected by nor
attached to the kind of cloth [for a robe] he obtains, knowing the regulation about the prohibition and restriction [of cloth for robes]. He
knows the essential path of deliverance and exerts himself in the practice
of the path without slackening, and he is able to equip himself with the
robe as required, neither slackening nor falling short of the regulation,

51a

292

Sutra 9: Numerically Assembled Doctrines

as well as helping others to be outﬁtted with the requisite robe. This
is the ﬁrst kind of self-contentment with the robe requisite, qualifying a
bhikṣu to be a member of the noble genealogy. He is neither disturbed in
his mind from the beginning until the present, nor can any fault be found
in him by gods, evil ones, Brahmā, śramaṇas, brāhmaṇas, [those of] the
heavenly as well human worlds. H also knows how to be content with
the remaining three requisites of food, lodging, and medicine for use in
illness.
(19) Again there is another fourfold doctrine that explains four kinds
of characteristics of sympathy: liberality, kind speech, skill in helping
others, and the sagacious conduct of equality.
(20) Again there is another fourfold doctrine that explains four kinds
of the saintly state of stream-enterer: serenity based on trust and faith
in the Buddha, serenity based on trust and faith in the Dharma, serenity
based on trust and faith in the Sangha, and serenity based on trust and
faith in the precepts.
(21) Again there is another fourfold doctrine that explains four kinds
of direct experience for oneself: the sense perception of forms experienced directly by one’s own eyes, the cessation of bodily sense perception experienced directly in one’s own body, the [recollection of
one’s] previous lives experienced directly in one’s own memory, and
the exhaustion of inﬂuences caused by deﬁlement experienced directly
through one’s own insight.
(22) Again there is another fourfold doctrine that explains four kinds
of the mode of progress: painful practice resulting in knowledge slowly
acquired, painful practice resulting in knowledge quickly acquired,
pleasant practice resulting in knowledge slowly acquired, and pleasant
practice resulting in knowledge quickly acquired.
(23) Again there is another fourfold doctrine that explains the Four
Noble Truths: the truth of suffering, the truth of the cause of suffering,
the truth of the cessation of suffering, and the truth of the path of cessation of suffering.
(24) Again there is another fourfold doctrine that explains four results
of the mendicant life: the result of the saintly state of stream-enterer

293

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

(srotaāpanna), the result of the saintly state of once-returner (sakṛdāgāmin), the result of the saintly state of nonreturner (anāgāmin) and
the result of the saintly state of arhatship.
(25) Again there is another fourfold doctrine that explains the four
ﬁrm bases [of religious life]: upholding the truth as one’s ﬁrm basis,
upholding the norm of renunciation as one’s ﬁrm basis, upholding analytical insight as one’s ﬁrm basis, and upholding the state of quiescence
as one’s ﬁrm basis;
(26) Again there is another fourfold doctrine of the four kinds of
knowledge: knowledge of the Dharma, knowledge of what follows,
knowledge of the general agreement or tradition, and knowledge of
the minds of others.
(27) Again there is another fourfold doctrine that explains four kinds
of rhetorical skill and knowledge: rhetorical skill in religious teaching,
rhetorical skill in the meaning [of the teaching], skill and knowledge
of different regional dialects, and skill and knowledge of using the
foregoing three types [of rhetorical skill].
(28) Again there is another fourfold doctrine that explains four kinds
of regions where cognition abides: the cognitive faculty that relies on
an external form as its indirect cause and grows stronger together with
the form and the subjective mental force of craving attachment as its
direct cause; it is the same with the remaining three: immediate sensation
or impression, symbolic signs or ideations, and dispositional forces of
conﬁguration.
(29) Again there is another fourfold doctrine that explains four kinds
of fetters: desire as a fetter, volitional acts of existence as a fetter, wrong
view as a fetter, and ignorance as a fetter.
(30) Again there is another fourfold doctrine that explains four kinds
of severance from fetters: severance from desire, from volition toward
existence, from wrong views, and from ignorance.
(31) Again there is another fourfold doctrine that explains four kinds
of purity: upholding one’s purity with the precepts, upholding one’s
purity with the mind, upholding one’s purity with right views, and
upholding one’s purity through transcending doubt.25

294

Sutra 9: Numerically Assembled Doctrines

(32) Again there is another fourfold doctrine that explains four kinds
of discernment: one discerns what he can or should accept, how he can
or should act, what he can or should enjoy, and what he can or should
forsake.
(33) Again there is another fourfold doctrine that explains four kinds
of discerning propriety or deportment: a bhikṣu discerns what deportment
or mode of walking, standing, sitting, or lying down he should adopt.26
(34) Again there is another fourfold doctrine that explains four kinds
of thought: thought with a focus on a limited scope, thought with a
range expanded over a wider scope, thought with an inﬁnitely wide
and expansive range, and thought without a speciﬁc focus or object.27
(35) Again there is another fourfold doctrine that explains four dialectical disciplines in questions and answers: a type of dialectical discipline
to answer categorically, a type of dialectical discipline to explain analytically, a type of dialectical discipline to respond with a counter-question, and a type of dialectical discipline to set aside a question.
(36) Again there is another fourfold doctrine that explains the four
points of the Tathāgata that do not need to be guarded for purity and
genuineness: his physical conduct is completely and automatically
pure so that he does not need to be on guard with it, and it is the same
with his verbal and mental conduct and his livelihood.
O bhikṣus, these are the right doctrines taught by the Tathāgata. We
should collect these doctrines in memory to prevent dispute and controversy, to consolidate the practice of austerity for a long time to come,
and so that the various beneﬁts derived thereby will help increase the
well-being of gods and humans.
Also again, all of the bhikṣus, the Tathāgata has taught the ﬁvefold
doctrines of his right Dharma:
(1) A ﬁvefold doctrine explains ﬁve bases of cognition: form as the
objective basis of the eyes, sound as the objective basis of the ears,
smell as the objective basis of the nose, taste as the objective basis of
the tongue, and tactile contact as the objective basis of the body.
(2) Again there is another ﬁvefold doctrine that explains the ﬁve
aggregates that are the basis of clinging to existence: the aggregate of

295

51b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

material elements, the aggregate of sensation, the aggregate of ideation,
the aggregate of dispositional forces, and the aggregate of consciousness.
(3) Again there is another ﬁvefold doctrine that explains ﬁve kinds
of moral and spiritual hindrances: sexual desire, malice, sloth and
torpor, agitation and anxiety,28 and doubt.
(4) Again there is another ﬁvefold doctrine that explains ﬁve kinds
of deﬁlement that bind sentient beings to the lower sphere of desire:
the heretical belief in a real personality, attachment to practices and
observances other than those approved by Buddha, doubt, sexual desire,
and malice.
(5) Again there is another ﬁvefold doctrine that explains ﬁve kinds
of deﬁlement that bind sentient beings to the upper spheres, the realms
of form (rūpadhātu) and formlessness (ārūpyadhātu): attachment to
form, attachment to the formless, and attachment to ignorance, selfconceit, and agitation.
(6) Again there is another ﬁvefold doctrine of the ﬁve kinds of spiritual faculties: the faculties of faith, effort, mindfulness, concentration,
and insight.
(7) Again there is another ﬁvefold doctrine that explains ﬁve kinds
of spiritual power: the power of faith, the power of effort, the power
of mindfulness, the power of concentration, and the power of insight.
(8) Again there is another ﬁvefold doctrine that explains ﬁve kinds
of vigorous effort toward ultimate cessation. First, a bhikṣu should
believe that the Buddha Tathāgata is perfectly endowed with the ten
supreme titles, such as “One Liberated from Attachment” and “Fully
Enlightened One.” Second, he should be free from illness and always
maintain his physical safety and well-being. Third, he should be honest
and direct, without ﬂattery toward those whom the Tathāgata has taught
the path to nirvana. Fourth, he should control his mind, upholding it
ﬁrmly and not allowing it to become disrupted, and keep in memory
whatever scripture has been recited, even long ago. Fifth, he should
be capable of skillfully investigating the rising and falling of the psychophysical elements and thus terminate the root of suffering through the
same practices as those accomplished by wise and saintly disciples.

296

Sutra 9: Numerically Assembled Doctrines

(9) Again there is another ﬁvefold doctrine of ﬁve kinds of accusations: untimely accusation, baseless accuasation, meaningless accusation, accusation through harsh words, and accusation derived from
enmity with no compassion.
(10) Again there is another ﬁvefold doctrine that explains ﬁve kinds
of good imputations: those that are timely, based in fact, meaningful,
made with kind, helpful words, and derived from compassion.
(11) Again there is another ﬁvefold doctrine that explains ﬁve kinds
of envious resentment: envy toward another bhikṣu’s residence, toward
lay patrons, toward material goods, toward pleasing appearance, and
toward access to instruction.
(12) Again there is another ﬁvefold doctrine that explains ﬁve kinds
of liberation according to ﬁve thoughts: contemplation on the impurity
of the body, contemplation on the impurity of food, contemplation on
the impermanence of all things, contemplation on the human world as
not enjoyable, and contemplation on the necessary end of death.29
(13) Again there is another ﬁvefold doctrine that explains ﬁve essential elements for liberation: a bhikṣu should be neither pleased nor disturbed by desire nor intimated by it but, mindful of the essential elements
of salvation, he should instead be content in distancing himself from
it. Even when he happens to be close to desire, he should exert himself
in controlling his mind without slackening and dissociate himself from
it by distancing from it. When he has completely discarded and terminated the deﬁlements that were under evil inﬂuences caused by desire,
he will be able to realize deliverance. This is the ﬁrst element of liberation from desire. It is the same with the remaining four: liberation
from malice, from jealous vexation, from external forms, and from the
heretical belief in a real personality.
(14) Again there is another ﬁvefold doctrine that explains ﬁve bases
of liberation. First, if a bhikṣu does not slacken exertion, is content to
stay in a secluded place, and concentrates his mind, he will be able to
understand what has not yet been understood, complete what has not
yet been completed, and settle in himself what has not yet been settled.
What are these ﬁve bases? When a bhikṣu listens to the teaching of the

297

51c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

Tathāgata, that of a practitioner of austerity, or that of an elder bhikṣu,
contemplates and examines it, and analyzes its meaning, then he becomes
aware of inner joy. Having experienced such inner joy he acquires
predilection toward the Dharma, and with this predilection he realizes
physical and mental peace and comfort. Once he realizes physical and
mental peace and comfort he is ready to accomplish the state of absorption and concentration in the practice of meditation, through which he
acquires insight into the nature of things as they really are. This acquisition is the ﬁrst basis of deliverance. At this point, having listened to
the teaching and experienced inner joy, the bhikṣu retains the teaching
in memory and by reciting it by heart, thus also enhancing his inner joy.
When he teaches what he has learned to other bhikṣus or other people
he is bound to experience a further increase of inner joy. When he contemplates and analyzes the teaching he again experiences the reinforcement of inner joy. It is the same [progression] as when he realizes the
state of concentration.
(15) Again there is another ﬁvefold doctrine that explains ﬁve kinds
of saints who enter ﬁnal nirvana without remainder: an anāgāmin (nonreturner) who passes away in the middle of his lifetime in a particular
heaven; an anāgāmin who passes away in the realm of desire (kāmadhatu), is reborn in the realm of form (rūpadhatu), and enters nirvana
from there; an anāgāmin who enters nirvana after proper mental preparation; an anāgāmin who enters nirvana without any mental preparation;
and an anāgāmin who is born in the highest Akaniṣṭha Heaven and
enters nirvana from there.
O bhikṣus, these are the right doctrines taught by the Tathāgata. We
should collect these doctrines in memory to prevent disputes and controversies, to consolidate the practice of austerity for a long time to
come, and so that the various beneﬁts derived thereby will increase
the well-being of gods and humans.
Also again, O bhikṣus, the Tathāgata has taught the sixfold doctrines
of his right Dharma:
(1) There is a sixfold doctrine that explains the six internal bases
of cognition: the sense faculty of sight, the sense faculty of hearing,

298

Sutra 9: Numerically Assembled Doctrines

the sense faculty of smell, the sense faculty of taste, the sense faculty
of touch, and the mental sense faculty of consciousness.
(2) Again there is another sixfold doctrine that explains the six external bases of cognition: material form, sounds, smells, tastes, tactile
sensations, and mental objects.
(3) Again there is another sixfold doctrine that explains the six kinds
of consciousness: visual consciousness derived from the sense faculty
of seeing, auditory consciousness derived from the sense faculty of
hearing, olfactory consciousness derived from the sense faculty of smell,
gustatory consciousness derived from the sense faculty of taste, tactile
consciousness derived from the sense faculty of touch, and mental consciousness derived from the mental faculty of thought.
(4) Again there is another sixfold doctrine that explains the six kinds
of contact between sense faculties and their objects: contact of the
visual faculty with its object (form), contact of the auditory faculty
with its object (sound), contact of the olfactory faculty with its object
(odor), contact of the gustatory faculty with its object (taste), contact
of tactile faculty with its tangible object, and contact of the mental faculty with its mental object (thought).
(5) Again there is another sixfold doctrine that explains the six kinds
of sense perception (or sensation): the visual sense perception arising
from contact [with the object]; likewise, auditory sense perception,
olfactory sense perception, gustatory sense perception, tactile sense
perception, and mental sense perception.
(6) Again there is another sixfold doctrine that comprises six kinds
of ideation: ideation of the object of seeing, ideation of the object of
hearing, ideation of the object of smelling, ideation of the object of
taste, ideation of the object of touch, and ideation of the mental object.
(7) Again there is another sixfold doctrine that explains the six kinds
of thought: thought of the object of seeing, thought of the object of
hearing, thought of the object of smelling, thought of the object of
taste, thought of the object of touch, and thought of the mental object.
(8) Again there is another sixfold doctrine that explains the six kinds
of craving for the objects of faculties: craving for the object of seeing,

299

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

craving for the object of hearing, craving for the object of smelling,
craving for the object of taste, craving for the object of touch, and sixth,
craving for the mental object.
(9) Again there is another sixfold doctrine that explains the six roots
of disputes or controversies. First, suppose that a bhikṣu tends to hold
animosity [against others] and reveres neither the Tathāgata (the
Buddha), nor the Dharma, nor the Sangha. He is careless and negligent
in his practice of the precepts, resulting in gaps and weaknesses [in
his practice]. Morally corrupted and impure, he frequently causes disputes or controversies within the sangha. Disliked by everyone, he disturbs other sangha members who are genuinely motivated, and he is
unable to contribute to the well-being of gods and humans.
O bhikṣus, you should examine your inner selves. If there is anyone
like the bhikṣu in this example, someone who is vindictive and disruptive, you should call for an assembly of the sangha with harmonious
unity and establish various measures (expedients) to eradicate the root
cause of the dispute or controversy. You also should apply introspection
to yourselves. When the cause of enmity has been eradicated, you
should set forth some expedient means to prevent the reoccurrence of
similar mental agitation or discontent. Do not let a similar dispute or
controversy recur.
O bhikṣus, the remaining ﬁve cases should be treated in a similar
manner: when a bhikṣu is hypocritical and merciless, when he is spiteful
and jealous, when he is deceptive and untruthful, when he is arrogant
and will not forsake his wrong view despite the fact that it has been
disproved, and when he is deluded by a heretical view and upholds
that view along with other one-sided views.
(10) Again there is another sixfold doctrine that explains the six elements of external reality: earth, ﬁre, water, wind, space, and consciousness.
(11) Again there is another sixfold doctrine that explains the six
kinds of correlation sought by the six internal faculties respectively
for the six external objects: the visual faculty examines and ﬁnds form
as its proper object. In like manner, the auditory faculty does the same
with its proper object, sound; the olfactory faculty with its object, odor;

52a

300

Sutra 9: Numerically Assembled Doctrines

the gustatory faculty with its object, taste; the tactile faculty with its
object, touch; and the mental faculty with its mental object.30
(12) Again there is another sixfold doctrine that explains the six
essential elements of liberation. Suppose a bhikṣu says, “I have practiced
the immeasurable mind of friendly love (maitrī) for the sake of liberation
yet I still experience malice.” Other bhikṣus warn him, “You should not
say this. Your statement slanders the Tathāgata, because the Tathāgata
has not taught us the way you have experienced. It is utterly impossible
that if he wishes us to learn the practice of the mind of friendly love as
an essential element for liberation, we would still experience a thought
of malice. According to the Buddha, when one eradicates the mind of
malice, only then he is ready to acquire the mind of benevolence.”
The remaining ﬁve essential elements of liberation should be shown
by similar responses if a bhikṣu says “I have practiced the immeasurable
mind of compassion (karuṇā) for the sake of liberation yet I still experience a mind of jealousy,” “I have practiced the immeasurable mind
of sympathetic joy (muditā) for the sake of liberation yet I still experience anxiety,” “I have practiced the immeasurable mind of equanimity
(upekṣā) for the sake of liberation yet I still experience mental states
of attachment and aversion,” “I have practiced the mind of nonself,
yet I still experience doubt,” and “I have practiced the concentration
of signlessness for the sake of liberation (i.e., nonapplication of symbols)
yet I still experience multiple thoughts due to the use of symbols.”
(13) Again there is a sixfold doctrine that explains the six kinds of
highest excellence: highest philosophical thought, highest listening to
teachings, highest material attainment, highest discipline, highest service, and highest mindfulness and recollection.
(14) Again there is a sixfold doctrine that explains the six objects
of mindfulness or recollection: being mindful of the Buddha, Dharma,
and Sangha and being mindful of the precepts, charity, and divinity.
O bhikṣus, these are the right doctrines taught by the Tathāgata. We
should collect these doctrines in memory to prevent disputes and controversy, to consolidate the practice of austerity for a long time to come,
and so that the various beneﬁts derived thereby increase the well-being
of gods and humans.

301

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

Also again, O bhikṣus, the Tathāgata has taught the sevenfold doctrines of his right Dharma:
(1) There is a sevenfold doctrine that explains the seven kinds of
detrimental conditions for the practice of religion: the absence of faith,
shamelessness in self-reﬂection, shamelessness before others, having
little learning, lack of zeal, forgetfulness, and having no insight.
(2) Again there is another sevenfold doctrine that explains the seven
kinds of good conditions for the practice of religion: the presence of
faith, shamefulness in self-reﬂection, shamefulness before others, being
well learned, being well endowed with energy and zeal, having a wellsustained memory, and having full insight.
(3) Again there is another sevenfold doctrine that explains the seven
places where consciousness abides. When sentient beings are in possession of different bodies and different ideations, these are humans
and heavenly beings. This is the ﬁrst abode of consciousness. When
some sentient beings possess individual bodies but one and the same
ideation, this is the time when the god Brahmā was initially born in
Ābhāsvara Heaven, where communication is accomplished by transmitted light instead of sound. This is the second abode of consciousness.
When some sentient beings possess one and the same body but different
ideations, this is the aforementioned Ābhāsvara Heaven. This is the
third abode of consciousness. When some sentient beings possess one
and the same body and ideation, this is Śubhakṛtsna Heaven. This is
the fourth abode of consciousness. The remaining three abodes are the
sphere of inﬁnite space, the sphere of inﬁnite consciousness, and the
sphere of nothingness or nonutility, respectively.
(4) Again there is another sevenfold doctrine that explains the seven
kinds of effort: a bhikṣu exerts himself to practice the precepts, to
exhaust avarice in preparation for the discipline of charity, to break
any wrong view in preparation for the right view, to learn as much as
he can, to maintain the discipline of effort, to uphold right mindfulness,
and to practice meditation and concentration.
(5) Again there is another sevenfold doctrine that explains the seven
kinds of thought: the thought of the impurity of the human body, the
thought that food is impure [in order to eradicate desire], the thought

52b

302

Sutra 9: Numerically Assembled Doctrines

that there is nothing that can be enjoyed in the world, the thought of
death, the thought of impermanence, the thought of suffering due to
impermanence, the thought of suffering due to nonself.
(6) Again there is another sevenfold doctrine that explains the seven
auxiliary disciplines of concentration: right view, right thought, right
speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, and right mindfulness.
(7) Again there is another sevenfold doctrine that explains the seven
auxiliary disciplines of enlightenment: mindfulness, discernment of
the psychophysical elements, effort, delight, freedom from bodily and
mental disturbance, the practice of concentration, and the mind of
equanimity.
O bhikṣus, these are the right doctrines taught by the Tathāgata. We
should collect these doctrines [in memory] to prevent disputes and
controversies, to consolidate the practice of austerity for a long time
to come, and so that the various beneﬁts derived thereby increase the
well-being of gods and humans.
O bhikṣus, the Tathāgata taught the eightfold doctrines of his right
Dharma:
(1) There is an eightfold doctrine that explains the eight worldly
concerns: gain and loss, pleasure and pain, fame and disgrace, and
praise and blame.
(2) Again there is another eightfold doctrine that explains the eight
kinds of liberation: the liberation realized when one, with an internal
ideation of form, perceives external forms; the liberation realized when
one, without any internal form ideation, perceives external forms; the
liberation realized when one has thus terminated all deﬁlements; the
liberation realized when one, having transcended all form ideations and
annihilated sensory reaction, abides in the ﬁrst formless state of concentration, the sphere of inﬁnite space; the deliverance realized when
one, having transcended the sphere of inﬁnite space, abides in the sphere
of inﬁnite consciousness; the liberation realized when one, having transcended the previous sphere, abides in the sphere of nothing or nonutility;
the liberation realized when one, having transcended the previous sphere,
abides in the sphere of neither ideation nor nonideation; and the liberation
realized when one, having transcended the previous sphere, abides in

303

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

the ﬁnal state of cessation free from the senses and ideation (i.e., the
third saintly state of anāgāmin).
(3) Again there is another doctrine that explains the eightfold noble
path: right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood,
right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration.
(4) Again there is another eightfold doctrine that explains the eight
saintly personalities: a bhikṣu who is ready for the state of stream-enterer
and one who has realized the state of stream-enterer; one who is ready
for the state of once-returner and one who has realized the state of
once-returner; one who is ready for the state of nonreturner and one
who has realized the state of nonreturner; and one who is ready for the
state of arhat and one who has realized arhatship.
These are the right doctrines taught by the Tathāgata. We should
collect these doctrines [in memory] to prevent disputes and controversies, to consolidate the practice of austerity for a long time to come,
and so that the various beneﬁts derived thereby will increase the wellbeing of gods and humans.
O bhikṣus, the Tathāgata taught the ninefold doctrines of his right
Dharma:
(1) There is a ninefold doctrine that explains the nine places of sentient beings. Sentient beings who are in possession of different bodies
and different ideations are humans and heavenly beings. This is the
ﬁrst abode of sentient beings. When some sentient beings possess different bodies but one and the same ideation, this is the time when the
god Brahmā was initially born in Ābhāsvara Heaven, where communication is accomplished by transmitted light instead of sound. This is
the second abode of sentient beings. When some sentient beings possess
one and the same body but different ideations, this is the aforementioned
Ābhāsvara Heaven. This is the third abode of sentient beings. When
some sentient beings possess one and the same body and ideation, this
is Śubhakṛtsna Heaven. This is the fourth abode of sentient beings.
When some sentient beings reside in the sphere of neither ideation nor
external awareness, this is Āsaṃjñika Heaven. This is the ﬁfth abode
of sentient beings. When some sentient beings reside in the sphere of

52c

304

Sutra 9: Numerically Assembled Doctrines

inﬁnite space, this is the sixth abode of sentient beings. When some
sentient beings reside in the sphere of inﬁnite consciousness, this is
the seventh abode of sentient beings. When some sentient beings reside
in the sphere of nothingness or nonutility, this is the eighth abode of
sentient beings. When some sentient beings reside in the sphere of neither ideation nor nonideation, this is the ninth abode of sentient beings.
These are the right doctrines taught by the Tathāgata. We should
collect these doctrines [in memory] to prevent disputes and controversies, to consolidate the practice of austerity for a long time to come,
and so that the various beneﬁts derived thereby increase the well-being
of gods and humans.
O bhikṣus, the Tathāgata taught a tenfold doctrine of his right
Dharma, namely, the ten norms for the arhat who does not require further training: right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right mindfulness, right effort, right concentration, right
wisdom, and right liberation.
These are the right doctrines taught by the Tathāgata. We should
collect these doctrines [in memory] to prevent disputes and controversies, to consolidate the practice of austerity for a long time to come,
and so that the various beneﬁts derived thereby increase the well-being
of gods and humans.

At that time, the World-honored One veriﬁed what Śāriputra had exhorted,
and all the bhikṣus who had listened to his lecture experienced joy, respectfully
received the teaching, and carried out what was taught by Śāriputra.
[End of Sutra 9: Numerically Assembled Doctrines]

305

Sutra 10
Ten Progressively
Classified Doctrines

(Dīgha Nikāya 34: Dasuttara-Suttanta)
Thus have I heard. At one time, the Buddha sojourned in the country of Aṅga
accompanied by one thousand two hundred and ﬁfty bhikṣus. He arrived at
the city of Campā and stayed overnight on the shore of Queen Gaggarā’s
lotus pond. As it was the full-moon night on the ﬁfteenth day, the Worldhonored One sat in an open area surrounded by the assembly of bhikṣus and
taught the Dharma throughout the night. The World-honored One said to
Śāriputra:

Now many bhikṣus have assembled from all quarters. They have all
been diligently listening to the teaching, disregarding the hours of their
sleep. I have pain in my back and wish to rest for awhile. Please teach
the Dharma for the sake of these bhikṣus.

Having thus instructed Śāriputra, the World-honored One folded his outer
robe into four layers, spread it on the ground, and lay down on his right side,
placing one foot on top of the other, like a lion.
Thereupon, the elder disciple Śāriputra said to the bhikṣus:

Whatever doctrine I exhort, whether at the beginning, the middle, or
the end, is true and genuine. Each doctrine is endowed with its meaning
and essence. It is well balanced with the practice of pure and genuine
austerity. All of you, listen attentively, and think about and remember
what I say. I will begin my discourse to you.

The bhikṣus were attentive and ready to listen. Śāriputra said to the bhikṣus:

There are ten progressively classiﬁed doctrines arranged from one to
ten, all of which can help you remove varieties of moral and spiritual
fetters, and thereby help you reach the goal of nirvana and bring an
end to all suffering. These ten groups altogether comprise ﬁve hundred

307

53a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

and ﬁfty doctrinal items. Now, I am going to enumerate the ten classiﬁed
groups individually.
Listen attentively, all of you. O bhikṣus, the ﬁrst group comprises
the doctrinal items that are very useful for religious salvation; the
second group comprises the doctrinal items that should be practiced;
the third group comprises the doctrinal items that should be comprehensively understood; the fourth group comprises the doctrinal items
that should be abandoned; the ﬁfth group comprises the doctrinal items
conducive to lessening perversity and ignorance; the sixth group comprises the doctrinal items conducive to increasing distinction; the
seventh group comprises the doctrinal items that are difﬁcult to fathom;
the eighth group comprises the doctrinal items that should be brought
into being; the ninth group comprises the doctrinal items that are known
as supernormal powers; and the tenth group comprises the doctrinal
items that should be directly experienced by oneself.
(1) What is the singular useful item? It is the discipline of nonheedlessness with regard to all good [psychophysical] elements. (2) What
is the singular item to be practiced? It is the discipline of mindfulness
in contemplation of the body. (3) What is the singular item to be exactly
known? It is the fact of contact of the faculties with their respective
objects under the inﬂuence of deﬁlement. (4) What is the singular item
to be abandoned? It is the sense of self-conceit. (5) What is the singular
item that is conducive to lessening perversity and ignorance? It is the
way of superﬁcial thought or observation, e.g., contrary to the thought
of impermanence. (6) What is the singular item conducive to increasing
distinction? It is the way of fundamental thought or observation. (7)
What is a singular item that is difﬁcult to realize? It is the state of continuous concentration without lapse. (8) What is the singular item to
be brought into existence? It is deliverance or the unshakable knowledge
of the transcendent in the realm that is under the inﬂuence of deﬁlement.
(9) What is the singular item of supernormal knowledge? It is the truth
that all sentient beings continue to subsist on food. (10) What is the singular item to be directly experienced? It is the deliverance of the mind
that is unshakable or undisturbed toward the realm that is beyond the
inﬂuence of deﬁlement.

308

Sutra 10: Ten Progressively Classiﬁed Doctrines

Again, there is a second group of ten: (1) the double doctrinal item
that is very useful to religious salvation, (2) the double doctrinal item
that should be practiced, (3) the double doctrinal item that should be
comprehensively understood, (4) the double doctrinal item that should
be abandoned, (5) the double doctrinal item that is conducive to declining into perversity and ignorance, (6) the double doctrinal item that is
conducive to increasing distinction, (7) the double doctrinal item that
is difﬁcult to fathom or penetrate, (8) the double doctrinal item that
should be brought to existence, (9) the double doctrinal item that should
be known as supernormal power, and (10) the double doctrinal item
that should be directly experienced by oneself.
(1) What is the double item that is very useful to religious salvation?
It means knowing shame upon self-reﬂection and knowing shame before
others. (2) What is the double item to be practiced? It means the [meditative] practice of calming the mind (śamatha) and that of analytical
insight (vipaśyanā). (3) What is the double item to be comprehensively
understood? It means the (noetic) category of name, i.e., the four mental
aggregates, and the (corporeal) category of form, i.e., the material aggregate. (4) What is the double item to be abandoned? It means ignorance
of the Four Noble Truths and desirous craving for existence. (5) What
is the double item that is conducive to declining into perversity and
ignorance? It means transgression of the precepts, association with the
wicked, and breaking away from right views. (6) What is the double
item that is conducive to increasing distinction? It means adherence to
the precepts and right views. (7) What is the double item that is difﬁcult
to fathom? It means the way in which sentient beings are deﬁled due
to direct and indirect causes, and the way in which they are puriﬁed
from deﬁlement due to direct and indirect causes. (8) What is the double
item to be brought into existence? It means knowledge of total eradication
of deﬁlement and knowledge of non-origination of states of being. (9)
What is the double item to be known as supernormal power? It means
the sphere of conditioned elements and the sphere of transcendent or
unconditioned elements. (10) What is the double item to be directly
experienced by oneself? It means acquisition of knowledge of the Four
Noble Truths and the realization of liberation.

309

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

Again there is a third group of ten: (1) the triple doctrinal item that
is very useful to religious salvation, (2) the triple doctrinal item that
should be practiced, (3) the triple doctrinal item that should be comprehensively understood, (4) the triple doctrinal item that should be
abandoned, (5) the triple item that is conducive to declining into perversity and ignorance, (6) the triple doctrinal item that is conducive to
increasing distinction, (7) the triple doctrinal item that is difﬁcult to
fathom, (8) the triple doctrinal item that should be brought into existence, (9) the triple doctrinal item that should be known as supernormal
power, and (10) the triple doctrinal item that should be directly experienced by oneself.
(1) What is the triple item that is very useful to religious salvation?
It means ﬁrst, associating with good friends; second, attending teachings
on the Dharma; and third, realizing the truth of the Dharma. (2) What
is the triple item to be practiced? It means the practice of the threefold
concentration: concentration on the emptiness of the self and things
attributed to it, concentration on signlessness or the nondifferentiation
of things, and concentration on the objectless or goal-free state of existence. (3) What is the triple item to be comprehensively understood?
It means three kinds of sensation or feeling: feeling pain, feeling pleasure, and feeling neither pain nor pleasure. (4) What is the triple item
to be abandoned? It means three kinds of attachment: craving for desire,
craving for existence, and craving for nonexistence. (5) What is the
triple item that is conducive to declining into perversity and ignorance?
It means the three kinds of morally unfavorable roots: greed, hatred,
and delusion. (6) What is the triple item that is conducive to increasing
distinction? It means the three kinds of morally good roots: the absence
of greed, the absence of hatred, and the absence of delusion. (7) What
is the triple item that is difﬁcult to fathom? It means the three kinds of
attainment: the state of saintly disciples, the doctrinal teaching, and
the state of tathāgata. (8) What is the triple item to be brought into
existence? It means three characteristics: quiescence, exertion, and the
neutral indifferent state. (9) What is the triple item to be known as
supernormal powers? It means the three essential kinds of transcendence:
escape from the realm of desire leading to the realm of form, escape

53b

310

Sutra 10: Ten Progressively Classiﬁed Doctrines

from the realm of form leading to the realm of formlessness, and escape
from the realm of formlessness leading to cessation. (10) What is the
triple item to be directly experienced by oneself? It means the three
kinds of supernormal knowledge: knowledge of the recollection of past
lives, knowledge derived from the supernormal power of vision, and
knowledge of the total eradication of the inﬂuence of deﬁlements.
O bhikṣus, the foregoing group comprises thirty doctrinal items.
Having realized them by himself, the Tathāgata has taught us these doctrinal items with equal emphasis as they really are and not otherwise.
Again there is a fourth group of ten: (1) the fourfold doctrinal item
that is very useful for religious salvation, (2) the fourfold doctrinal
item that should be practiced, (3) the fourfold doctrinal item that should
be comprehensively understood, (4) the fourfold doctrinal item that
should be abandoned, (5) the fourfold doctrinal item that is conducive
to declining into perversity and ignorance, (6) the fourfold doctrinal
item that is conducive to increasing distinction, (7) the fourfold doctrinal
item that is difﬁcult to fathom, (8) the fourfold doctrinal item that
should be brought into existence, (9) the fourfold doctrinal item that
should be known as supernormal power, (10) and the fourfold doctrinal
item that should be directly experienced by oneself.
(1) What is the fourfold item that is very useful for religious salvation? It means the four kinds of blessings: residing in the proper place
(i.e., the middle region of India, the Gangetic basin), association with
and support from good friends, perfect effort motivated by oneself,
and having planted good roots in one’s past lives.
(2) What is the fourfold item to be practiced? It means the practice
of four kinds of application of mental awareness. First, when a bhikṣu
observes his inner body (i.e., internal senses) in concentration, he
should exert himself with no slackening, being mindful of his observations to keep them in memory, and thereby remove worldly desires
and anxiety. Second, when observing his outer body (i.e., external
senses), he should exert himself with no slackening, being mindful of
his observations to keep them in memory, and thereby remove worldly
desires and anxiety, Third, when observing both the inner and outer
body, he should exert himself with no slackening, being mindful of his

311

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

observations to keep them in memory, and thereby remove worldly
desires and anxiety. It is the same with the second application: observing
one’s sense perceptions; the third application, observing one’s mind
(intellect); and the fourth application, observing one’s aggregate of
psychophysical elements.
(3) What is the fourfold item to be comprehensively understood?
It means four kinds of food: edible, material food that is either nutritious or exquisite; nutriment received through contact; nutriment
received through volition or thought; and nutriment received through
consciousness.
(4) What is the fourfold item to be abandoned? It means four kinds
of grasping or attachment: attachment to desires, to the self, to precepts
belonging to other schools, and to wrong views.
(5) What is the fourfold item that is conducive to declining into perversity and ignorance? It means the four kinds of fetters: the fetters of
desire, the volitional act of existence, wrong view, and ignorance.
(6) What is the fourfold item that is conducive to increasing distinction? It means the four kinds of severance from fetters: severance
from the fetters of desire, volition toward existence, wrong view, and
ignorance.
(7) What is the fourfold item that is difﬁcult to fathom or penetrate?
It means the Four Noble Truths: the truth of suffering, the truth of the
cause of suffering, the truth of the cessation of suffering, and the truth
of the path of cessation of suffering.
(8) What is the fourfold item to be brought into existence? It means
four kinds of knowledge: knowledge of the Dharma, knowledge of
what follows, knowledge of the general agreement or tradition, and
knowledge of the minds of others.
(9) What is the fourfold item to be known as supernormal power? It
means the four kinds of rhetorical skill and knowledge: rhetorical skill
in religious teaching and its meaning, skill and knowledge of different
regional dialects, and skill and knowledge in using the foregoing three.
(10) What is the fourfold item to be directly experienced by oneself?
It means the four results of the mendicant life: the four states of spiritual
development of stream-enterer, once-returner, nonreturner, and arhatship.

312

Sutra 10: Ten Progressively Classiﬁed Doctrines

O bhikṣus, the foregoing group comprises forty doctrinal items. Having realized them by himself, the Tathāgata has taught us these doctrinal
items with equal emphasis as they really are and not otherwise.
Again there is a ﬁfth group of ten: (1) the ﬁvefold doctrinal item that
is very useful for religious salvation, (2) the ﬁvefold doctrinal item that
should be practiced, (3) the ﬁvefold doctrinal item that should be comprehensively understood, (4) the ﬁvefold doctrinal item that should be
abandoned, (5) the ﬁvefold doctrinal item that is conducive to declining
into perversity and ignorance, (6) the ﬁvefold doctrinal item that is conducive to increasing distinction, (7) the ﬁvefold doctrinal item that is
difﬁcult to fathom or penetrate, (8) the ﬁvefold doctrinal item that should
be brought into existence, (9) the ﬁvefold doctrinal item that should be
known as supernormal power, and (10) the ﬁvefold doctrinal item that
should be directly experienced by oneself.
(1) What is the ﬁvefold item that is very useful for religious salvation? It means the ﬁve kinds of effort toward ultimate cessation: striving
to establish belief that the Buddha Tathāgata is perfectly endowed with
the ten supreme titles, such as One Liberated from Attachment and
Fully Enlightened One; second, striving to be free from illness and
thus always maintain one’s physical health and well-being; third,
striving to be honest and direct, without the vice of ﬂattery, toward
those to whom the Tathāgata has taught the path to nirvana; fourth,
striving to control one’s mind, upholding it ﬁrmly and not being disrupted, and keeping in one’s memory whatever scripture was once
recited, even long ago; and ﬁfth, striving to be capable of investigating
the rising and falling of the psychophysical elements skillfully, and
thus terminate the root of suffering through the same practice as that
accomplished by wise and saintly disciples.
(2) What is the ﬁvefold item to be practiced? It means the practice of
ﬁve spiritual faculties: the faculty of faith, the faculty of effort, the faculty
of mindfulness, the faculty of concentration, and the faculty of insight.31
(3) What is the ﬁvefold item to be comprehensively understood? It
means the ﬁve aggregates that are the basis of clinging to existence:
the aggregates of material elements, sensation, ideation, dispositional
forces, and consciousness.

313

53c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

(4) What is the ﬁvefold item to be abandoned? It means ﬁve kinds
of moral and spiritual hindrances: sexual desire, malice, sloth and
torpor, agitation and anxiety, and doubt.
(5) What is the ﬁvefold item that is conducive to declining into perversity and ignorance? It means the ﬁve kinds of barren mind arising
from doubt. First, a bhikṣu cherishes a doubt against the Buddha. Because
of his doubt he does not approach the Buddha, and because of this alienation he does not pay reverence and respect toward the Buddha. This
is the initial kind of barren mind arising from doubt. Again, in this context, the bhikṣu [naturally] creates blemishes in his practice of the precepts as the second kind of barren mind; does dishonest actions in
relation to the sangha as the third kind of barren mind; and develops
impure conduct [contrary to the teaching] inﬂuenced by deﬁlement as
the fourth kind of barren mind in neglecting the practice of the precepts
and disrespecting adherence to them. These are four kinds of a barren
mind respectively arising from doubt. Also, again the bhikṣu [inevitably]
harbors malice or antagonism toward the other members of the sangha,
and with a joyless and unhappy mind he accuses them in abusive language. This is the ﬁfth kind of barren mind arising from doubt.
(6) What is the ﬁvefold item that is conducive to increasing distinction? It means the ﬁve modes of right concentration: inner joy, mental
recollection, self-contentment or self-reliance, a sense of pleasant ease,
and mental focus.32
(7) What is the ﬁvefold item that is difﬁcult to fathom? It means the
ﬁve bases of liberation. If a bhikṣu does not slacken from his effort, is
content to live in a secluded place, and concentrates his mind, he will
be able to understand what has not yet been understood, to complete
what has not yet completed, and to settle in himself what has not yet
been settled. What are these ﬁve bases? When a bhikṣu listens to the
teaching of the Tathāgata, that of a practitioner of austerities, or that of
an elder bhikṣu, contemplates and examines it, and analyzes its meaning,
he becomes aware of inner joy; having experienced this inner joy he
acquires a predilection for the Dharma; with this predilection he realizes
physical and mental peace and comfort. Once he has realized physical
and mental peace and comfort he is ready to accomplish the state of

314

Sutra 10: Ten Progressively Classiﬁed Doctrines

absorption and concentration in the practice of meditation, through
which he acquires insight into the nature of things as they really are.
This is the ﬁrst basis of liberation. Second, having listened to the teaching and experienced inner joy the bhikṣu retains the teaching in memory
and by reciting it by heart, thus also enhancing his inner joy; third,
when he teaches what he has learned to other bhikṣus or people he is
bound to feel a further increase of inner joy; fourth, when he contemplates and analyzes the teaching his experience of inner joy is again
reinforced; ﬁnally, it is the same when he realizes the state of concentration as regards the teaching.
(8) What is the ﬁvefold item to be brought into existence? It means
ﬁve kinds of knowledge, especially that derived from the practice of
concentration. First, through the practice of concentration one acquires
insight into the inner and outer cognitive interaction in blissful absorption in the present moment as well as a subsequent effect of the future;
second, one acquires insight into the inner and outer corporeal faculties
as a transcendent saintly state of nonattachment; third, one acquires
insight into the inner and outer cognitive interaction as a state that is
[always] pursued by the buddhas and saintly disciples; fourth, one
acquires insight into the inner and outer cognitive interaction as a state
characteristic of total quiescence and solitude; and ﬁfth, through the
state of concentration one acquires insight into the inner and outer cognitive interaction as a state into which the mind enters and from which
it reemerges.
(9) What is the ﬁvefold item to be known as supernormal powers?
It means the ﬁve essential elements for liberation. First, a bhikṣu should
be neither pleased with nor disturbed by [the object of] desires nor
intimidated by it but, mindful of the essential elements of liberation,
he is content to distance himself from it. Even if he happens to be
closely bound up with desire he should exert himself to control his
mind without slackening and dissociate himself from it by distancing
from it. When he has completely abandoned and terminated those
deﬁlements that were under the evil inﬂuences caused by desires he
will be able to realize liberation. This is the ﬁrst element of liberation
from desire. It is the same with the remaining four: liberation from

315

54a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

malice, from jealous vexation, from external form, and from the heretical
belief in a self.
(10) What is the ﬁvefold item to be directly experienced by oneself?
It means the ﬁve kinds of religious doctrines for one who has realized
the state of arhat and requires no further levels of training: the doctrine
of moral precepts and disciplines, the doctrine of meditative concentration, the doctrine of analytical insight, the doctrine of spiritual libertion,
and the doctrine of the insight acknowledging liberation.
The foregoing group comprises ﬁfty doctrinal items. Having realized
them by himself, the Tathāgata has taught us these doctrinal items with
equal emphasis as they really are and not otherwise.
Again there is a sixth group of ten: (1) the sixfold doctrinal item that
is very useful for religious salvation, (2) the sixfold doctrinal item that
should be practiced, (3) the sixfold doctrinal item that should be comprehensively understood, (4) the sixfold doctrinal item that should be
abandoned, (5) the sixfold doctrinal item that is conducive to declining
into perversity and ignorance, (6) the sixfold doctrinal item that is conducive to increasing distinction, (7) the sixfold doctrinal item that is
difﬁcult to fathom or penetrate, (8) the sixfold doctrinal item that should
be brought into existence, (9) the sixfold doctrinal item that should be
known as supernormal power, and (10) the sixfold doctrinal item that
should be directly experienced by oneself.
(1) What is the sixfold item that is very useful for religious salvation?
It means the six principles of fraternity: whe a bhikṣu adheres to the six
principles of fraternity in practice his conduct is worthy of respect and
reverence and creates harmony within the sangha, without any dispute
or controversy, enabling him to act independently without the admixture
of confusion. What are these six principles of fraternity? First, if a monk
always acts in benevolence, pays respect toward those who uphold the
practice of austerity, and abides with a mind of benevolence and love,
his benevolence is regarded as “the principle of fraternity,” worthy of
respect, reverence, creating harmony within the sangha, without any
dispute or controversy, and he can independently proceed without the
admixture of confusion. Second, through adherence to benevolent and
friendly speech and, third, through adherence to benevolent and friendly

316

Sutra 10: Ten Progressively Classiﬁed Doctrines

thought, a bhikṣu may obtain material support on the basis of the doctrinal
teaching. Fourth, he should share whatever he receives in his almsbowl
with his colleagues without keeping it all for himself. Fifth, when a
bhikṣu upholds the practice of precepts belonging to the practitioners
of saintly status that should not be violated or altered but kept free from
immoral contamination, he equips himself well with the foregoing principles that the learned elders praise and realizes the state of mental concentration. Sixth, the bhikṣu realizes the deliverance of those of saintly
status, terminates the state of suffering together with others (i.e., equally),
and continues to adhere to right views and various practices of austerity.
These principles are worthy of respect and reverence, and they create
harmony within the sangha, without any dispute or controversy, enabling
one to act independently without the admixture of confusion.
(2) What is the sixfold item to be practiced? It means the six kinds
of mindfulness: being mindful of Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha, and
mindfulness of the precepts, charity, and heavenly beings.
(3) What is the sixfold item to be comprehensively understood? It
means the six internal bases of cognition: the sense faculties of seeing,
hearing, smell, taste, and touch, and the mental faculty of consciousness.
(4) What are the sixfold items to be abandoned? It means the six
kinds of craving desire that are respectively directed to the external
bases of cognition, i.e., the objects of the faculties: craving for the
object of seeing, craving for the object of hearing, craving for the object
of smell, craving for the object of taste, craving for the object of touch,
and craving for the mental object.
(5) What is the sixfold item that is conducive to declining into perversity and ignorance? It means the six kinds of disrespect: disrespect
toward the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha; and disrespect toward the
precepts, concentration, and one’s parents.
(6) What is the sixfold item that is conducive to increasing distinction? It means the six kinds of respect: respect for Buddha, Dharma,
and Sangha; respect for the precepts and concentration, and respect
for one’s parents.
(7) What is the sixfold item that is difﬁcult to fathom or penetrate?
It means the six kinds of highest excellence: highest philosophical

317

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

thought, highest comprehension in listening to discourses, greatest
material attainment, highest discipline and service, and greatest mindfulness and recollection.
(8) What is the sixfold item to be brought into existence? It means
the six kinds of long life. Fiirst, a bhikṣu concentrates his mind to abide
in the state of equanimity, neither distressed nor delighted when with
his visual faculty he sees its object, form; likewise, when in a state of
equanimity, he hears with his auditory faculty its object, sound; [and
likewise] when with his olfactory faculty he smells its object, odor,
his gustatory faculty tastes its object, taste; his bodily faculty touches
its object, tactile contact; and when his mental faculty conceives its
object, an idea or conception—[in all cases] he concentrates his mind
to abide in the state of equanimity, neither distressed nor delighted.
(9) What is the sixfold item to be known as supernormal power? It
means the six essential elements of liberation. Suppose a bhikṣu says,
“I have practiced the immeasurable mind of friendly love for the sake
of liberation yet I still experience malice.” Other bhikṣus warn him, “You
shuld not say this. Your statement constitutes slander against the Tathāgata,
because the Tathāgata has not taught us the way you have experienced.
It is utterly impossible that when he teaches us to learn the practice of
the mind of friendly love as an essential element for liberation he also
causes us to experience a malicious thought. According to the Buddha,
when one eradicates the mind of malice, only then is he ready to acquire
the mind of benevolence.” The remaining ﬁve essential elements of liberation are found in similar responses when a bhikṣu says “I have practiced
the immeasurable mind of compassion for the sake of liberation yet I
still experience jealousy,” “I have practiced the immeasurable mind of
sympathetic joy for the sake of liberation yet I still experience anxiety,”
“I have practiced the immeasurable mind of equanimity for the sake of
liberation yet I still experience attraction and aversion,” “I have practiced
the mind of nonself yet I still experience doubt,” and “I have practiced
the concentration of signlessness (i.e., nonapplication of symbols) for
the sake of liberation yet I still experience multiple thoughts arising due
to the application of symbols.”

54b

318

Sutra 10: Ten Progressively Classiﬁed Doctrines

(10) What is the sixfold item to be directly experienced by oneself?
It means the six kinds of supernormal powers: supernormal psychic
power, supernormal hearing, the supernormal power of knowing the
minds of others, the supernormal power of recollecting and knowing
one’s past lives, supernormal vision, and the supernormal power of
eradicating deﬁlements.
The foregoing group comprises sixty doctrinal items. Having realized
them by himself, the Tathāgata taught us these doctrinal items with
equal emphasis as they really are and not otherwise.
Again there is a seventh group of ten: (1) the sevenfold doctrinal
item that is very useful for religious salvation, (2) the sevenfold doctrinal
item that should be practiced, (3) the sevenfold doctrinal item that should
be comprehensively understood, (4) the sevenfold doctrinal item that
should be abandoned, (5) the sevenfold doctrinal item that is conducive
to declining into perversity and ignorance, (6) the sevenfold doctrinal
item that is conducive to increasing distinction, (7) the sevenfold doctrinal
item that is difﬁcult to fathom or penetrate, (8) the sevenfold doctrinal
item that should be brought into existence, (9) the sevenfold doctrinal
item that should be known as supernormal power, and (10) the sevenfold
doctrinal item that should be directly experienced by oneself.
(1) What is the sevenfold item that is very useful for religious salvation? It means the seven kinds of possessions (or wealth, treasure,
etc.): ﬁrst, possessing faith; second, possessing precepts; third, possessing a sense of shame in self-reﬂection; fourth, possessing shame
before others; ﬁfth, possessing learning; sixth, possessing charity; and
seventh, possessing insight.
(2) What is the sevenfold item to be practiced? It means the seven
auxiliary disciplines of enlightenment. A bhikṣu practices the discipline
of mindfulness on the basis of nondesire, quiescence, and distancing
[himself from worldly matters]. In like manner, he practices the discipline of discernment of the psychophysical elements, the discipline
of effort, the discipline of delight [in the practice], the discipline of
freedom from physical and mental disturbances; the discipline of the
practice of concentration; and the discipline of the mind of equanimity

319

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

on the basis of nondesire, quiescence, and distancing [oneself from
worldly matters].
(3) What is the sevenfold item to be comprehensively understood?
It means the seven places where consciousness abides. Sentient beings
that possess different bodies and different ideations are humans and
heavenly beings. This is the initial abode of consciousness. When some
sentient beings possess individual bodies but one and the same ideation,
this is when the god Brahmā was initially born in Ābhāsvara Heaven,
where communication is accomplished by transmitted light instead of
sound. This is the second abode of consciousness. When sentient beings
possess one and the same body but different ideations, this is the aforementioned Ābhāsvara Heaven. This is the third abode of consciousness.
When some sentient beings possess one and the same body and ideation,
this is Śubhakṛtsna Heaven, the fourth abode of consciousness. When
some sentient beings reside in the sphere of inﬁnite space, this is the
ﬁfth abode of consciousness. When some sentient beings reside in the
sphere of inﬁnite consciousness, this is the sixth abode of consciousness.
When some [sentient beings] reside in the sphere of nothingness or
nonutility, this is the seventh abode of consciousness.
(4) What is the sevenfold item to be abandoned? It means the seven
kinds of deﬁlement: craving for sexual desire, craving for existence,
wrong view, self-conceit, malice, ignorance, and doubt.
(5) What is the sevenfold item that is conducive to declining into
perversity and ignorance? It means the seven detrimental conditions
counter to the practice of religion: the absence of faith, shamelessness
in self-reﬂection, shamelessness before others, having little learning,
lacking zeal, forgetfulness, and lacking insight.
(6) What is the sevenfold item that is conducive to increasing distinction? It means the seven good conditions for the practice of religion:
a bhikṣu possesses faith, a sense of of shame in self-reﬂection, and a
sense of shame before others; he is well learned, endowed with effort
and zeal, possesses a well-sustained memory, and is full of insight.
(7) What is the sevenfold item that is difﬁcult to fathom or penetrate?
It means the seven qualities of a good person: a bhikṣu is endowed
with good purpose, with good teachings, with good judgment as to

54c

320

Sutra 10: Ten Progressively Classiﬁed Doctrines

proper timing, with good judgment as to proper degrees of satisfaction,
with a good capacity of self-restraint, with good organizational skill
to assemble others, and with good judgment about human character.
(8) What is the sevenfold item to be brought into existence? It means
the seven kinds of ideation or thought: the thought of the impurity of
the human body, the thought of food as distasteful, the thought that
there is nothing that can be enjoyed in the world, the thought of death,
the thought of impermanence, the thought of suffering due to impermanence, and the thought of suffering due to nonself.
(9) What is the sevenfold item to be known as supernormal power?
It means the seven kinds of effort: a bhikṣu exerts himself to practice
precepts, to exhaust avarice in preparation for the discipline of charity,
to break any wrong view in preparation for right view, to learn as much
as he can, to maintain the discipline of endeavor, to uphold right mindfulness, and to practice meditation and concentration.
(10) What is the sevenfold item to be directly experienced by oneself? It means the seven kinds of power that exhaust the inﬂuence of
deﬁlement. A bhikṣu who has terminated the inﬂuence of deﬁlement
sees all the elements of existence as suffering, originated from causal
concatenation, and which can be brought to cessation as they really
are in reference to the essential method of liberation. He sees desires
as a ﬁery pit or as a weapon, like a knife or sword. Though he knows
the arising of desire and sees it, he is not attached to it nor does he
abide in it. The bhikṣu who has terminated the inﬂuence of deﬁlement
practices introspection of the causal chain in the order of cessation as
well as in the order of origination, and thus understands the origin of
desire and its cessation as it really is. The worldly vices of avarice and
parsimony and evil and bad psychophysical elements—these do not
exercise any inﬂuence on his existence nor do they arise in his existence.
He practices the four disciplines of applying mental awareness, and is
thus engaged with many items to be practiced and carried out. He is
also engaged in cultivating the ﬁve spiritual faculties and their correlative forces and practicing the seven auxiliary disciplines of enlightenment as well as the eightfold noble path of cessation.

321

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

The foregoing group comprises seventy doctrinal items. Having
realized them by himself, the Tathāgata has taught us these doctrinal
items with equal emphasis as they really are and not otherwise.
Again there is an eighth group of ten: (1) the eightfold doctrinal
item that is very useful for religious salvation, (2) the eightfold item
that should be practiced, (3) the eightfold item that should be comprehensively understood, (4) the eightfold item that should be abandoned,
(5) the eightfold item that is conducive to declining into perversity and
ignorance, (6) the eightfold doctrinal item that is conducive to increasing
distinction, (7) the eightfold doctrinal item that is difﬁcult to fathom
or penetrate, (8) the eightfold doctrinal item that is to be brought into
existence, (9) the eightfold doctrinal item that is to be known as supernormal power, and (10) the eightfold doctrinal item that is to be directly
experienced by oneself.
(1) What is the eightfold item that is very useful for religious salvation? It means the eight kinds of causal factors that enable one to
acquire knowledge when the practice of austerity has not been fully
perfected, and to broaden and strengthen it when the practice of austerity
has been perfected. What are these eight items? First, when a bhikṣu
abides in reliance on the World-honored One, his elder teacher, or a
practitioner of austerity endowed with knowledge, he becomes aware
of a sense of shame in his self-reﬂection and shame before his teacher,
and he cherishes a sense of adoration and reverence toward the teacher.
This is the ﬁrst kind of causal factor that enables a bhikṣu to acquire
knowledge when the practice of austerity has not yet been fully perfected, and to broaden and strengthen it when the practice of austerity
has been perfected. Second, a bhikṣu who abides in reliance on the
World-honored One closely questions him whenever possible, asking,
“What is the meaning of this doctrine, sir?” and “What is intended by
it, sir?” At that time, any honorable senior [monk] should explain the
profound meaning of each doctrine referred to or asked about for the
sake of the junior [monk]. This is the second kind of causal factor. Third,
having thus listened to the meaning of the doctrine, the junior bhikṣu
realizes well-established settlement within his body and mind. This is

322

Sutra 10: Ten Progressively Classiﬁed Doctrines

the third causal factor. Fourth, having thus realized well-established
settlement within his body and mind, the junior bhikṣu does not engage
in nonreligious or trivial speech and when he joins his colleagues he
either talks about the doctrine or invites others to talk about it; otherwise,
he does not forsake the discipline of noble silence. This is the fourth
causal factor. Fifth, he attends many discourses for learning, widens
his knowledge, and upholds it without forgetting it. He intuits the depth
of the various doctrines, the various degrees of higher, middle, and
lower goods, the truth of meanings and essences, and, endowed with
the practice of austerity, he abides ﬁrmly unswayed in his mind upon
reviewing what he has learned. This is the ﬁfth causal factor. Sixth,
engaged in the practice of terminating evil while increasing good without slackening, he strives hard, sustains the doctrine, and does not forsake it. This is the sixth causal factor. Seventh, he comes to acquire
the insight of origin and cessation, know the goal of saintly realization,
and thus reaches the end of suffering. This is the seventh causal factor.
Eighth, he analytically intuits the ﬁve aggregates of existence as to
their origination and cessation by specifying, “This is the aggregate
of material form, its causal context, and its cessation. This is the aggregate of feeling (sensation), that of ideation, that of dispositional forces,
that of consciousness, the causal context of consciousness, and the cessation of it.” This is the eighth causal factor that enables a bhikṣu to
acquire knowledge when the practice of austerity has not yet been fully
perfected, and to broaden and strengthen it when the practice of austerity
has been perfected.
(2) What is the eightfold item to be practiced? It means the noble
eightfold path: right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration.
(3) What is the eightfold item to be comprehensively understood?
It means the eight concerns of the secular world: gain and loss, disgrace
and fame, praise and blame, and suffering and happiness.
(4) What is the eightfold item to be abandoned? It means the eight
kinds of wrong conduct [counter to the eightfold noble path]: wrong
view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood,
wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, and wrong concentration.

323

55a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

(5) What is the eightfold item that is conducive to declining into
perversity and ignorance? It means the eight kinds of indolence. What
are the eight items of indolence? First, if a bhikṣu does not obtain alms
and thinks to himself, “Today I went down to the village for alms but
could not get any. Because of this I am so exhausted that I cannot
sustain myself to conduct the practice of meditation and meditative
walking. Now I should lie down and rest.” This inactive bhikṣu at once
lies down and does not exert himself to acquire what he has not
acquired, realize what he has not realized, and experience what he has
not experienced directly by himself. This is the ﬁrst kind of indolence.
Second, the inactive bhikṣu, having obtained alms and satisﬁed with
[the meal], thinks to himself, “This morning I went down to the village
and received more [food than was] than necessary. Since I have eaten
too much, I feel too dull in my body and cannot sustain myself in the
conduct of the practice of meditation and meditative walking. Now I
should lie down and take a short rest.” The inactive bhikṣu at once lies
down and does not exert himself to acquire what he has not acquired,
realize what he has not realized, and experience what he has not experienced directly by himself. Third, when the inactive bhikṣu does a
little work he thinks to himself, “Because I have handled this small
matter today I am extremely tired and cannot sustain myself to conduct
the practice of meditation and meditative walking. Now I should lie
down and take a short rest.” The inactive bhikṣu at once lies down for
a rest. Fourth, if the inactive bhikṣu, wishing to do some minor work,
thinks to himself, “Tomorrow, I have to deal with such-and-such thing
and there will necessarily be some physical exertion. I should not
engage now in practicing meditation and meditative walking but instead
get enough rest beforehand for tomorrow’s [activity].” The inactive
bhikṣu at once lies down for a rest. Fifth, when the inactive bhikṣu goes
out for an errand in the morning he thinks to himself, “Since I went
out this morning for the errand I am extremely tired and cannot sustain
myself to practice meditation and meditative walking. Now I should
lie down and rest.” The inactive bhikṣu at once lies down for a rest.
Sixth, when the inactive bhikṣu wishes to go out for some minor errand
he thinks to himself, “Since I must go out for an errand tomorrow I

324

Sutra 10: Ten Progressively Classiﬁed Doctrines

will necessarily be exhausted then. I cannot now practice meditation
and meditative walking but should instead take enough rest beforehand
for tomorrow.” The inactive bhikṣu at once lies down and [thus, just
as in the preceding cases,] he does not exert himself to acquire what
he has not acquired, realize what he has not realized, and experience
what he has not experienced directly by himself. This is the sixth kind
of indolence. Seventh, again, when such an inactive bhikṣu suffers
from a minor illness he thinks to himself, “Since I am extremely ill
and feel unwell and feeble I cannot sustain myself to practice meditation
and meditative walking. I must rest [instead].” The inactive bhikṣu
continues to lie around idly and does not exert himself to acquire what
he has not acquired, realize what he has not realized, and experience
what he has not experienced directly by himself. Eighth, when the
inactive bhikṣu recovers from his minor illness but again thinks to himself, “I was ill and it has not been long since I recovered from it. Since
I am still feeble I cannot sustain myself to practice meditation and
meditative walking and should lay down to rest.” He at once lies down
and does not exert himself to acquire what he has not acquired, realize
what he has not realized, and experience what he has not experienced
directly by himself.
(6) What is the eightfold item that is conducive to increasing distinction? It means the eight kinds of indefatigable effort. What are the
eight kinds of indefatigable effort? First, if a bhikṣu does not obtain
alms and thinks to himself, “I am physically slight and do not need
much sleep. I should exert myself in the practice of meditation and meditative walking so as to acquire what I have not acquired, realize what
I have not realized, and experience what I have not yet experienced
directly by myself.” Thus he at once continues to exert himself. He is
regarded as a bhikṣu who is endowed with the virtue of effort. Second,
having obtained alms enough to sustain himself, the aspiring bhikṣu
thinks to himself, “Now I went into the village, obtained enough alms,
and feel vigorous in my mental and physical energies. I should exert
myself in the practice of meditation and meditative walking so as to
acquire what I have not acquired, realize what I have not realized, and
experience what I have not yet experienced directly by myself.” Here

325

55b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

the bhikṣu at once continues to exert himself. Third, when the aspiring
bhikṣu does a little work and thinks to himself, “Since I have engaged
in some work and could not conduct my regular practice today, I should
now exert myself in the practice of meditation and meditative walking
so as to acquire what I have not acquired, realize what I have not realized, and experience what I have not yet experienced directly by
myself.” Here the bhikṣu at once continues to exert himself. Fourth, if
the aspiring bhikṣu wants to do some work [other than his daily practice]
he thinks to himself, “Tomorrow I have to deal with such-and-such
thing, and so I am not going to be able to conduct my regular practice.
I should now exert myself in the practice of meditation and meditative
walking so as to acquire what I have not acquired, realize what I have
not realized, and experience what I have not yet experienced directly
by myself.” Here he exerts himself. Fifth, when the aspiring bhikṣu
makes an excursion he thinks to himself, “Since I went out this morning
for an errand and could not conduct my regular practice, I should now
exert myself in the practice of meditation and meditative walking so
as to acquire what I have not acquired, realize what I have not realized,
and experience what I have not yet experienced directly by myself.”
Here he continues to exert himself. Sixth, when the aspiring bhikṣu
wants to make an excursion, he thinks to himself, “Since I have to go
out for an errand tomorrow I will miss my regular practice. I should
now exert myself in the practice of meditation and meditative walking
so as to acquire what I have not acquired, realize what I have not realized, and experience what I have not yet experienced directly by
myself.” Seventh, when the aspiring bhikṣu suffers from an illness he
thinks to himself, “Since I am extremely unwell and my life might
come to an end, I should now exert myself in the practice of meditation
and meditative walking so as to acquire what I have not acquired,
realize what I have not realized, and experience what I have not yet
experienced directly by myself.” Eighth, when the aspiring bhikṣu
recovers from the illness and has made a temporary recovery he thinks
to himself, “Because I was ill I was obliged to forsake my regular
practice a little in the beginning but now increasingly more during
my illness. I should now exert myself in the practice of meditation

55c

326

Sutra 10: Ten Progressively Classiﬁed Doctrines

and meditative walking so as to acquire what I have not acquired,
realize what I have not realized, and experience what I have not yet
experienced directly by myself.” Here he rallies to exert himself in the
practice of meditation and meditative walking. These are the eight
kinds of indefatigable exertion.
(7) What is the eightfold item that is difﬁcult to fathom or penetrate?
It means the eight kinds of places where the practice of austerity is
obstructed. What are these eight places? First, despite the fact that the
Tathāgata, who has realized the state of arhatship, has appeared in this
world, exhorting the supreme Dharma, quiescent and transcendent,
and proceeded on the path of enlightenment, some sentient beings are
born in the world of hells. This is the ﬁrst place where the practice of
austerity is obstructed. Second, despite the fact that the Tathāgata, who
has realized the state of arhatship, has appeared in this world, exhorting
the supreme Dharma, quiescent and transcendent, and proceeded on
the path of enlightenment, some sentient beings are born among animals;
third, among hungry ghosts (pretas); fourth, among the gods of extraordinary longevity; and ﬁfth, among the nonreligious in the remote frontier
regions where there are no believers. These are places where the practice
of austerity is obstructed. Sixth, despite the fact that the Tathāgata,
who has realized the state of arhatship, has appeared in this world,
exhorting the supreme Dharma, quiescent and transcendent, and proceeded on the path of enlightenment, some people who are born in the
central country (i.e., India) still adhere to wrong views and perverted
thoughts, and thus, having done evil deeds, they are bound to fall into
hell. This is the place where the practice of austerity is obstructed. Seventh, despite the fact that the Tathāgata, who has realized the state of
arhatship, has appeared in this world, exhorting the supreme Dharma,
quiescent and transcendent, and proceeded on the path of enlightenment,
some people who are born in the middle country (i.e., China) are deaf,
blind, and dumb and cannot listen to the exhortation of the Dharma,
nor can they engage in the practice of austerity. This is the seventh
place where the practice of austerity is obstructed. Eighth, when the
Tathāgata, who has realized the state of arhatship, has neither appeared
in this world nor does he exhort the supreme Dharma, quiescent and

327

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

transcendent, nor does he proceed on the path of enlightenment, some
people are born in the middle country and are perfectly endowed with
various faculties, and are thus capable of receiving the noble teaching.
But because they do not encounter the Buddha they have lost the opportunity to be introduced to the practice of austerity. This is the eighth
place where the practice of austerity is obstructed.
(8) What is the eightfold item to be brought into existence? It means
the eight kinds of established mind upheld by great persons. The [right]
path consists of having less desire, whereas greater desire means the
wrong path. The [right] path consists of being content with little,
whereas insatiable need is the wrong path. The [right] path consists of
an environment of leisurely quietude, whereas interaction with a multitude is the wrong path. The [right] path consists of self-restraint,
whereas a [frivolous] attitude of joking and laughing is the wrong path.
The [right] path consists of indefatigable effort, whereas idle slackening
is the wrong path. The [right] path consists of concentration and mindfulness, whereas forgetfulness is the wrong path. The [right] path consists of the state of concentration, whereas a state of scattered confusion
is the wrong path. The [right] path consists of wisdom or insight,
whereas delusion or mental dullness is the wrong path.
(9) What is the eightfold item to be known as supernormal power?
It means the eight kinds of mastery over the senses. An inner ideation
of form perceives a part of external material form, always judging it
and being reminded of it either as good or ugly. This is the ﬁrst sense
base over which one should have mastery. Second, an inner ideation
of form perceives the immeasurably [vast number of ] external material
forms, always judging them and reminded of them as either good or
ugly. This is the second sense base [over which one should have] mastery. Third, an inner immaterial ideation in possession of a consciousness
perceives a part of external material form, always judging it and
reminded of it either as good or ugly. This is the third sense base [over
which one should have] mastery. Fourth, an inner immaterial ideation
(e.g., consciousness) perceives the immeasurably [vast umbers of]
external material forms, always judging them and reminded of them
either as good or ugly. This is the fourth sense base [over which one

56a

328

Sutra 10: Ten Progressively Classiﬁed Doctrines

should have] mastery. Fifth, an inner immaterial ideation perceives the
blue color of an external material form, for instance, like perceiving a
blue lotus ﬂower with blue color, blue luminescence, and bluish effect,
or like perceiving a blue Vārāṇasī garment with pure blue color, blue
luminescence, and bluish effect; and, having formulated an ideation
like this, always judges it and is reminded of it. This is the ﬁfth sense
base [over which one should have] mastery. Sixth, an inner immaterial
ideation perceives the yellow color of an external material form, for
instance, like perceiving a yellow lotus ﬂower with yellow color, yellow
luminescence, and yellowish effect, or perceiving a yellow Vārāṇasī
garment with pure yellow color, yellow luminescence, and yellowish
effect; and, having always judged it and been reminded of it, formulates
an ideation like this. [This is the sixth sense base over which one should
have mastery.] Seventh, an inner immaterial ideation perceives the red
color of an external material form, for instance, like perceiving a red
lotus ﬂower with red color, red luminescence, and reddish effect, or
perceiving a red Vārāṇasī garment with pure red color, red luminescence,
and reddish effect; and, having always judged it and been reminded of
it, formulates an ideation like this. This is the seventh sense base [over
which one should have] mastery. Eighth, an inner immaterial ideation
perceives the white color of an external material form, for instance,
like perceiving a white lotus ﬂower with white color, white luminescence, and whitish effect, or perceiving a white Vārāṇasī garment with
pure white, white luminescence, and whitish effect; and, having always
judged it and been reminded of it, formulates an ideation like this. This
is the eighth sense base [over which one should have] mastery.
(10) What is the eightfold item to be directly experienced by oneself?
It means the eight kinds of liberation. First, the liberation that is realized
when one, with an internal ideation of form, perceives external forms;
second, the liberation that is realized when one, without any internal
ideation of form, perceives external forms; third, the liberation that is
realized when one thus has terminated all deﬁlements; fourth, the liberation that is realized when one, having transcended all ideations of
form and annihilated sensory reaction, abides in the ﬁrst formless state
of concentration, the sphere of inﬁnite space; ﬁfth, the liberation that

329

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

is realized when one, having transcended the sphere of inﬁnite space,
abides in the sphere of inﬁnite consciousness; sixth, the liberation that
is realized when one, transcending the previous sphere, abides in the
sphere of nothingness or nonutility; seventh, the liberation that is realized when one, having transcended the previous sphere, abides in the
sphere of neither ideation nor nonideation; and eighth, the liberation
that is realized when one, having transcending this sphere, abides in
the ﬁnal state of cessation transcendent from senses and ideation, equivalent to the third saintly state of anāgāmin (nonreturner).
O bhikṣus, the foregoing group comprises eighty doctrinal items.
Having realized them by himself, the Tathāgata has taught us these doctrinal items with equal emphasis as they really are and not otherwise.
Again there is the ninth group of ten: the ninefold doctrinal item
that is very useful for religious salvation, the ninefold doctrinal item
that should be practiced, the ninefold item that should be comprehensively understood, the ninefold doctrinal item that should be abandoned,
the ninefold item that is conducive to declining into perversity and
ignorance, the ninefold doctrinal item that is conducive to increasing
distinction, the ninefold doctrinal item that is difﬁcult to fathom or
penetrate, the ninefold doctrinal item that should be brought into existence, the ninefold doctrinal item that should be known as supernormal
power, and the ninefold doctrinal item that should be directly experienced by oneself.
(1) What is the ninefold item that is very useful for religious salvation? It means the nine qualities for which to strive: moral purity in
upholding precepts, purity of mind, purity of views, purity of overcoming doubt, purity of analytical excellence, knowing the right path
from wrong ones, purity of knowing the method for reaching the goal,
purity of the absence of desire, and purity of liberation.
(2) What is the ninefold item to be practiced? It means the nine
roots of proper mental attention: delight, devotion, joy, comfort,
concentration, absolute knowledge, eradication [of deﬁlement], equanimity or nondifferentiation, absence of desire, and liberation.
(3) What is the ninefold item to be comprehensively understood?
It means the nine places of sentient beings. When sentient beings are

330

Sutra 10: Ten Progressively Classiﬁed Doctrines

in possession of different bodies and different ideations, these are
humans and heavenly beings. This is the ﬁrst abode of sentient beings;
second, when some sentient beings possess different bodies but one
and the same ideation, this is the time when the god Brahmā was initially
born in Ābhāsvara Heaven, where communication is accomplished by
transmitted light instead of sound. This is the second abode of sentient
beings. Third, when some sentient beings possess one and the same
body but different ideations, this is the aforementioned Ābhāsvara
Heaven. This is the third abode of sentient beings. Fourth, when some
sentient beings possess one and the same body and ideation, this is
Śubhakṛtsna Heaven. This is the fourth abode of sentient beings. Fifth,
again when some sentient beings reside in the sphere where one has
neither ideation nor external awareness, this is Āsaṃjñika Heaven.
This is the ﬁfth abode of sentient beings. Sixth, when some sentient
beings reside in the sphere of inﬁnite space, this is the sixth abode of
sentient beings. Seventh, when some sentient beings reside in the sphere
of inﬁnite consciousness, this is the seventh abode of sentient beings.
Eighth, when some sentient beings reside in the sphere of nothingness
or nonutility, this is the eighth abode of sentient beings. Ninth, when
some sentient beings reside in the sphere of neither ideation nor nonideation, this is the ninth abode of sentient beings.
(4) What is the ninefold item to be abandoned? It means the nine
roots of craving. First, there is craving; second, because of craving the
act of seeking arises; third, because of seeking a gain arises; fourth,
because of gain there arises a thought of its utility; ﬁfth, because of
the thought of utility there arises desire; sixth, because of desire strong
attachment arises; seventh, because of attachment an act of grasping
arises; eighth, because of grasping a parsimonious act arises; and ninth,
because of parsimony an act of guarding arises.
(5) What is the ninefold item that is conducive to declining into perversity and ignorance? It means the nine kinds of hatred. First, hatred
arises when someone thinks about another person, “He abused me in
the past.” Second, hatred arises when he thinks, “He abuses me now.”
Third, hatred arises when he thinks, “He will surely abuse me in the
future.” Fourth, a person again hates someone when he thinks, “He

331

56b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

abused someone I love.” Fifth, hatred arises when he thinks, “He is
now abusing someone I love.” Seventh, hatred arises when he thinks,
“He will surely abuse someone I love in the future.” Seventh, a person
again hates someone when he thinks, “He associated with someone
whom I hate.” Eighth, hatred arises when he thinks, “He is now associating with someone whom I hate.” Ninth, hatred arsises when he
thinks, “He will associate with someone whom I hate in the future.”
(6) What is the ninefold item that is conducive to increasing distinction? It means the nine kinds of subduing hatred. First, a person
subdues his hatred toward someone, thinking, “This person abused me
in the past but what beneﬁt is there in my holding hatred against him?
I have already subdued my hatred.” Second, he thinks, “Now I am subduing my hatred.” Third, he thinks, “I will subdue my hatred in the
future.” Fourth, a person subdues his hatred toward someone, thinking,
“This person abused someone I love but what beneﬁt is there in my
holding hatred against him? I have already subdued my hatred.” Fifth,
he thinks, “Now I am subduing my hatred.” Sixth, he thinks, “I will
certainly subdue my hatred in the future.” Seventh, a person subdues
his hatred toward someone, thinking, “Though this person has
befriended someone I hate, what beneﬁt is there in holding hatred
against him? I have already subdued my hatred.” Eighth, he also thinks,
“Now I am subduing my hatred.” Ninth, he also thinks, “I will subdue
my hatred in the future.”
(7) What is the ninefold item that is difﬁcult to fathom or penetrate?
It means nine kinds of the practice of austerity. [First, if a bhikṣu does
not have sincere faith he is not regarded as having accomplished the
practice of austerity. When he acquires sincere faith he will be endowed
with the ﬁrst step of the practice of austerity.33 Second, if a bhikṣu has
sincere faith but not moral precepts he is not regarded as having accomplished the practice of austerity. When he acquires adherence to the
precepts in addition to faith, he will be endowed with the practice of
austerity. Third, if a bhikṣu has sincere faith and adheres to the moral
precepts but is not well learned, he is not regarded as having accomplished the practice of austerity. When he is well learned in addition
to having sincere faith and [upholding] moral precepts, he will be

332

Sutra 10: Ten Progressively Classiﬁed Doctrines

endowed with the practice of austerity. Fourth, if a bhikṣu is endowed
with sincere faith, moral precepts, and learnedness but has little experience with preaching, he is not regarded as having accomplished the
practice of austerity. When he is well experienced with preaching in
addition to the preceding excellences he will be endowed with the practice of austerity. Fifth, if [a bhikṣu] is well endowed with sincere faith,
moral precepts, learnedness, and [skilled in] doctrinal preaching but
is not capable of supporting the sangha, he is not regarded as having
accomplished the practice of austerity. When he becomes capable of
supporting the sangha in addition to the preceding excellences, he will
be endowed with the practice of austerity. Sixth, if a bhikṣu is endowed
with sincere faith, moral precepts, learnedness, [skilled in preaching,]
and [capable of] supporting the sangha but is not capable of discoursing
on the doctrines before the assembly of the bhikṣus, he is not regarded
as having accomplished the practice of austerity. When he becomes
capable of discoursing on the doctrines before the assembly of the
bhikṣus in addition to the preceding excellences, he will be endowed
with the practice of austerity. Seventh, if a bhikṣu is endowed with sincere faith, moral precepts, learnedness, [skill in preaching, and is
capable of] supporting the sangha and [discoursing] on the doctrines
before the assembly of bhikṣus but has not acquired freedom with the
four levels of meditative concentration, he is not regarded as having
accomplished the practice of austerity. When he acquires the excellence
of freedom with the four levels of meditative concentration in addition
to the preceding excellences, he will be endowed with the practice of
austerity. Eighth, if a bhikṣu is endowed with sincere faith, moral precepts,
learnedness, [skill in preaching, is capable of] supporting the sangha and
discoursing on doctrines before the assembly of bhikṣus, and [has attained]
freedom with the four levels of meditative concentration but has not
attained freedom with the eight levels of liberation, traversing them in
successive order as well as returning in reverse order, he is not regarded
as having accomplished the practice of austerity. When he acquires the
excellence of freedom with the eight kinds of liberation in addition to
the preceding excellences he will be endowed with the practice of austerity. Ninth, if a bhikṣu is endowed with sincere faith, moral precepts,

333

56c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

learnedness, [and skill in preaching; is capable of] supporting the sangha
and discoursing on doctrines before the assembly of bhikṣus, and has
attained freedom in the four levels of meditative concentration and
freedom in the eight levels of liberation, traversing them in successive
order as well as returning in reverse order, but has not accomplished
ultimate realization, he is not regarded as having accomplished the
practice of austerity, namely: “terminating the inﬂuences of deﬁlement
and realizing freedom from worldly inﬂuences, realizing the liberation
of the mind and liberation through analytical insight, directly experiencing in one’s present life that the cause of birth and death has been
exhausted, the practice of austerity has been accomplished, what should
be done [for religious salvation] has thus been accomplished, and that
there will be no more birth to him again.” When in addition to the preceding excellences of being endowed with sincere faith, moral precepts,
learnedness, [skill in preaching,] supporting the sangha, discoursing
on doctrines before the assembly of bhikṣus, freedom in the four levels
of meditative concentration, and freedom in the eight levels of liberation,
traversing them in successive order as well as returning in reverse
order, he acquires ultimate realization, namely: “terminating the inﬂuences of deﬁlement and realizing freedom from worldly inﬂuences,
realizing the liberation of the mind, liberation through the analytical
insight, having directly experienced in the present life that the cause
of birth and death have been exhausted, the practice of austerity has
been accomplished, what should be done [for religious salvation] has
been accomplished, and will not again be reborn,” he will be endowed
with the practice of austerity thus perfected.
(8) What is the ninefold item to be brought into existence? It means
the nine kinds of ideation or thought: ﬁrst, the thought of the impurity
of the human body; second, the thought of food as distasteful; third,
the thought that there is nothing that can be enjoyed in the world; fourth,
the thought of death; ﬁfth, the thought of impermanence; sixth, the
thought of suffering due to impermanence; seventh, the thought of suffering due to nonself; eighth, the thought of the cessation of suffering;
and ninth, the thought of freedom from desire.

334

Sutra 10: Ten Progressively Classiﬁed Doctrines

(9) What is the ninefold item to be known as supernormal power?
It means the nine kinds of causal interaction to be intuited as manifold:
ﬁrst, because the causal (external) domain is manifold the (internal)
effectual domain that arises in correspondence with the former is manifold (different); second, because of these manifold external and internal
domains there arises the manifold domain of contacts between the
senses and objects; third, because of this manifold contact there arise
manifold sense perceptions; fourth, because of these manifold sensations
(or feelings) there arise manifold ideations; ﬁfth, because of these manifold ideations there arise manifold conceptions;34 sixth, because of
manifold conceptions there arise manifold desires; seventh, because
of manifold desires there arise manifold passions;35 eighth, because of
manifold passions there arise manifold yearning or seeking; ninth,
because of manifold yearning there arise manifold gains.36
(10) What is the ninefold item to be directly experienced oneself?
It means the nine stages of the successive process of cessation. First,
when a bhikṣu enters the ﬁrst meditative absorption there ceases to be
the ideation of desire.37 Second, in the second meditative state of absorption, the mental activity of thinking and deliberation ceases. Third, in
the third meditative state of absorption the awareness of delight ceases.
Fourth, in the fourth meditative state of absorption the signs of inhalation
or exhalation cease. Fifth, in the sphere of inﬁnite space, the ﬁrst formless state of concentration, the ideation of external form ceases. Sixth,
in the sphere of inﬁnite consciousness the ideation of empty space
ceases. Seventh in the sphere of nothingness or nonutility the ideation
of consciousness ceases. Eighth, in the sphere of neither ideation nor
nonideation the ideation of nonutility or nothingness ceases. Ninth, in
the ﬁnal state of cessation, in which the senses and ideation equivalent
to third saintly state of anāgāmin have been transcended, both ideation
and sensation cease.
O bhikṣus, the foregoing group comprises eighty doctrinal items.
Having realized them by himself, the Tathāgata has taught us these
doctrinal items with equal emphasis as they really are and not otherwise.
Again there is a tenth group of ten doctrinal items: the tenfold doctrinal item that is very useful for religious salvation, the tenfold doctrinal

335

57a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

item to be practiced, the tenfold doctrinal item that should be comprehensively understood, the tenfold doctrinal item that should be
abandoned, the tenfold doctrinal item that is conducive to declining
into perversity and ignorance, the tenfold doctrinal item that is conducive to increasing distinction, the tenfold doctrinal item that is difﬁcult
to fathom or penetrate, the tenfold doctrinal item that should be brought
into existence, the tenfold doctrinal item that should be known as supernormal power, and the tenfold doctrinal item that should be directly
experienced by oneself.
(1) What is the tenfold item that is very useful for religious salvation? It means the ten kinds of refuge for religious salvation. First, a
bhikṣu is endowed with the two hundred and ﬁfty disciplines as well
as with digniﬁed deportment, is careful not to commit even a minor
offense, and trains in all the disciplines with meticulous evenness, having no detrimental imbalance. Second, he befriends good associates.
Third, he adequately uses words, neither in excess nor insufﬁciently,
and is able to understand meanings beyond words. Fourth, he willingly
seeks opportunities to listen to discourses on the Dharma and liberally
disseminates whatever doctrine he has thereby received to others without
hesitation. Fifth, he goes out to visit various practitioners of austerity,
openhandedly offers his assistance to help them, accomplishes whatever
is difﬁcult to accomplish, and also teaches others how to do the same.
Sixth, he attends as many lectures as possible to acquire knowledge
and retains whatever he has learned in memory without losing anything
in forgetfulness. Seventh, he exerts himself to eradicate unfavorable
mental obstacles and promote favorable mental elements. Eighth, with
self-motivation he always focuses his mind with vigilant mindfulness
on essentially good conduct as if he has visualized it before his own
eyes. Ninth, he realizes transcendental insight and knowledge, intuitively
perceives the origination and cessation of the psychophysical elements,
and, on the basis of the disciplines upheld by wise and saintly disciples,
he eradicates the root of all suffering. Tenth, he is content with leisurely
seclusion, engaged in mental contemplation, and never wastes time on
worldly pastimes during sessions of meditation.

336

Sutra 10: Ten Progressively Classiﬁed Doctrines

(2) What is the tenfold item to be practiced? It means the ten right
practices: right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right concentration, right
liberation, and right wisdom.
(3) What is the tenfold item to be comprehensively understood? It
means the ten bases of cognition, namely the ﬁve senses and their
respective objects: the visual organ, the eye; the auditory organ, the
ears; the olfactory organ, the nose; the gustatory organ, the tongue; the
tactile organ, the body; the visual object, form; the auditory object,
sound; the olfactory object, smell; the gustatory object, taste; and the
tactile object, touch.
(4) What is the tenfold item to be abandoned? It means the ten kinds
of wrong paths: wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong
action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong
concentration, wrong deliverance, and wrong knowledge.
(5) What is the tenfold item that is conducive to declining into perversity and ignorance? It means the ten kinds of wrongful deeds: ﬁrst,
taking life; second, theft, taking what is not given; third, sexual misconduct; fourth, [speaking] falsehoods; ﬁfth, [deceptive speech]; sixth,
harsh [speech]; seventh, ﬂattery; eighth, covetousness; ninth, malicious
intent; and tenth, [holding] wrong views.
(6) What is the tenfold item conducive to increasing distinction? It
means the ten kinds of good deeds: ﬁrst, not taking life; second, not
[committing] theft; third, [not committing] sexual misconduct; fourth,
[not speaking] falsehoods; ﬁfth, [not engaging in deceptive speech];
sixth, not speaking harshly; seventh, [not engaging in] ﬂattery; eighth,
not being covetous; ninth, [not harboring] malicious intent; and tenth,
[not holding] wrong views.
(7) What is the tenfold item that is difﬁcult to fathom or penetrate?
It means the ten abodes of the saintly disciple. First, the ﬁve items of
striving toward ultimate cessation (i.e., examination of the ﬁvefold cognition). Second, examination of the six faculties including mental cognition: if a bhikṣu adheres to the six principles of community in practice,
his conduct is worthy of respect and reverence and is harmonious with

337

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume I

the sangha, without creating any disputes or controversy, enabling him
to act independently without the admixture of confusion. Third, the
singular item to be abandoned, namely, the sense of self-conceit. Fourth,
the four kinds of reliance: ﬁrst, contentment with the robe requisite
(simple robes or garments that qualify a bhikṣu as a member of the
noble genealogy), and also with the remaining three requisites of food,
lodging, and medicine for use in illness. Fifth, the sixfold alternative
or the different truth of cessation. Sixth, the search for the supreme
and subtle for religious salvation, namely, transcendental insight and
knowledge, intuitively perceiving the origination and cessation of the
psychophysical elements, and eradicating the root of suffering on the
basis of the disciplines upheld by wise and saintly disciples. Seventh,
the thought of nondeﬁlement. Eighth, accomplishment of the practice
of austerity and completion of what should be done [for religious salvation]. Ninth, liberation of the mind. Tenth, liberation through insight.
(8) What is the tenfold item to be brought into existence? It means
the ten kinds of reverence for praise. First, when a bhikṣu has ﬁrmly
acquired faith and explains it to others, he should praise those [other
than himself] who have acquired faith. Second, when a bhikṣu has
ﬁrmly adhered to the precepts and explains them to others, he should
praise those who have adhered to the precepts. Third, when a bhikṣu
has disciplined himself to desire less and when he explains [this discipline] to others, he should praise those who have disciplined themselves to desire less. Fourth, when a bhikṣu has trained to know contentment and explains this to others, he should praise those who have
also trained to know contentment. Fifth, when a bhikṣu is content with
leisurely seclusion and explains it to others, he should praise those
who are also content with such leisurely seclusion. Sixth, when a bhikṣu
is well learned [in listening] and explains it to others, he should praise
those who are also well learned [in listening]. Seventh, when a bhikṣu
exerts himself in the practice of the path and explains it to others, he
should praise those who have also exerted themselves in the practice
of the path. Eighth, when a bhikṣu has show self-discipline in the practice of concentration and explains it to others, he should praise those
who have also shown self-discipline in the practice of concentration;

57b

338

Sutra 10: Ten Progressively Classiﬁed Doctrines

Ninth, when a bhikṣu has realized meditative concentration and explains
it to others, he should praise those who have also realized meditative
concentration. Tenth, when a bhikṣu has realized ultimate insight and
explains it to others, he should praise those who have also realized
ultimate insight.
(9) What is the tenfold item to be known as supernormal power? It
means the ten kinds of things to be destroyed: ﬁrst, he who holds right
views can destroy wrong views, remove all derivative evils arising
from wrong views, cause innumerable good things to arise through
various right views, and thereby accomplish whatever he aspires toward.
It is the same with the remaining nine items: right thought, right speech,
right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right concentration, right liberation, and right knowledge, just as one who has
realized right knowledge can destroy wrong knowledge, remove all
derivative evils arising from wrong knowledge, cause innumerable
good things to arise through varieties of right knowledge, and thereby
accomplish whatever one aspires toward.
(10) What is the tenfold item to be directly experienced by oneself?
It means the ten norms of the arhat who requires no further training:
right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
mindfulness, right effort, right concentration, right wisdom, and right
liberation.
O bhikṣus, the foregoing group comprises one hundred doctrinal
items. Having realized them by himself, the Tathāgata has taught us
these doctrinal items with equal emphasis as they really are and not
otherwise.

At that time, the World-honored One coﬁrmed what Śāriputra had exhorted,
and all the bhikṣus who had listened to his discourse experienced joy, respectfully received the teaching, and carried out what Śāriputra had taught.
[End of Sutra 10: Ten Progressively Classiﬁed Doctrines]

339

Notes
1
2

3
4

5

6
7
8

Étienne Lamotte, History of Indian Buddhism from the Origins to the Śaka Era, trans.
Sara Webb-Bohn (Louvain-la-Neue: Institut Orientaliste, 1988), p. 272.

The ninefold or twelvefold categories of scriptures by which the words of the Buddha’s
discourses were grouped for the sake of memorizing them. The Tripiṭaka categories
of Sutra, Vinaya, and Abhidharma were a later development.
Cf. Dīpavaṃsa VII, 34–43; Mahāvaṃsa V, 267–282.

The Abhidharmamahāvibhāṣā-śāśtra; the Sanskrit original is lost, and there is no
Tibetan translation of this text. There is a Chinese translation by Xuanzang, the Apidamo da pibosha lun (200 fascicles, Taishō 1545). Xuanzang concludes his epilogue:
“Four hundred years after [the Buddha’s] nirvana, King Kaniṣka called an assembly
of ﬁve hundred arhats and Kāśmīri Tripiṭaka masters to discuss the analyses of Abhidharma study.” Canonical revision was accomplished on all three divisions in chapter
3 of Xuanzang’s Xi you ji (Record of the Western Regions, Taishō 2087; English translation in Li Rongxi, The Great Tang Dynasty Record of the Western Regions [Berkeley:
Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research, 1996]); Lamotte, History of
Indian Buddhism, p. 586.

According to Satis Chandra Vidyabhusana, in his renowned work A History of Indian
Logic: Ancient, Mediaeval, and Modern Schools (Calcutta: Calcutta University Press,
1931), pp. 49–50; p. 49, n. 2, the Hindu literature, the Purāṇas and Śāstras, were
compiled by the brāhmaṇa assemblies in the region of Vidarbha under the leadership
of Jātūkarṇya Vyāsa. This movement was inspired by the Fourth Buddhist Council
that had been held in Kāśmīra half a century earlier.
Franklin Edgerton, Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit Grammar and Dictionary (New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press, 1953), esp. Ch. 1, Introduction.

Chizen Akanuma, Kanpashibushi agon shōroku (The Comparative Catalogue of Chinese Āgamas and Pāli Nikāyas) (Nagoya: Hajinkaku-shobō, 1929), pp. 3–6.

The missing seven texts are: DN 6, Mahalī Suttanta; DN 7, Jāliya Suttanta; DN 10,
Subha Suttanta; DN 22, Mahā-Satīpaṭṭhāna Suttanta; DN 30, Lakkhaṇa Suttanta;
and DN 32, Āṭānāṭiya Suttanta; and “The Sutra on Buddhist Cosmology,” not found
in DN.

341

Notes

9
10

11

12

13

14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23

24
25
26

Kaijō Ishikawa, Agon-kyō seiritsu no kenkyū (A Study on the Establishment of Āgama
Sūtras (Tokyo: Shakōsha, 1989), especially the Conclusion, pp. 246–247.

Kumārajva had been the king’s counselor in his native land, Kuccha. General Lüguang
destroyed the state in 383 C.E. and brought Kumārajīva as a captive to the neighboring
city of Liangzhou. In 401 Kumārajīva was invited to Chang’an to serve as the religious
counselor to Yaoxing.

Genmyō Ono, et al., eds., Bussho kaisetsu daijiten (The Expositional Dictionary of
Buddhist Texts in the Chinese Tripiṭaka Collection) (Tokyo: Daitō Shuppansha, 1933),
Fascicle 6, pp. 45–46.

Faxian started with a few co-travelers from Chang’an in 399 and returned alone by
the sea route in 413, transporting the Mahāsāṃghika-vinaya, the Samyukta Āgama,
and the Mahāparinirvāṇa-sūtra, among other texts.

The section of doctrinal commentaries: vols. 33–39; the section of Vinaya commentaries,
vol. 40; the section of treatise commentaries, partially sectarian: vols. 41–44; the
section of Chinese and Japanese sectarian schools, vols. 45–48; the section of historical
traditions, vols. 49–52; the section of incidental and non-Buddhist texts, vols. 53–54
(which comprises both); and the section of textual catalogues, vol. 55.
T. W. and C. A. F. Rhys Davids, The Dialogues of the Buddha, 3 vols. (London: Pali
Text Society, 1899, 1910, 1921).
This passage is not found in the Pāli text.

This set of seven principles is not found in the Pāli text.
This is given as the Four Noble Truths in the Pāli text.

The following passage in the Pāli text gives different names and the story differs.

In the Pāli text, the meal offered to the Buddha by Cunda is described as “tender
boar’s meat.”
The text gives this incorrectly as “arhat.”
“Boiling star” (feixing), i.e., a comet.

There is no clear difference between this item and item no. 3 above. The Pāli text
does not list this item.

The Chinese translation has the second and third items, moral precepts (samatā-kriyā)
and repeated practice (cetanā-kriyā), but these two do not go along with the first item,
charity (dāna-kriyā) as a triple doctrine.
Lit., “thorns”; this item is not found in the Pāli text.
This set of items not found in the Pāli text.
This set of items not found in the Pāli text.

342

Notes

27
28
29
30
31

32

33
34
35
36
37

This set of items is not found in the Pāli text.

The item “anxiety” in this list is found only in the Pāli text.
This set of items is not found in the Pāli text.
This set of items is not found in the Pāli text.

The Pāli text has the same question but gives a different answer: “the five modes of
right concentration: first, inner joy; second, mental recollection; third, self-contentment
or self-reliance; fourth, pleasant ease; and fifth, mental fixation.”

The Pāli text has the same question but gives a different answer: “the five spiritual
faculties: first, faculty of faith; second, faculty of endeavor; third, faculty of mindfulness; fourth, faculty of concentration; and fifth, faculty of insight.”
The Pāli text does not have the first item; it has been added here.
The Chinese text has “causal assemblages.”
The Chinese text has “manifold gains.”

The Chinese text has “manifold defilements.”

The Chinese text has “ceases to be the object of sound of the auditory faculty.”

343

Bibliography
Primary Sources

Abhidharmamahāvibhāṣā-śāstra (nonextant Sanskrit original; no Tibetan translation);
Apidamo dapibosha lun (T. 1545), in two hundred fascicles. Translated by Xuanzang.
Chu sanzang ji ji (Collection of the Tripiṭaka Textual Records) (T. 405) by Sengyou
(445–518). An expanded version of Dao’an’s Zhongjing mulu.
Dharmaguptaka-vinaya; Sifen lü (Vinaya in Four Divisions) (T. 1428), in sixty fascicles.
Translated by Buddhayaśas and Zhu Fonian.
Dīrgha Āgama (Pāli: Dīgha Nikāya); Chang ahan jing (Canonical Collection of Lengthy
Discourses) (T. 1), in twenty-two fascicles. Translated by Buddhayaśas and Zhu
Fonian. English translation in T. W. and C. A. F. Rhys Davids, The Dialogues of
the Buddha, 3 vols. (London: Pali Text Society, 1899, 1910, 1921).
Dīpavaṃsa (Chronicle of the Island). English translation in B. C. Law, “Chronicle of
the Island of Ceylon or the Dīpavaṃsa,” Ceylon Historical Journal 7 (1958): 1–266.
Dvādaśamukha-śāstra; Shiermun lun (T. 1568), in one fascicle. Translated by Kumārajīva
in 409.
Fochui ban lüeshuo jiaojie jing (T. 389), in one fascicle. Translated by Kumārajīva in
402–412.
Gaoseng faxian zhuan (Biography of Faxian) (T. 2085), in one fascicle. English translatiion
in Li Rongxi, The Journey of the Eminent Monk Faxian, in Lives of Great Monks
and Nuns (Berkeley: Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research, 2002),
pp. 155–214.
Gezhong qinding zhongjing mulu (Buddhist Canonical Textual Catalogues) compiled
by four northern dynasties: (1) Liang in 519, (2) Northern Wei in 532; (3) Northern
Qi in 570–578, and (4) Northern Chou in 563.
Kaiyuan shijiao mulu (Kaiyuan Record of Buddhist Textual Catalogues) (T. 2154). Compiled in 731.
Mahāprajñāpāramitōpadeśa-śāstra; Dazhidu lun (T. 1509), in one hundred fascicles,
by Nāgārjuna (ca. 50–150). Translated by Kumārajīva.
Mahāvaṃsa (Great Chronicle). English translation in Wilhelm Geiger and Mabel Haynes
Bode, The Mahāvaṃsa, Or, the Great Chronicle of Ceylon (London: Published for
the Pali Text Society by Luzac & Co, 1964).
Mūlamadhyamakākarikā-śāstra; Zhong lun (T. 1564), in four fascicles. By Nāgārjuna
with commentary by Piṅgala. Translated by Kumārajīva in 409.

345

Bibliography
Pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikā-prajñāpāramitā-sutra; Mohe banruo boluomi jing (Sutra of the
Perfection of Wisdom in Twenty-ﬁve Thousand Verses) (T. 221), in twenty-seven
fascicles. Translated by Kumārajīva in 404. Generally known in China as the Dapin
banruo jing (Larger Prajñāpāramitā Sutra) together with its voluminous commentary.
Renshou zhongjing mulu (Renshou Record of Textual Catalogues), revised upon the
Kaiyuan shijiao mulu in 602.
Saddharmapuṇḍarīka-sūtra; Miaofa lianhuajing (Sutra of the Lotus Blossom of the Fine
Dharma) (T. 262), in seven fascicles. Translated by Kumārajīva in 408–409. Commonly known as the Lotus Sutra; English translation in Tsugunari Kubo and Akira
Yuyama, The Lotus Sutra (Berkeley: Numata Center For Buddhist Translation and
Research, 2007, rev. second ed.)
Sui Kaihuang lidai sanbao ji (Sui Kaiyuan Record of the Threefold Buddhist Treasures
of the Successive Dynasties) (T. 2034), 598.
Vimalakīrtinirdeśa-sūtra; Weimojie suoshuo jing (T. 475), in three fascicles. Translated
by Kumārajīva. English translation in John R. McRae in The Sutra of Queen Srimala
of the Lion’s Roar/The Vimalakirti Sutra (Berkeley: Numata Center For Buddhist
Translation and Research, 2004), pp. 63–199.
Xiaopin banruo boluomi jing (Smaller Prajñāpāramitā-sutra) (T. 227), in ten fascicles.
Translated by Kumārajīva in 406.
Xi you ji (T. 2087). Translated by Xuanzang. English translation in Li Rongxi, The Great
Tang Dynasty Record of the Western Regions (Berkeley: Numata Center for Buddhist
Translation and Research, 1996).
Zhaolun (T. 1858), by Sengzhao (374–414), comprising four essays and two epistles.
Zhongjing mulu (Comprehensive Record of the Textual Catalogues) (T. 2146) by Dao’an
(314–385).

Secondary Sources

Akanuma, Chizen. Kanpa shibushiagon shōroku (Comparative Catalogue of Chinese
Āgamas and Pāli Nikāyas). Nagoya: Hajinkaku shobō, 1929.
Edgerton, Franklin. Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit Grammar and Dictionary. New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press, 1953.
Ichimura, Shohei. “Revisiting the Times of Śākyamuni Buddha,” in Radhavallabh Tripathi
ed., Srutimahati Glory of Sanskrit Tradition: Prof. Ram Karan Sharma Felicitation
Volume, vol. 2, pp. XX–XX. Delhi: Pratibha Prakashan, 2008
—. “The Chinese Mādhyamika Sengzhao’s Paradoxical Method of Argument,” in Shohei
Ichimura, Buddhist Critical Spirituality: Prajñā and Śūnyatā, pp. XX–XX. Delhi:
Motilal Banarsidass, 2001.
Ishikawa, Kaijō. Agon-kyō seiritsu no kenkyū (A Study on How Sutras were Assembled
into the Āgama Collections). Tokyo: Shakōsha, 1989.
Lamotte, Étienne. History of Indian Buddhism from the Origins to the Śaka Era. Sara
Webb-Bohn, trans. Louvain-la-Neue: Institut Orientaliste, 1988.

346

Bibliography
Malalasekera, G. P. Dictionary of Pāli Proper Names, 2 vols. London and Boston: Pali
Text Society, 1974.
Mettanando Bhikkhu. After the Buddha. Unpublished monograph.
Ono, Gemmyō, et al., eds. Bussho kaisetsu daijiten (Expositional Dictionary of Buddhist
Texts in the Chinese Tripiṭaka Collection). Tokyo: Daitō Shuppansha, 1933.
Vidyabhusana, Satis Chandra. A History of Indian Logic: Ancient, Mediaeval, and Modern
Schools. Calcutta: Calcutta University Press, 1931.

347

Index
A

Abhidharma, xiv, xviii, xxi, xxiii, 3
categorized in the Tripiṭaka, xiv, xx,
xxi–xxiii, 341n2
Mahayana and Hinayana, xxii
See also Tripiṭaka
Abhibhū, 14, 15
See also Sikhin
Abhidharmamahāvibhāśā-śāśtra, 341n4
Āgama(s), xiii, xv
four/fourfold, xiv, xv, xxiii, 3
Hinayana, xxiv
See also Aṅguttara Āgama; Dīrgha
Āgama; Ekottarikā Āgama; Madhyama Āgama; Saṃyukta Āgama
Agnidatta, 17
See also Krakucchanda
Ajātaśatru, 63, 166, 169, 170
Ajitakeśa-kambalin, 142
Ākāśagarbha-sūtra. See Xukongyun pusa
jing
alms/almsfood, 86, 87, 272, 324, 325
almsbowl(s), 37, 38, 54, 57, 70, 71, 75,
78, 79, 81, 83, 85, 86, 89, 100, 101,
104, 105, 163, 199, 222, 228, 317
almsround(s), 7, 199, 200, 222, 228
Ambapālī, 78–81, 83–85
Ambaṭṭha, xvii
anāgāmin, 77, 151, 194, 294, 298, 304,
330, 355
See also nonreturner
Ānanda, 15, 64–66, 70, 72–73, 75–79,

85, 86–90, 91–93, 94–95, 99–104,
107–108, 110, 112–113, 115–122,
129, 133, 137–141, 143–149, 151,
153, 157, 160–161, 163, 197–200,
208–209
Aṅga, King, 81
See also Bimbisāra
Aṅguttara Āgama (Discourses Increasing
Each by One Doctrine), 3
See also Āgamas, four/fourfold
Aṅguttara Nikāya (Increasing Each by a
Doctrine), xv
See also Aṅguttara Āgama; Nikāyas,
ﬁvefold
anuttara samyaksaṃbodhi. See enlightenment, highest, perfect, supreme
Anupiya, xvii
Anuruddha, 151–152, 156–159, 161
Apidamo da pibosha lun. See Abhidharmamahāvibhāśā-śāśtra
Apramāṇa, 15
See also Sikhin
arhat(s), 77, 143, 215, 304, 341n4, 342n20
who require no further training, 304,
316, 339
arhatship, 67, 82, 144, 224, 245, 294, 304,
312, 327
Aruṇa, 16
ārūpyadhātu. See realm, of formlessness
ascetic(s), 93, 109, 140, 143, 144, 162,
272, 273–276, 277–279
mendicants, 94, 165

349

Index
ascetic(s) (continued):
practice, 68, 273, 276, 277, 278, 279,
282
See also austerity/austerities; mendicant; śramaṇa
Aśoka, xiv, 15
See also Vipaśyin
asura(s), xvii, 52, 174, 175, 176, 177,
179, 201
Atapā, 59
austerity/austerities, 21, 22, 52, 54, 55,
67, 68, 70, 73, 85, 90, 101, 143, 144,
164, 173, 174, 178, 190, 193, 194,
195, 201, 202, 203, 221, 222, 223,
224, 240, 241, 271, 273, 279, 284,
285, 287, 289, 295, 298, 301, 303,
304, 305, 307, 314, 316, 317, 322,
323, 327–328, 332–334, 336, 338
See also ascetic, practice

B

Bamboo Grove, 70
Bandhumant, 16, 24, 50
See also Vipaśyin
Bandhumatī, 16
Bharadvāja, 15
See also Kāśyapa
Bhāradvāja, 211, 224
bhikṣu(s), xix, 7, 8, 9, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22,
23, 29, 37, 42, 54, 55, 56–57, 58, 59,
61, 66–72, 75, 78, 80–81, 83, 85, 87,
88, 90, 92, 93, 95–98, 100–107, 114,
117, 121, 122, 139, 143, 145–146,
148–150, 151, 152, 153, 155–157,
162, 163, 176, 197, 199, 209, 211,
225, 229, 241–243, 245–246, 254,
256, 269, 283–285, 289–293, 295–
296, 297–298, 300–305, 307–308,
311, 313–326, 330, 332–339
four kinds of reliance/support, 39, 338
four principles, 101–104

350

residence, 61, 297
saṃghātī robe, 37
See also disciple; monk; śramaṇa;
śrāvaka
bhikṣuṇī(s), 90, 92, 93, 146, 163, 176, 209
Bhiyyosa, 14, 15
See also Kanakamuni
Bimbisāra, 81, 198, 199
bird(s), xvi, 31, 46, 212, 228, 274
crane, 57
garuḍa, 57
Himalayan, 31
kalaviṅka, 28, 31, 93
bodhisattva(s), 92, 96, 179
career/ideal of, in the Mahayana, xiii
Bodhisattva, 19–24, 28, 31–34, 35, 39,
41–42, 46, 93
See also Buddha; Vipaśyin
Brahmā, xvii, 18, 47–50, 51, 53, 84, 85,
93, 95, 145, 151, 173, 183, 184,
188, 189, 191, 192, 203, 212, 213,
214, 224, 240, 288, 293, 302, 304,
320, 331
in the form of a youth, 177–179, 184,
185–187, 203–205, 207, 208
Brahmadatta, 17
See also Kāśyapa
brāhmaṇa(s), 17–18, 51, 55, 63, 81, 82,
85–86, 92, 117–119, 145, 166–170,
183, 184, 187, 191–193, 206, 211–
214, 222, 228, 232, 240, 241, 245,
246–268, 269–282, 293, 341n5
ascetic(s), xvii, 140, 143, 269
class/family, 11, 17, 94, 176, 204, 211,
212, 213, 214, 215, 222, 223
nonpracticing, 222
Buddha, xiv, xv, 7–8, 9–30, 42, 74–75,
151, 160, 165, 170, 171, 174–178,
189, 192, 202, 266, 293, 296, 301,
313, 314, 318, 328, 341n2
and Ajātaśatru, 63–64

Index
and Ambapālī, 78–81, 83–85
and Ānanda, 64–65, 6–70, 73, 75,
76–78, 85, 86–90, 91–95, 99–101,
104, 107–108, 112–117, 120–122,
133, 138–139, 144–149, 160–161,
197–200, 209
ashes/relics, 158, 167, 169
and the bhikṣus/disciples, 7–8, 54–58,
66–70, 97–98, 101–104, 148–150,
225, 229, 241, 243
and Brahmā, 48–50
and the brāhmaṇa of Kuśinagara,
117–119
and Cunda, 104–108, 342n19
and Cundaka, 114-115
demise/nirvana/ parinirvāṇa, xiii,
155–158, 166, 341n4
and the Evil One/Māra, 90–91, 98
funeral, 161–163, 166, 168
and Janavasabha, 199–201, 208
and lay devotees, 71–74
and the Licchavi clanspeople, 83
and the Mallan clanspeople, 140
and Nyagrodha, 270–273, 275–282
and Pañcaśika, 173, 177, 193–195
and Piṅgiyānī, 81–82
and Pishatuoya, 85–86
and Pukkusa, 108–112
and Sandhāna, 269, 271, 282
and Śāriputra, 283, 307
and Subhadra, 141–144
and Śuddhāvāsa, 56–58
and Tiṣya, 50–54
and Upavāna, 121–122
and Varṣākāra, 65–66
and Vāseṭṭha, 211–224
See also Gautama; Śākyamuni; Tathāgata
buddha(s), 7, 9, 10, 13–16, 18–24, 50, 59,
84, 111, 122, 155, 164, 176–177, 240,
280, 315

future, 145, 240
past, 7, 8, 9, 145, 280
seven, 12, 15, 61, 176
solitary, 117
thirty-two marks, 28
See also pratyekabuddha
Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha, 85, 111,
149, 215, 266, 300, 301, 317
See also Three Treasures
buddhahood, 24, 25
Buddhayaśas, xviii–xx, xxi, 5
Buddhija, 15, 16
See also Krakucchanda
Buddhist(s), xiv, xv, xviii, xx, xxi, xxiv
canon, xiv, xx
Chinese, xviii, xix
communities, xiii, xx–xxi, xxiv, xxv,
Japanese, xx, xxiv
lay householders, 193, 204
literature/scriptures/texts, xiv, xx, xxi,
xxii, xxv
monk(s), xiii, 5
path/religion/spirituality, xxvi, 4, 113
shrines/temples, xxii, 65
studies, xviii, xxiv
Tripiṭaka, xxii, xxiii, xxv
Buddhist councils, four, xiii–xiv
First Council, xiii
Second Council, xiii
Third Council, xiii, xiv, xv
Fourth Council, xiv, 341n5
Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit, xv
Buli people, 166
See also countries, Allakappa

C

cakravartin, xvi, xvii, 24, 117, 124, 226–
227, 229, 232, 240–241
See also universal ruler
Canonical Collection of Lengthy Discourses. See Chang ahan jing

351

Index
Cāpāla shrine, 89, 91, 98
causal/causality, xxiii, 39, 40, 41, 42, 44,
45, 213, 247, 290, 321, 322–323,
335, 343n34
See also dependent origination
causation, twelvefold chain, 42
See also causal/causality; dependent
origination
Central Asian, xvii, xix
Chang ahan jing, xiii, xv–xvi, xxiv–xxv,
3
categorized in the Taishō shinshū
daizōkyō, xx–xxi
and the Dharmaguptaka school, xix
“Sutra of Cosmology,” xv
sutras, correlated to the Pāli Dīgha
Nikāya suttantas, xv–xvii
translation, xviii, xxi, xxv, 5
See also Dīrgha Āgama
Channa, 148
Cheng shi lun. See Satyasiddhi-śāstra
China, xiv, xviii, xxi, xxiv, 327
Chinese, xix, xx, xxii, 342n13
Buddhists, xviii, xix
language, xv, xviii, xxiv, xxv, 3, 341n4,
342n21, 343nn 34, 35, 36, 37
Chu sanzang ji ji, xx
cities/towns/villages:
Ambala, 100, 101
Anopama, 16, 17
Aruṇavatī, 16
Ātumā, 110
Bandhumatī, 16, 50, 51, 52, 54, 55, 56,
57
Beluva-gāma, 85
Bhāṇḍagrāma, 101
Bhoganagara, 101, 104
Campā/Caṃpā, 122, 188
Chang’an, xviii, xix, xx, xxi, xxiv, 3,
342nn10, 12

352

Dantapura, 188
Jambugrāma, 101
Kapilavastu, 18, 122, 166, 170x
Kaśi, 188, 198
Koṭigāma, 74, 75, 78
Kṣema, 17
Kuśavatī, 122, 130, 132
Kuśinagara, 91, 98, 108, 109, 113,
117, 118, 120, 121, 133, 136, 138,
139, 140, 141, 162, 163, 166, 167,
168, 170
Liangzhou, xviii xix, xx, 342n10
Louyang, xviii
Lushan, xix
Nādikā/Nādika, 75, 197, 199, 200
Pāṭaliputra (Patna), xiv, 70, 71, 72, 74
Pāvā, 104, 108, 109, 111, 117, 162,
166, 170, 283
Potana, 188
Rājagṛha (Rājgīr), xiii, 58, 63, 66, 70,
122, 173, 269
Roruka, 188
Shomisaluo, 188
Śubha, 17
Śvetavyā, 245, 264, 265, 268
Uruvilvā, 90, 98
Vaiśālī (Vesālī), xiii, 78, 79, 82, 83,
85, 87, 95, 122, 166, 170
Kūṭāgāra hall, 95
Vārāṇasī, 17, 22, 188
garment(s), 329
Xiuo, 188
Collection of the Tripiṭaka Textual
Records. See Chu sanzang ji ji
commemorative tower(s), xix, 84, 115,
115, 116, 122, 147, 160, 161, 166,
167, 169–170
Comprehensive Record of the Textual
Catalogues. See Zhongjing mulu
Confucian, xviii, xx

Index
contemplation/contemplative, 13, 14, 34,
36, 46, 85, 222, 269, 297, 336
of the body, 308
recollection, xxiv, 4
silence/silent, 33, 34, 36
two types, 46
countries/regions:
Allakappa, 166, 170
Aṅga, 188, 198, 307
Aśvaka, 188, 198
Avanti, 188, 198
Burma, xiv
Ceḍi, 198
Indochina, xv
Kāmboja, 198
Kāśmīra/Kāśmīri, xiv, xviii, xx, 5,
341nn4, 5
Khotan, xviii, xix
Kośala, 198, 215, 245
Kuccha, xviii, 342n10
Kuru, 198
Kuṣāṇa, xiv
Liang, 5
Magadha/Magadhan, 63, 70, 71, 81,
166, 167, 170, 198, 199, 200, 201,
204, 225
Malla/Mallan, 104, 161, 198, 283
Matsya, 198
Mātulā, 225
Mauryan, xiv
Pañcāla, 198
Pippalavana, 170
Rāmagrāma, 166, 170
Southeast Asia, xiv
Śrāvastī, 7, 122, 211
Sri Lanka, xiv
Sūrasena, 198
Thailand, xiv
Vaṭhadvīpa (Veṭhādīpa), 166
Vatsa, 198
Vidarbha, 341n5

Vṛji, 63, 64, 65, 72, 74, 75, 78, 85, 87,
100, 101, 122, 198
Xia, 5
Cunda, 104–105, 107–108, 283, 342n19
Cundaka, 114–115

D

Daḷhanemi, 226–227, 232
Dao’an, xx–xxi
Daohan, 5
Daoist, xviii, xx, xxi, 5
Daśabhāṇavāra-vinaya, xviii
Daśabhūmika-sūtra, xviii
Deer Park, 50, 51, 54, 55, 57, 93
deﬁlement(s), 7, 12, 13, 14, 22, 46, 47,
48, 51, 53, 54, 55, 60, 61, 74, 77,
84, 87, 93, 106, 111, 119, 127, 134,
153, 165, 188, 190, 191, 197, 215,
221, 224, 243, 285, 288, 291, 293,
297, 303, 308, 309, 311, 314, 315,
319, 321, 329, 330, 334, 343n36
ﬁve, 76, 194, 197, 296
moral, 273–274, 275–276
seven, 320
three, 70, 76, 101, 164, 286
dependent origination, 40, 44, 45, 47
See also causal/causality; causation,
twelvefold chain
desire, hatred, and ignorance, 49, 53
deva. See god(s)
Dhanavatī, 17
See also Kāśyapa
dhāraṇī. See contemplation/contemplative,
recollection
dharma(s), 3, 53, 69, 186
adbhuta-, 96
saṃskṛta-, 119
Dharma, xv, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 30, 43,
47–50, 51, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 60,
66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 74, 77, 78,
82, 84, 85, 86, 88–89, 95, 96, 97,

353

Index
Dharma (continued):
104, 106, 107, 110, 111, 120, 122,
141, 143, 144, 145, 146, 147, 148,
156, 157, 162, 168, 174, 175, 178,
194, 202, 203, 207, 208–209, 211,
212, 214, 215, 216, 225, 226, 227,
232, 240, 283, 293, 294, 298, 307,
310, 312, 314, 327, 336
four branches of, 75
great/highest/supreme, 5, 47, 51, 55,
88, 327
mirror, 76, 77
mystery of, 90, 91, 98
nature of, 51, 55, 85, 111, 141
pond, 131
profound/subtle, 39, 48, 61, 86, 95, 175
right, 25, 48, 51, 55, 78, 82, 90, 125,
144, 208, 212, 221, 227, 230, 232,
240, 266, 284, 285, 289, 295, 298,
302, 303, 304, 305
wheel, 27, 52, 53, 92, 93, 147, 154, 214
See also Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha
Dharmaguptaka school, xiii, xiv, xv, xix
Dharmaguptaka-vinaya, xix
Dhṛtarāṣṭra, 173, 201
See also four guardians
Dīgha Nikāya (Lengthy Discourses), xix,
xxv
and the Dīrgha Āgama, xiv–xvii
suttantas, xv
correlated with Dīrgha Āgama sutras,
xv–xvi
seven not found in Dīrgha Āgama/
Chang ahan jing, xv, 341n8
See also Dīrgha Āgama; Nikāyas,
ﬁvefold
Dīrgha Āgama, 3
and the Dīgha Nikāya, xiv–xvii
translation of, xiii, xix
See also Āgamas, four/fourfold; Chang
ahan jing; Dīgha Nikāya

354

Diśāṃpati, 179, 180–181
disciple(s), xiii, xix, xxi, 7, 8, 9, 12–13,
14–15, 29, 38, 39, 54, 55, 58, 59,
60, 61, 63, 66, 71, 74, 77, 78, 79,
83, 85, 86, 87, 89, 90, 91, 98, 106,
143, 144, 145, 162, 173, 174, 178,
193, 194–195, 198, 200, 202, 204,
214, 225, 240, 269, 270–272, 279,
281, 282, 283
four kinds, 163
holy/noble/saintly, 76–77, 117, 215,
296, 310, 313, 315, 336, 337, 338
lay, 108, 270
See also bhikṣu; śrāvaka
discourses, ninefold or twelvefold categories, xv, 304, 341n2
Droṇa, 167, 169–170
Dutou Grove, 104
See also cities/towns/villages, Pava

E

Eastern Turkestan, xviii
eightfold noble path, 142, 304, 321, 323
Ekottarikā Āgama (Gradually Increased
Discourses), xv
emptiness, xxi
of the self, 287, 310
enlightenment, 93, 120, 143, 145, 147,
148, 170, 171, 212, 280
highest, perfect, supreme, 9, 11, 12,
13, 24, 25, 26, 42, 46, 52, 58, 67,
90, 92, 96, 98, 99, 112, 138, 150,
171, 207, 212
initial, 107, 108, 147
path of, 327–328
seven auxiliary disciplines/practices
of, 96, 223, 303, 319, 321
eon(s), 4, 7, 9, 10, 89, 99, 100, 122, 216,
278, 279
auspicious (bhadrakalpa), 9

Index
immeasurable/innumerable, 8, 48, 278,
279
evil(s), 53, 65, 68, 134, 213, 228, 237,
279, 291, 321, 323, 339
action/deeds, 48, 49, 52, 213
ten, 236
three kinds of, 286
beings/gods/spirits, 19, 92, 262, 263
inﬂuences, 222, 297, 315
intent/thoughts, 22, 69
evil courses of life, 76, 85, 111, 149, 186,
194, 198, 199, 200
three, 53, 76, 77, 221, 279
Evil One, 12, 18, 51, 53, 55, 84, 89, 90–
91, 92, 93, 94, 98, 165, 225, 240,
243, 282
See also evil ones; Māra; Pāpīyan
evil ones (deva-māras), 59, 85, 145, 293
See also Evil One
expediency, expedient(s), expedient
means, 33, 36, 44, 81, 88, 205, 206,
227, 231, 300

F

Fangying, 15, 16
See also Vipaśyin
Faxian, xix, 342n12
ﬁve aggregates, 46, 121, 295–296, 313,
323
ﬁve kinds of beneﬁts, 173–174, 201
ﬁve precepts, 21, 71, 72, 85, 251, 266
ﬁve senses, 33, 36, 179, 182, 189, 190,
191, 204, 250, 337
objects of, 189, 337
ﬁve spiritual faculties, 96, 296, 313, 321
ﬂower(s), 30, 31, 117, 120, 124, 131, 153,
158, 159, 160, 161, 162, 166
atimuktaka, 131
campaka, 131
dhanuṣkari, 131

mandāra, 162
pāṭalī, 131
śāla, 171
sumanā, 131
udumbara, 141, 150
vārṣika, 131
See also lotus ﬂowers; trees
four applications of mental awareness,
205–206, 290–291, 311–312, 321
four classes, 165, 212–213, 214, 216,
222, 224
See also brāhmaṇa; kṣatriya; śūdra;
vaiśya
four guardians, xvii, 94, 125, 154, 173,
177, 193, 201, 202, 204, 230
See also Dhṛtarāṣṭra; Vaiśravaṇa;
Virūḍhaka; Virūpākṣa
four immeasurable minds, 135, 183–184,
292
four kinds of blessings, 129, 311
four kinds of knowledge, 294, 312
four kinds of rhetorical excellences/skill,
45, 294, 312
four quarters:
of the continent/earth, 24, 124, 226,
227, 231, 240, 277, 278, 283
of heaven/heavenly, 19, 51
four meditative states of absorption/concentration, 134–135, 150–151, 242,
291–292, 333–334, 335
Four Noble Truths, 29, 52, 84, 164, 208,
286, 293, 309, 312, 342n17
four oceans, 126, 127, 132, 231
four states of spiritual development, 76,
142, 197, 312
See also arhat; nonreturner; oncereturner; stream-enterer
four supernormal powers of concentration,
89, 96, 99, 206, 207, 291
Fujian, xviii, xx, xxi

355

Index

G

Gaggarā, Queen, 307
Gandhāra, 198
Gandharva, 173
Gautama, 11, 12, 74, 85, 118, 141, 142,
212, 216, 270, 271, 272, 280
See also Buddha; Śākyamuni
Giñjakāvasatha, 197
god(s), 18, 19, 30, 48, 51, 52, 53, 54, 56,
57, 58, 72–74, 84, 92, 93, 98, 99,
122, 145, 156, 158, 161–162, 177,
178, 179, 183, 185, 189, 193, 198,
201, 203, 250, 265, 284, 285, 288,
289, 290, 293, 295, 298, 300, 301,
303, 304, 305, 327
of Ābhāsvara Heaven, 288
of Brahmā Heaven, 94, 185
ﬁre, 185, 255
of earth, 51
heavenly, 7, 8, 11, 19, 29, 51, 55, 72,
86, 89, 93, 95, 100, 151, 153, 158–
159, 161, 164, 167, 185, 189, 279
of Trāyastriṃśa Heaven/thirty-three,
31, 52, 80, 94, 159, 173, 174, 175,
176, 177, 179, 203, 204, 207, 208
of Tuṣita Heaven, 193
See also four guardians
Govinda, 179
Gṛdhrakūṭa. See Vulture Peak
Great Collection Sutra. See Mahāsaṃnipāta-sūtra
Great Perfection of Wisdom Sutra. See
Mahāprajñāpāramitā-sūtra
Great Yüeji. See Kaniṣka, King
Guhyaka, 153

H

Han dynasty/period, xviii
See also Late Han dynasty
Hastigrāma, 101

356

heaven(s), 8, 18, 19, 20, 23, 24, 25, 31,
51, 59, 94, 97, 122, 139, 154, 159,
173–174, 178, 183, 201, 202, 217,
232, 252, 298
Ābhāsvara, 288, 302, 304, 320, 331
Akaniṣṭha, 59, 298
Āsaṃjñika, 304, 331
Avṛha, 59
birth/rebirth in, 50, 54, 70, 84, 86, 107,
111, 116, 147, 161, 178, 186, 197,
202, 251–252, 264
Brahmā, 49, 94, 138, 153, 173, 185,
186, 187, 193, 194
Light-sound, 216
lower, 122
Nirmāṇarataya, 155
of controlling enjoyments magically
created by others, 204
of controlling enjoyments magically
created by themselves, 204
Paranirmitavaśavartin, 155
of purity, 203, 288
sixth, 51
Subhakṛtsna, 302, 304, 320, 331
Śuddhāvāsa, 59
Sudṛśa, 59
thirty-three, 94, 138, 151, 207
Trāyastriṃśa, xvii, 21, 31, 52, 80, 130,
154, 159, 173, 174, 176, 177, 178,
179, 192, 193, 201, 202, 203, 204,
205, 206, 207, 251, 252, 267
Tuṣita, 18, 19, 20, 21, 92, 154, 193
twenty-eighth, 122
Vimāna, 267
Yāmadeva, 193, 204
See also four guardians; heavenly
heavenly, 20, 21, 27, 28, 134, 162, 194,
217, 247, 279, 288
abode/garden/palace/quarters, 14, 19,
48, 56, 80, 152

Index
beings, 18, 21, 22, 29, 76, 85, 90, 91,
98, 106, 130, 151, 156, 158, 159,
163, 177, 199, 203, 216, 249, 250,
302, 304, 317, 320, 331
birth, 249, 251
citizens/residents, 174, 176, 177, 178,
202
gods. See god(s), heavenly
guardians. See four guardians
happiness, 226, 231
longevity, 173, 201
master, 124, 227, 229
mother, 18, 22
music, 123, 159
wheel, 25, 201, 226
world(s), 249, 289, 293
See also heaven(s)
hell(s), xvii, 72, 247, 248, 327
heretic/heretical, 65, 90, 300
See also Hindu; non-Buddhist(s)
Himalaya(s)/Himalayan, 31, 82, 113, 114
Hinayana, xiv, xv, xx, xxii, xxiv
Hindu, xiv, xv
literature, Purāṇas and Śāstras, 341n5
See also heretic/heretical; nonBuddhist(s)
householder(s), 94, 124, 128–129, 132,
133, 136, 138, 146, 176, 183, 184,
187, 188, 189, 191, 192, 193, 200,
204, 209, 212, 222, 226, 240, 246,
268, 269, 270, 271, 280, 282
See also household life; lay
household life, 24, 25, 26, 33, 35, 36, 37,
38, 54, 192, 221–222, 227, 232
Huibian, xix
Huiyüen, xix

I

ignorance, 12, 39, 40, 41, 44, 48, 264,
276, 284, 294, 296, 312, 320
deﬁlement due to, 70, 101

of the Four Noble Truths, 286, 309
perversity and, doctrinal items conducive to lessening, 308–314, 316–
317, 319–320, 322, 324, 330–331,
336–337
See also desire, hatred, and ignorance
impermanence, 68, 140, 153, 154, 155,
297, 303, 308, 321, 334
India/Indian, xviii, xix, 327
Gangetic basin, 311
Northern, xv
Indra, xvii, 18, 19, 36, 52, 53, 84, 85, 93,
152, 173, 174, 175, 177, 178, 179,
201, 202, 207, 240

J

Jain, 162, 283
See also Nirgrantha religion/school
Jambudvīpa, xvii, 182, 250
Janavasabha, xvi, 197, 199–201, 208–209
Jātūkarṇya Vyāsa, 341n5
Jetavana Monastery, Kareri-kuṭikā quarter, 7
Jin state, 4
Jing period, xxiii
Jyotipāla, 179, 180
See also Govinda

K

Kaiyuan shijiao lu (Kaiyuan Record of
Buddhist Textual Catalogues), xxii
Kakkaṭa, 75, 76, 197
Kakkudha. See Kakkaṭa
Kakuda-katyāyana, 142
Kaliṅga, 75, 188, 197
kalpa. See eon
Kalyāṇa-jātika, xvii
kāmadhatu. See realm, of desire
Kanakamuni, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15,
17, 59, 60
Kaniṣka, King, xiv, 341n4

357

Index
Kāśyapa, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17,
59, 60, 162–163
Kauliyan people, 166
See also countries/regions, Rāmagrāma
Kauṇḍinya, 10, 11
See also Vipaśyin
Kevaddha, xvii
Khaṇḍa, 14, 15, 50, 51, 52, 54, 56
See also Vipaśyin
Khema. See Kṣema
Khuddaka Nikāya (Short Discourses), xv
See also Nikāyas, ﬁvefold
Kikin, 17
Koṇḍañña. See Kauṇḍinya
Krakucchanda, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15,
17, 59, 60
kṣatriya(s), 10, 11, 16, 18, 94, 124, 176,
178,
six, 179–182
See also four classes
Kṣema, 17
Kṣemakāra, 15
See also Śikhin
Kumārajīva, xviii, xix–xx, xxi, 342n10
Kumara-Kāśyapa, 245–267
Kumbhīra, 153
Kūṭadanta, xvii

L

lapis lazuli, 20, 26, 27, 123, 130–131,
135, 189, 236, 239
Late Han dynasty/period, xiv, xviii
See also Han dynasty/period
Late Qin period, xviiii
See also Qin
lay:
devotee(s)/disciple(s)/patrons, 71, 72,
73, 75, 76, 85, 108, 111, 115, 116,
199, 266, 270, 297
householders, 94, 146, 176, 193, 200,
204, 209

358

laymen, 90
See also upāsaka
laywoman/laywomen, 78, 90
See also upāsikā
Licchavi clanspeople, 79–83, 166
Lishu, 75, 197
Lokanāyaka, 15, 16
See also Kanakamuni
Lotus Association, xix
lotus ﬂower(s), 28, 82, 123, 151
blue (utpala), 151, 159, 329
pink (padma), 151, 159
red (kumuda), 151, 159, 329
white (puṇḍarīka), 131, 151, 159, 329
yellow, 329
Lüguang, General, xviii, 342n10
Lumbinī grove, 153

M

Madhyama Āgama (Middle-length Discourses), xv, 3
See also Āgamas, four/fourfold;
Majjhima Nikāya
Madhyamaka, xxii
Mahāgovinda, 193
Mahākāśyapa, 162–164, 165
Mahāmāyā, 18
Mahāparinirvāṇa-sūtra, 342n12
Mahāprajñāpāramitā-sūtra, xxiv
Mahāsāṃghika-vinaya, 342n12
Mahāsaṃnipāta-sūtra, xxiii
Mahāsudarśana, King, 122, 124–126,
129, 230–231
Mahāvibhāṣā-śāstra, xiv
Mahayana, xvi, xx, xxiii
sutras/texts, xxi, xxii, xxiii, xxiv
Tripiṭaka, xv, xix, xxi
Māhīṣmatī, 188
Maitreya, 240
Majjhima Nikāya (Middle-length Discourses), xv

Index
See also Nikāyas, ﬁvefold; Madhyama
Āgama
Makuṭabandhana shrine, 159, 160, 161,
163
Mallan clan/clanspeople, 91, 98, 120,
138, 139–140, 157–162, 165–167
Mānava, 267
Māra, 12, 84, 85, 90, 94, 165, 240, 243
See also Pāpīyan
marks, of a buddha, 24, 28, 78
thirty-two, 25, 26–27, 29, 71
eighty, 71
Maskarin-gośālīputra, 142
Maudgalyāyana, 15
Māyā, 153
meditation/meditative, 73, 90, 133, 134,
197, 211, 222, 269, 270, 273, 275,
276, 298, 302, 309, 315, 316, 321,
324–327, 333, 334, 336, 339
absorption, four states of, 134–135,
150–151, 242, 288, 291–292, 335
walking, 110, 211, 324–327
mendicant, 37, 38, 94, 165, 293, 312
See also śramaṇa
mindfulness, 18, 69–70, 134, 135, 242,
292, 296, 301, 303, 308, 313, 318,
319, 323, 328, 343n32
four kinds of, 96
right, 206, 292, 302, 303, 304, 305,
321, 323, 337, 339
six kinds of, 317
six objects of, 301
wrong, 336, 337
Ming period, xxiii
monk(s), xiii, xiv, xix, 5, 7, 8, 58, 121,
162, 225, 316, 322
See also bhikṣu; disciple; śramaṇa;
śravaka

N

Nikaṭa, 75, 197

Nikāyas, ﬁvefold, xv, xxv
See also Aṅguttara Nikāya; Dīgha
Nikāya; Khuddaka Nikāya; Majjhima
Nikāya; Saṃyutta Nikāya
Nirgrantha-jñātiputra, 142
Nirgrantha religion/school, 283, 284
See also Jain
nirvana, 7, 8, 15, 47, 58, 74, 88, 90, 91,
92, 94, 98, 106, 114, 115, 116, 119,
122, 148, 170, 171, 194, 195, 197,
214, 228, 266, 289, 298, 341n4
ﬁnal/ultimate, 8, 76, 90, 91, 94, 96, 98,
99, 100, 107, 108, 112, 114, 138,
139, 147, 151, 152, 154, 155, 157,
160, 162, 166, 167, 168, 170, 171,
194, 195, 266, 281, 298
goal of, 175, 194, 281, 307
path of, 77, 296, 313
non-Buddhist(s), xv, 76, 147, 194, 197,
342n13
nonself, 68, 120, 301, 303, 318, 321, 334
nonreturner, 77, 204, 215, 294, 298, 304,
312, 330
See also anāgāmin
Northern Song period, xxii
See also Song period
Numata, Dr. Yehan, xxiv
nun. See bhikṣuṇī
Nunnery of the Eastern Grove, 211
Mṛgamāta’s lecture hall, 211
Nyagrodha, 269–270, 271–273, 275,
281, 282

O

once-returner, 77, 204, 215, 294, 304, 312
ordination, 54, 55, 56, 57, 144, 147
higher, 54, 55, 214

P

Pāli, xiv, xv, xvi, xix, xxiv, xxv, 10, 14,
15, 16, 17, 134, 211, 226, 342n15

359

Index
Pali Text Society, xxv
Pañcaśika, 173, 177, 193–195
pañcaśīla. See precepts, ﬁve
Pāpīyān, 282
See also Evil One; Māra
parinirvāṇa. See nirvana, ﬁnal/ultimate
Pāyāsi, xiv, 245–268
Piṅgiyānī, 81–82
Pishatuoya, 85
Potoulou, 75, 197
Poyalou, 75, 197
Prabhāvatī, 16
See also Śikhin
practice(s), xvi, xvii, xxiv, 4, 8, 39, 47,
69, 70, 85, 88, 89, 96, 99, 101, 143,
144, 175, 193, 211, 213, 224, 273,
276, 281, 286, 293, 296, 300, 313,
319, 326, 342n23
ascetic, 68, 273, 276, 277, 278, 279, 282
of analytical insight, 58, 309
of austerity, 21, 22, 52, 54, 68, 70, 73,
85, 90, 101, 143, 144, 164, 173, 174,
178, 190, 193, 194, 195, 201, 202,
203, 223, 224, 240, 241, 284, 285,
287, 289, 295, 298, 301, 303, 304,
305, 307, 316, 317, 322, 323, 327,
328, 332–334, 338
of calming the mind, 58, 309
of charity, 70
of concentration/meditation/meditative
walking, 68, 77, 211, 241, 269, 273,
274, 275, 276, 287, 298, 303, 310,
315, 319, 324, 325, 326–327, 338
deﬁled/extreme/wrong, 273, 275, 281,
282, 290
of enlightenment, seven auxiliary, 223
of ﬁve spiritual faculties, 313
of the four immeasurable minds, 135,
184, 242, 301, 318
of four kinds of application of mental
awareness, 311

360

of good/good karma/good principles,
134, 237–239, 281, 282, 323
moral/of morality, precepts, xviii, 145,
287, 300, 314, 317
non-Buddhist, 76, 194, 197
of the path/religion/religious, xxv, 8,
37, 38, 48, 105, 106, 142, 149, 188,
199, 212, 227, 231, 232, 241, 292,
302, 320, 338
of quiescence, 164
of recitation, 184, 191
six principles of community in, 316,
337
ten right, 337
prajñā, xxi, 70, 100, 152
Prajñāpāramitā sutras/texts, xxi, xxiii,
xxiv
Prasenajit, King, 215–216, 245
pratyekabuddha, 117, 119
pratītyasamutpāda. See causal/causality;
causation, twelvefold chain;
dependent origination
precept(s), 7, 21, 22, 65, 68, 69, 70, 72,
73, 75, 77, 86, 97, 100, 215, 225,
229, 241, 243, 265, 274, 276, 286,
287, 290, 293, 294, 300, 301, 302,
309, 312, 314, 316, 317, 319, 321,
330, 332, 333, 334, 338, 342n23
ﬁve, 21, 71, 72, 85, 251, 266
vow of, 143, 144, 147, 290
psychophysical elements, 69, 81, 89,
205, 206, 225, 291, 296, 303, 308,
312, 313, 319, 321, 336, 338
Pukkusa, 108–109, 112
Purāṇa-kāśyapa, 142
Pure Land, xix

Q

Qin, 3
See also Late Qin

Index
quiescence, 14, 37, 97, 108, 110, 118,
152, 164, 165, 184, 198, 215, 228,
287, 294, 310, 315, 319, 320

R

Rāhula, 15, 16
realm:
of desire, 51, 298, 310
of form, 296, 298, 310–311
of formlessness, 296, 311
Record of the Western Regions. See Xi
you ji
Renshou zhongjing mulu (Renshou
Record of Textual Catalogue), xxii
Reṇu, King/Prince, 179–182, 188–189
river(s), 4, 74, 113, 114, 236, 253
Ganges, 74, 167, 175
Hiraṇyavatī, 159, 160, 163
Kakuṭṭhā, 113, 114
Nairañjanā, 90, 98
Yamunā, 175
Yangzi, xviii
robe(s), 27, 39, 46, 57, 70, 75, 78, 79, 81,
84, 85, 86, 99, 100, 101, 104, 112,
114, 121, 122, 146, 150, 154, 163,
187, 200, 222, 223, 228, 267, 283,
292–293, 307, 338
saṃghāṭī, 37, 38, 54, 71, 83, 86, 89,
105, 114, 120, 199
three, 38, 192, 226, 227, 231, 232, 241
rūpadhātu. See realm, of form

S

sakṛdāgāmin. See once-returner
Śākya clan/clanspeople/family, 14, 59,
147, 153, 155, 162, 166, 214, 215,
240
Śākyamuni, xiii, xvi, xix, xxiv, xxvi, 3,
10, 12, 15, 59, 61, 192, 193, 284
See also Buddha; Gautama
Sāḷha, 75, 197

śamatha. See practice, of calming the
mind
Saṃbhava, 14, 15
See also Śikhin
Saṃyukta Āgama (Mixed Discourses), xv,
3, 342n12
See also Āgamas, four/fourfold; Saṃyutta Nikāya
Saṃyutta Nikāya (Mixed Discourses), xv
See also Nikāyas, ﬁvefold; Saṃyukta
Āgama
Sandhāna, 269–282
sangha, xx, 56, 57, 66–67, 68, 83, 84, 86,
88, 97, 102, 105, 106, 146, 147,
149, 176, 214, 215, 266, 267, 281,
300, 314, 316, 317, 333–334, 338
See also Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha
Sanghasena, 15, 16
Sañjayin-vairāṭīputra, 142
Sañjīva, 14, 15
See also Krakucchanda
Saptaparṇa Cave, 269, 270
Śāriputra, 14, 15, 283, 305, 307, 339
Sarvamitra, 15
See also Kāśyapa
Sarvāstivāda school, xiv, xv, xviii
Satyasiddhi-śāstra, xx
Sengyou, xx, xxi
Sengzhao, xxi, xxiv, 3
sensation, 40–43, 45, 81, 95
See also sense(s)
sense(s), 19, 35, 37, 48, 53, 60, 78, 81,
112, 151, 188, 193, 200
calm/restrained, 71, 108, 117
contact, 40–45, 47
faculties/operation, six/sixfold, 40–45
ﬁve, 33, 36, 179, 182, 189, 190, 191
inner, 80, 88
outer, 80, 88
perception(s), 40, 89
See also sensation

361

Index
seven treasures, 24, 25–26, 124, 129, 226,
240
seven principles:
that enable the Dharma to ﬂourish, 67–
69, 342n16
of well-being (for monks), 66–67
Shangsheng, 188
Shumisaluo, 188
Sifen lü. See Dharmaguptaka-vinaya
Śikhin, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 59, 60
śīla. See precepts
skandhas. See psychophysical elements
solitary buddha. See pratyekabuddha
Soṇa, 14, 15
See also Viśvabhū
Song period, xxiii
See also Northern Song period
Sotthija, 15
See also Kanakamuni
Soudalishetu, 75, 197
śramaṇa(s), xvii, xviii, xix, 5, 14, 18, 37,
38, 51, 55, 58, 65, 74, 85, 92, 93,
94, 105, 106, 141, 142, 143, 145,
146, 164, 165, 176, 206, 212, 214,
216, 222, 224, 227, 228, 240, 241,
247, 249, 251, 263, 264, 265, 270,
271, 272, 274, 275, 280, 293
See also ascetic; mendicant; monk
śrāvaka(s), 58, 117, 119, 279
See also bhikṣu; disciple; monk
srotaāpanna. See stream-enterer
Sthāvira/Sthāvira-Sarvāstivāda school,
xiii, xiv, xv
stream-enterer, 76, 77, 78, 194, 197, 199,
200, 204, 215, 293, 304, 312
stupa. See commemorative tower(s)
Śubha, 17
Subhadra, 75, 140–144, 197
Subuddha, 15, 16
See also Viśvabhū
Sudarśana, King, 126–138

362

Śuddhāvāsa, 56–58
Śuddhodana, 18
Sudharma pavilion/Sudharma-sabhā hall,
130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 136, 138,
173, 177, 202, 227, 229
śūdra(s), 213, 215, 222, 223
See also four classes
Sui dynasty, xxi, xxii
Sui Kaihuang lidai sanbao ji (Sui Kaihuang Record of the Threefold
Buddhist Treasures of the Successive
Dynasties), xxi
Sumatī, Queen, 134–137
Suṃkha, 240
śūnyatā. See emptiness
supernormal:
hearing, 7, 8, 270, 319
knowledge, 9, 308, 311
power(s), 7, 8, 12, 54, 55, 56, 59, 60,
89, 93, 147, 152, 165, 177, 203,
206, 207, 241, 243, 271, 272, 288,
308, 309, 310, 311, 312, 313, 315,
316, 318, 319, 321, 322, 328, 330,
333, 336, 339
four, 89, 96, 99, 206, 207, 291
vision, 72, 73, 254, 256, 288, 289,
311, 319
Suppatīta, 17
See also Viśvabhū
Sutra on Ākāśagarbha Bodhisattva. See
Xukongyun pusa jing
Sutra on the Ten Stages of the Bodhisattva
Career. See Daśabhūmika-sūtra
Sutra, Vinaya, and Abhidharma, xiv, xx,
xxi, 3, 341n2
See also Tripiṭaka

T

Taishō shinshū daizōkyō (Taishō New
Tripiṭaka Edition), xx, xxii–xxiv
Tang dynasty, xviii, xxii

Index
Tathāgata, 3, 7, 8, 9, 28, 43, 48, 50, 51,
54–56, 58, 61, 63, 67, 71, 74, 77,
81, 82–84, 88–93, 95, 98–100, 107–
108, 110, 112–117, 120, 121, 138–
139, 141, 143, 145, 150–152, 154,
157, 160, 161, 166–169, 171, 174–
179, 197–200, 202, 204–208, 211,
214–216, 224, 266, 280, 284, 285,
289, 295, 296, 298, 300–305, 311,
313, 314, 316, 318, 319, 322, 327,
330, 335, 339
See also Buddha
tathāgata(s), 11, 280, 310
tathāgatahood, 55
Theravāda, xiv, xv
three major trainings, 70, 100, 287
three evil courses of life, 53, 76, 77, 221,
279
Three Treasures, 78, 198
See also Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha
Three Vedas, xvii
Tibetan language, xxiv, 341n4
Tipiṭaka. See Tripiṭaka
Tiṣya:
disciple of Kāśyapa 14, 15
disciple of Vipaśyin, 14, 15, 50–51,
52, 54, 56
See also Kāśyapa; Vipaśyin
Tuolishetu, 75, 197
Treatise on the Establishment of Truth.
See Satyasiddhi-śāstra
tree(s), 11–12, 22, 74, 78, 89, 90, 93, 95,
107, 108, 109, 114, 123, 128, 139,
152, 156, 162, 199, 200, 201, 236,
239, 245, 266, 276, 277
ajapāla-nyagrodha, 90, 98
banyan, 27
bodhi, 50, 51
nyagrodha, 11, 12, 28
pippala, 11, 12
palm, 123, 131m 135, 136, 138

pārichattaka, 59
paṭala, 11, 12, 71
puṇḍarīka, 11, 12
śāla, 11, 12, 91, 98, 117, 118, 119,
120, 138, 139, 140, 141, 152, 153,
158, 159, 163, 165, 166, 171
sandal (sūkara-maddava), 105, 108,
127
śiṃśapā, 101, 245
śirīsā, 11, 12
spirits, 120
udumbara, 11, 12
Tripiṭaka, xiii, xiv, xv, xx–xxiii, xxiv–
xxv, 3, 341n2
master, xix, 5, 341n4
See also Sutra, Vinaya, and Abhidharma

U

Udumbarikā, Queen, 269
Udumbarikā Grove, 270
unconditioned, 60, 91, 99, 285, 309
transcendence, 152, 191, 192, 194
universal ruler, xvi, xvii, 24–26, 115–
117, 124, 126–129, 134, 138, 146,
160, 225–226, 229, 231, 243
See also cakravartin
Upananda, 162
upāsaka(s), 90, 146, 163, 176, 193, 209
See also lay, devotees, householders;
laymen
upāsikā(s), 78, 90, 146, 163, 176, 193, 209
See also lay, devotees, householders;
laywoman/laywomen
Upaśāntā, 15
See also Viśvabhū
Upavāna, 121, 152
Uttama, 14, 15
See also Viśvabhū
Uttara, 14, 15
See also Kanakamuni

363

Index
Uttarā, 17
See also Kanakamuni
Uttarakuru, xvii

V

Vaibhāṣika. See Buddhayaśas
Vaiśravaṇa, 152, 173, 199, 200, 201,
204–205, 208
See also four guardians
vaiśya, 212, 213, 215, 222, 223
See also four classes
Varṣākāra, 63, 65–66, 72, 74
Vāseṭṭha, 211–217, 222–224
Vibhava, 60
See also Viśvabhū
Vidhūra, 14, 15
See also Krakucchanda
Vinaya, xiii, xix, xx, xxi, xxii, xviii, xxiv, 3,
5, 96, 102, 143, 144, 241n2, 342n13
Dharmaguptaka, xix
Sārvastivāda, xviii
See also Sutra, Vinaya, and Abhidharma; Tripiṭaka
Vinaya in Four Divisions. See Dharmaguptaka-vinaya
vipaśyanā. See practice, of analytical
insight
Vipaśyin, 9–16, 18–23, 29, 31, 32, 46–51,
54, 55, 57–60, 122
Virūḍhaka, 173, 201
See also four guardians
Virūpākṣa, 173, 201
See also four guardians
Viśākhā, 17
See also Krakucchanda
Viśvabhū, 9, 10–16, 59, 61
Viśvakarman, 130

364

Vulture Peak, 58, 63, 173, 192, 269

W

wheel(s), 26–28, 51, 53, 160, 201
Dharma, 26, 51–53, 55, 92, 93, 147,
152, 214
golden/ sacred, 24, 25, 52, 124–129,
132, 136–138, 226, 227, 229–232,
240

X

Xi you ji, 341n4
Xuanzang, xiv
Xukongyun pusa jing, xx

Y

Yajñadatta, 17
See also Kanakamuni
yakṣa, 200, 208
Yamaka underworld, 154
Yaoshuang, 4, 5
Yaoxing, xviii, xx, xxi, 342n10
Yaśas, 75, 197
Yaśavatī, 16, 17
See also Viśvabhū
Yeshuduolou, 75, 197
Yogācāra, xxiii
Yuan period, xxiii

Z

Za ahan jing. See Saṃyukta Āgama
Zengyi ahan jing. See Aṅguttara Āgama
Zhao lun, xxi
Zhi Faling, xix
Zhong ahan jing. See Madhyama Āgama
Zhongjing mulu, xx
Zhu Fonian, xix, 5

BDK English Tripiṭaka
(First Series)

Title

Abbreviations
Ch.: Chinese
Skt.: Sanskrit
Jp.: Japanese
Eng.: Published title

Ch. Chang ahan jing (長阿含經)
Skt. Dīrghāgama
Eng. The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses
(Volume I, 2015)

Taishō No.

Ch. Zhong ahan jing (中阿含經)
Skt. Madhyamāgama
Eng. The Madhyama Āgama (Middle-length Discourses)
(Volume I, 2013)

1

26

Ch. Dasheng bensheng xindi guan jing (大乘本生心地觀經)

159

Ch. Zabao zang jing (雜寶藏經)
Eng. The Storehouse of Sundry Valuables (1994)

203

Ch. Xiaopin banruo boluomi jing (小品般若波羅蜜經)
Skt. Aṣṭasāhasrikā-prajñāpāramitā-sūtra

227

Ch. Fo suoxing zan (佛所行讃)
Skt. Buddhacarita
Eng. Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts (2009)

Ch. Faju piyu jing (法句譬喩經)
Eng. The Scriptural Text: Verses of the Doctrine, with Parables (1999)
Ch. Jingang banruo boluomi jing (金剛般若波羅蜜經)
Skt. Vajracchedikā-prajñāpāramitā-sūtra

365

192

211

235

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Daluo jingang bukong zhenshi sanmoye jing
(大樂金剛不空眞實三麼耶經)
Skt. Adhyardhaśatikā-prajñāpāramitā-sūtra
Eng. The Sutra of the Vow of Fulﬁlling the Great Perpetual
Enjoyment and Beneﬁting All Sentient Beings Without
Exception (in Esoteric Texts, 2015)

Taishō No.
243

Ch. Renwang banruo boluomi jing (仁王般若波羅蜜經)
Skt. *Kāruṇikārājā-prajñāpāramitā-sūtra

245

Ch. Miaofa lianhua jing (妙法蓮華經)
Skt. Saddharmapuṇḍarīka-sūtra
Eng. The Lotus Sutra (Revised Second Edition, 2007)

262

Ch. Guan Puxian pusa xingfa jing (觀普賢菩薩行法經)
Eng. The Sutra Expounded by the Buddha on Practice of the Way
through Contemplation of the Bodhisattva All-embracing
Goodness (in Tiantai Lotus Texts, 2013)

277

Ch. Banruo boluomiduo xin jing (般若波羅蜜多心經)
Skt. Prajñāpāramitāhṛdaya-sūtra

251

Ch. Wuliangyi jing (無量義經)
Eng. The Inﬁnite Meanings Sutra (in Tiantai Lotus Texts, 2013)

276

Ch. Dafangguang fo huayan jing (大方廣佛華嚴經)
Skt. Avataṃsaka-sūtra

279

Ch. Wuliangshou jing (無量壽經)
Skt. Sukhāvatīvyūha
Eng. The Larger Sutra on Amitāyus (in The Three Pure Land Sutras,
Revised Second Edition, 2003)

360

Ch. Shengman shizihou yisheng defang bianfang guang jing
(勝鬘師子吼一乘大方便方廣經)
Skt. Śrīmālādevīsiṃhanāda-sūtra
Eng. The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of the Lion’s Roar (2004)

Ch. Guan wuliangshou fo jing (觀無量壽佛經)
Skt. *Amitāyurdhyāna-sūtra
Eng. The Sutra on Contemplation of Amitāyus
(in The Three Pure Land Sutras, Revised Second Edition, 2003)

366

353

365

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Taishō No.

Ch. Amituo jing (阿彌陀經)
Skt. Sukhāvatīvyūha
Eng. The Smaller Sutra on Amitāyus (in The Three Pure Land Sutras,
Revised Second Edition, 2003)

366

Ch. Fochuibo niepan lüeshuo jiaojie jing (佛垂般涅槃略説教誡經)
Eng. The Bequeathed Teaching Sutra (in Apocryphal Scriptures, 2005)

389

Ch. Da banniepan jing (大般涅槃經)
Skt. Mahāparinirvāṇa-sūtra
Eng. The Nirvana Sutra (Volume I, 2013)

374

Ch. Dizang pusa benyuan jing (地藏菩薩本願經)
Skt. *Kṣitigarbhapraṇidhāna-sūtra

412

Ch. Yaoshi liuli guang rulai benyuan gongde jing
(藥師琉璃光如來本願功徳經)
Skt. Bhaiṣajyaguru-vaiḍūrya-prabhāsa-pūrvapraṇidhāna-viśeṣavistara

450

Ch. Wenshushili wen jing (文殊師利問經)
Skt. *Mañjuśrīparipṛcchā

468

Ch. Banzhou sanmei jing (般舟三昧經)
Skt. Pratyutpanna-buddhasammukhāvasthita-samādhi-sūtra
Eng. The Pratyutpanna Samādhi Sutra (1998)

Ch. Mile xiasheng chengfo jing (彌勒下生成佛經)
Skt. *Maitreyavyākaraṇa

Ch. Weimojie suoshuo jing (維摩詰所説經)
Skt. Vimalakīrtinirdeśa-sūtra
Eng. The Vimalakīrti Sutra (2004)

418

454

475

Ch. Yueshangnü jing (月上女經)
Skt. Candrottarādārikā-paripṛcchā

480

Ch. Damoduoluo chan jing (達磨多羅禪經)

618

Ch. Zuochan sanmei jing (坐禪三昧經)
Eng. The Sutra on the Concentration of Sitting Meditation (2009)

614

Ch. Yuedeng sanmei jing (月燈三昧經)
Skt. Samādhirāja-candrapradīpa-sūtra

639

367

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Shoulengyan sanmei jing (首楞嚴三昧經)
Skt. Śūraṅgamasamādhi-sūtra
Eng. The Śūraṅgama Samādhi Sutra (1998)

Taishō No.
642

Ch. Jinguang ming zuishengwang jing (金光明最勝王經)
Skt. Suvarṇaprabhāsa-sūtra

665

Ch. Jie shenmi jing (解深密經)
Skt. Saṃdhinirmocana-sūtra
Eng. The Scripture on the Explication of Underlying Meaning (2000)

676

Ch. Sishierzhang jing (四十二章經)
Eng. The Sutra of Forty-two Sections (in Apocryphal Scriptures, 2005)

784

Ch. Dasheng rulengqie jing (大乘入楞伽經)
Skt. Laṅkāvatāra-sūtra

672

Ch. Yulanpen jing (盂蘭盆經)
Skt. *Ullambana-sūtra
Eng. The Ullambana Sutra (in Apocryphal Scriptures, 2005)

685

Ch. Dafangguang yuanjue xiuduoluo liaoyi jing
(大方廣圓覺修多羅了義經)
Eng. The Sutra of Perfect Enlightenment
(in Apocryphal Scriptures, 2005)

842

Ch. Da Biluzhena chengfo shenbian jiachi jing
848
(大毘盧遮那成佛神變加持經)
Skt. Mahāvairocanābhisambodhi-vikurvitādhiṣṭhāna-vaipulyasūtrendrarājanāma-dharmaparyāya
Eng. The Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi Sutra (2005)

Ch. Jinggangding yiqie rulai zhenshi she dasheng xianzheng dajiao
865
wang jing (金剛頂一切如來眞實攝大乘現證大教王經)
Skt. Sarvatathāgata-tattvasaṃgraha-mahāyānābhisamaya-mahākalparāja
Eng. The Adamantine Pinnacle Sutra (in Two Esoteric Sutras, 2001)

Ch. Suxidi jieluo jing (蘇悉地羯囉經)
Skt. Susiddhikara-mahātantra-sādhanopāyika-paṭala
Eng. The Susiddhikara Sutra (in Two Esoteric Sutras, 2001)
Ch. Modengqie jing (摩登伽經)
Skt. *Mātaṅgī-sūtra
Eng. The Mātaṅga Sutra (in Esoteric Texts, 2015)

368

893

1300

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Mohe sengqi lü (摩訶僧祇律)
Skt. *Mahāsāṃghika-vinaya

Taishō No.
1425

Ch. Sifen lü (四分律)
Skt. *Dharmaguptaka-vinaya

1428

Ch. Fanwang jing (梵網經)
Skt. *Brahmajāla-sūtra

1484

Ch. Shanjianlü piposha (善見律毘婆沙)
Pāli Samantapāsādikā

1462

Ch. Youposaijie jing (優婆塞戒經)
Skt. Upāsakaśīla-sūtra
Eng. The Sutra on Upāsaka Precepts (1994)

1488

Ch. Shizha biposha lun (十住毘婆沙論)
Skt. *Daśabhūmika-vibhāṣā

1521

Ch. Apidamojushe lun (阿毘達磨倶舍論)
Skt. Abhidharmakośa-bhāṣya

1558

Ch. Miaofa lianhua jing youbotishe (妙法蓮華經憂波提舍)
1519
Skt. Saddharmapuṇḍarīka-upadeśa
Eng. The Commentary on the Lotus Sutra (in Tiantai Lotus Texts, 2013)

Ch. Fodijing lun (佛地經論)
Skt. *Buddhabhūmisūtra-śāstra
Eng. The Interpretation of the Buddha Land (2002)

1530

Ch. Zhonglun (中論)
Skt. Madhyamaka-śāstra

1564

Ch. Cheng weishi lun (成唯識論)
Eng. Demonstration of Consciousness Only
(in Three Texts on Consciousness Only, 1999)

1585

Ch. Yüqie shidilun (瑜伽師地論)
Skt. Yogācārabhūmi-śāstra

1579

Ch. Weishi sanshilun song (唯識三十論頌)
Skt. Triṃśikā
Eng. The Thirty Verses on Consciousness Only
(in Three Texts on Consciousness Only, 1999)

1586

369

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Weishi ershi lun (唯識二十論)
Skt. Viṃśatikā
Eng. The Treatise in Twenty Verses on Consciousness Only
(in Three Texts on Consciousness Only, 1999)

Taishō No.
1590

Ch. She dasheng lun (攝大乘論)
1593
Skt. Mahāyānasaṃgraha
Eng. The Summary of the Great Vehicle (Revised Second Edition, 2003)
Ch. Bian zhongbian lun (辯中邊論)
Skt. Madhyāntavibhāga

1600

Ch. Dasheng chengye lun (大乘成業論)
Skt. Karmasiddhiprakaraṇa

1609

Ch. Yinming ruzheng li lun (因明入正理論)
Skt. Nyāyapraveśa

1630

Ch. Jingangzhen lun (金剛針論)
Skt. Vajrasūcī

1642

Ch. Dasheng zhuangyanjing lun (大乘莊嚴經論)
Skt. Mahāyānasūtrālaṃkāra

1604

Ch. Jiujing yisheng baoxing lun (究竟一乘寳性論)
Skt. Ratnagotravibhāga-mahāyānottaratantra-śāstra

1611

Ch. Dasheng ji pusa xue lun (大乘集菩薩學論)
Skt. Śikṣāsamuccaya

1636

Ch. Zhang suozhi lun (彰所知論)
Eng. The Treatise on the Elucidation of the Knowable (2004)

1645

Ch. Jingangding yuqie zhongfa anouduoluo sanmiao sanputi xin lun
(金剛頂瑜伽中發阿耨多羅三藐三菩提心論)
Eng. The Bodhicitta Śāstra (in Esoteric Texts, 2015)

1665

Ch. Putixing jing (菩提行經)
Skt. Bodhicaryāvatāra

1662

Ch. Dasheng qixi nlun (大乘起信論)
Skt. *Mahāyānaśraddhotpāda-śāstra
Eng. The Awakening of Faith (2005)

1666

Ch. Shimoheyan lun (釋摩訶衍論)

370

1668

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Naxian biqiu jing (那先比丘經)
Pāli Milindapañhā

Taishō No.

1670

Ch. Banruo boluomiduo xin jing yuzan (般若波羅蜜多心經幽賛)
Eng. A Comprehensive Commentary on the Heart Sutra
(Prajñāpāramitā-hṛdaya-sūtra) (2001)

1710

Ch. Guan wuliangshou fo jing shu (觀無量壽佛經疏)

1753

Ch. Miaofalianhua jing xuanyi (妙法蓮華經玄義)

1716

Ch. Sanlun xuanyi (三論玄義)

1852

Ch. Zhao lun (肇論)

1858

Ch. Dasheng xuan lun (大乘玄論)
Ch. Huayan yisheng jiaoyi fenqi zhang (華嚴一乘教義分齊章)

Ch. Yuanren lun (原人論)

Ch. Mohe zhiguan (摩訶止觀)

1853
1866
1886
1911

Ch. Xiuxi zhiguan zuochan fayao (修習止觀坐禪法要)

1915

Ch. Guoqing bai lu (國清百録)

1934

Ch. Foguo Yuanwu chanshi biyan lu (佛果圜悟禪師碧巖録)
Eng. The Blue Cliff Record (1998)

2003

Ch. Liuzu dashi fabao tan jing (六祖大師法寶壇經)
Eng. The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch (2000)

2008

Ch. Tiantai sijiao yi (天台四教儀)
Eng. A Guide to the Tiantai Fourfold Teachings
(in Tiantai Lotus Texts, 2013)

Ch. Zhenzhou Linji Huizhao chanshi wulu (鎭州臨濟慧照禪師語録)
Eng. The Recorded Sayings of Linji (in Three Chan Classics, 1999)

Ch. Wumen guan (無門關)
Eng. Wumen’s Gate (in Three Chan Classics, 1999)

Ch. Xinxin ming (信心銘)
Eng. The Faith-Mind Maxim (in Three Chan Classics, 1999)

Ch. Huangboshan Duanji chanshi chuanxin fayao
(黄檗山斷際禪師傳心法要)
Eng. Essentials of the Transmission of Mind (in Zen Texts, 2005)

1931

1985

2005

2010
2012A

371

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Yongjia Zhengdao ge (永嘉證道歌)

Taishō No.

Ch. Chixiu Baizhang qinggui (勅修百丈清規)
Eng. The Baizhang Zen Monastic Regulations (2007)

2014

2025

Ch. Yibuzonglun lun (異部宗輪論)
Skt. Samayabhedoparacanacakra
Eng. The Cycle of the Formation of the Schismatic Doctrines (2004)

2031

Ch. Maming pusa zhuan (馬鳴菩薩傳)
Eng. The Life of Aśvaghoṣa Bodhisattva
(in Lives of Great Monks and Nuns, 2002)

2046

Ch. Ayuwang jing (阿育王經)
Skt. Aśokāvadāna
Eng. The Biographical Scripture of King Aśoka (1993)

2043

Ch. Longshu pusa zhuan (龍樹菩薩傳)
Eng. The Life of Nāgārjuna Bodhisattva
(in Lives of Great Monks and Nuns, 2002)

2047

Ch. Posoupandou fashi zhuan (婆藪槃豆法師傳)
Eng. Biography of Dharma Master Vasubandhu
(in Lives of Great Monks and Nuns, 2002)

2049

Ch. Gaoseng zhuan (高僧傳)

2059

Ch. Datang Daciensi Zanzang fashi zhuan (大唐大慈恩寺三藏法師傳) 2053
Eng. A Biography of the Tripiṭaka Master of the Great Ci’en
Monastery of the Great Tang Dynasty (1995)

Ch. Biqiuni zhuan (比丘尼傳)
Eng. Biographies of Buddhist Nuns
(in Lives of Great Monks and Nuns, 2002)

2063

Ch. Datang xiyu ji (大唐西域記)
Eng. The Great Tang Dynasty Record of the Western Regions (1996)

2087

Ch. Gaoseng Faxian zhuan (高僧法顯傳)
Eng. The Journey of the Eminent Monk Faxian
(in Lives of Great Monks and Nuns, 2002)

Ch. Youfangjichao: Tangdaheshangdongzheng zhuan
(遊方記抄: 唐大和上東征傳)

372

2085

2089-(7)

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Hongming ji (弘明集)
Eng. The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation
of Buddhism (Volume I, 2015)

Taishō No.
2102

Ch. Fayuan zhulin (法苑珠林)

2122

Ch. Fanyu zaming (梵語雑名)

2135

Jp. Yuimakyō gisho (維摩經義疏)
Eng. The Expository Commentary on the Vimalakīrti Sutra (2012)

2186

Jp.

2203

Ch. Nanhai jigui neifa zhuan (南海寄歸内法傳)
Eng. Buddhist Monastic Traditions of Southern Asia (2000)
Jp. Shōmangyō gisho (勝鬘經義疏)
Eng. Prince Shōtoku’s Commentary on the Śrīmālā Sutra (2011)

2125

2185

Jp.

Hokke gisho (法華義疏)

2187

Jp.

Daijō hossō kenjin shō (大乘法相研神章)

2309

Jp. Risshū kōyō (律宗綱要)
Eng. The Essentials of the Vinaya Tradition (1995)

2348

Jp.

Hannya shingyō hiken (般若心經秘鍵)

Kanjin kakumu shō (觀心覺夢鈔)

2312

Jp. Tendai hokke shūgi shū (天台法華宗義集)
Eng. The Collected Teachings of the Tendai Lotus School (1995)

2366

Jp.

2377

Jp.

Kenkairon (顯戒論)

Sange gakushō shiki (山家學生式)

Jp. Hizōhōyaku (秘藏寶鑰)
Eng. The Precious Key to the Secret Treasury (in Shingon Texts, 2004)

Jp. Benkenmitsu nikyō ron (辨顯密二教論)
Eng. On the Differences between the Exoteric and Esoteric
Teachings (in Shingon Texts, 2004)

Jp. Sokushin jōbutsu gi (即身成佛義)
Eng. The Meaning of Becoming a Buddha in This Very Body
(in Shingon Texts, 2004)

2376

2426

2427
2428

Jp. Shōji jissōgi (聲字實相義)
2429
Eng. The Meanings of Sound, Sign, and Reality (in Shingon Texts, 2004)
373

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Jp. Unjigi (吽字義)
Eng. The Meanings of the Word Hūṃ (in Shingon Texts, 2004)

Taishō No.

Jp. Gorin kuji myōhimitsu shaku (五輪九字明秘密釋)
Eng. The Illuminating Secret Commentary on the Five Cakras
and the Nine Syllables (in Shingon Texts, 2004)

2430

2514

Jp. Mitsugonin hotsuro sange mon (密嚴院發露懺悔文)
Eng. The Mitsugonin Confession (in Shingon Texts, 2004)

2527

Jp. Fukan zazengi (普勧坐禪儀)
Eng. A Universal Recommendation for True Zazen
(in Zen Texts, 2005)

2580

Jp. Zazen yōjin ki (坐禪用心記)
Eng. Advice on the Practice of Zazen (in Zen Texts, 2005)

2586

Jp. Kenjōdo shinjitsu kyōgyō shōmon rui (顯淨土眞實教行証文類)
Eng. Kyōgyōshinshō: On Teaching, Practice, Faith, and
Enlightenment (2003)

2646

Jp. Kōzen gokoku ron (興禪護國論)
Eng. A Treatise on Letting Zen Flourish to Protect the State
(in Zen Texts, 2005)

2543

Jp. Shōbōgenzō (正法眼藏)
Eng. Shōbōgenzō: The True Dharma-eye Treasury (Volume I, 2007)
Shōbōgenzō: The True Dharma-eye Treasury (Volume II, 2008)
Shōbōgenzō: The True Dharma-eye Treasury (Volume III, 2008)
Shōbōgenzō: The True Dharma-eye Treasury (Volume IV, 2008)

2582

Jp. Senchaku hongan nembutsu shū (選擇本願念佛集)
Eng. Senchaku Hongan Nembutsu Shū: A Collection of Passages
on the Nembutsu Chosen in the Original Vow (1997)

2608

Jp. Tannishō (歎異抄)
Eng. Tannishō: Passages Deploring Deviations of Faith (1996)

Jp. Rennyo shōnin ofumi (蓮如上人御文)
Eng. Rennyo Shōnin Ofumi: The Letters of Rennyo (1996)

Jp.

374

Ōjōyōshū (往生要集)

2661
2668
2682

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Taishō No.

Jp. Risshō ankoku ron (立正安國論)
Eng. Risshōankokuron or The Treatise on the Establishment
of the Orthodox Teaching and the Peace of the Nation
(in Two Nichiren Texts, 2003)

2688

Jp. Kaimokushō (開目抄)
Eng. Kaimokushō or Liberation from Blindness (2000)

2689

Ch. Fumu enzhong jing (父母恩重經)
Eng. The Sutra on the Profundity of Filial Love
(in Apocryphal Scriptures, 2005)

2887

Jp. Kanjin honzon shō (觀心本尊抄)
Eng. Kanjinhonzonshō or The Most Venerable One Revealed
by Introspecting Our Minds for the First Time at the
Beginning of the Fifth of the Five Five Hundred-year Ages
(in Two Nichiren Texts, 2003)

Jp. Hasshūkōyō (八宗綱要)
Eng. The Essentials of the Eight Traditions (1994)

2692

extracanonical

Jp.

Sangō shīki (三教指帰)

extracanonical

Jp.

Jūshichijō kenpō (十七條憲法)

extracanonical

Jp. Mappō tōmyō ki (末法燈明記)
Eng. The Candle of the Latter Dharma (1994)

extracanonical

375

