THE CANONICAL BOOK OF THE

BUDDHA’S LENGTHY DISCOURSES
VOLUME III

dBET PDF Version
© 2018
All Rights Reserved

BDK English Tripiṭaka Series

THE CANONICAL BOOK
OF THE BUDDHA’S
LENGTHY DISCOURSES
VOLUME III
(Taishō Volume 1, Number 1)

Translated from the Chinese
by

Shohei Ichimura

BDK America, Inc.
2018

Copyright © 2018 by Bukkyō Dendō Kyōkai and
BDK America, Inc.

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored
in a retrieval system, or transcribed in any form or by any means
—electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise—
without the prior written permission of the publisher.
First Printing, 2018
ISBN: 978-1-886439-68-9
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 2015943478
Published by
BDK America, Inc.
1675 School Street
Moraga, California 94556

Printed in the United States of America

A Message on the Publication of the
English Tripiṭaka
The Buddhist canon is said to contain eighty-four thousand different teachings.
I believe that this is because the Buddha’s basic approach was to prescribe a
different treatment for every spiritual ailment, much as a doctor prescribes a
different medicine for every medical ailment. Thus his teachings were always
appropriate for the particular suffering individual and for the time at which the
teaching was given, and over the ages not one of his prescriptions has failed to
relieve the suffering to which it was addressed.
Ever since the Buddha’s Great Demise over twenty-ﬁve hundred years ago,
his message of wisdom and compassion has spread throughout the world. Yet
no one has ever attempted to translate the entire Buddhist canon into English
throughout the history of Japan. It is my greatest wish to see this done and to
make the translations available to the many English-speaking people who have
never had the opportunity to learn about the Buddha’s teachings.
Of course, it would be impossible to translate all of the Buddha’s eighty-four
thousand teachings in a few years. I have, therefore, had one hundred thirty-nine
of the scriptural texts in the prodigious Taishō edition of the Chinese Buddhist
canon selected for inclusion in the First Series of this translation project.
It is in the nature of this undertaking that the results are bound to be criticized.
Nonetheless, I am convinced that unless someone takes it upon himself or herself
to initiate this project, it will never be done. At the same time, I hope that an
improved, revised edition will appear in the future.
It is most gratifying that, thanks to the efforts of more than a hundred Buddhist
scholars from the East and the West, this monumental project has ﬁnally gotten
off the ground. May the rays of the Wisdom of the Compassionate One reach
each and every person in the world.
NUMATA Yehan
Founder of the English
Tripiṭaka Project

August 7, 1991
v

Editorial Foreword
In the long history of Buddhist transmission throughout East Asia, translations
of Buddhist texts were often carried out as national projects supported and
funded by emperors and political leaders. The BDK English Tripiṭaka project,
on the other hand, began as a result of the dream and commitment of one man.
In January 1982 Dr. NUMATA Yehan, founder of Bukkyō Dendō Kyōkai (Society
for the Promotion of Buddhism), initiated the monumental task of translating
the complete Taishō shinshū daizōkyō edition of the Chinese Tripiṭaka (Buddhist
canon) into the English language. Under his leadership, a special preparatory
committee was organized in April 1982. By July of the same year the Translation
Committee of the English Tripiṭaka was officially convened.
The initial Committee included the following members: (late) HANAYAMA
Shōyū (Chairperson), (late) BANDŌ Shōjun, ISHIGAMI Zennō, (late) KAMATA
Shigeo, (late) KANAOKA Shūyū, MAYEDA Sengaku, NARA Yasuaki, (late)
SAYEKI Shinkō, (late) SHIOIRI Ryōtatsu, TAMARU Noriyoshi, (late) TAMURA
Kwansei, (late) URYŪZU Ryūshin, and YUYAMA Akira. Assistant members of
the Committee were as follows: KANAZAWA Atsushi, WATANABE Shōgo, Rolf
Giebel of New Zealand, and Rudy Smet of Belgium.
After holding planning meetings on a monthly basis, the Committee selected
one hundred and thirty-nine texts for the First Series of the project, estimated
to be one hundred printed volumes in all. The texts selected were not limited to
those originally written in India but also included works composed in China
and Japan. While the publication of the First Series proceeds, the texts for the
Second Series will be selected from among the remaining works; this process
will continue until all the texts, in Japanese as well as in Chinese, have been
published. Given the huge scope of this project, accomplishing the English translations of all the Chinese and Japanese texts in the Taishō canon may take as
long as one hundred years or more. Nevertheless, as Dr. NUMATA wished, it is
the sincere hope of the Committee that this project will continue until completion,
even after all the present members have passed away.

vii

Editorial Foreword

Dr. NUMATA passed away on May 5, 1994, at the age of ninety-seven. He
entrusted his son, Mr. NUMATA Toshihide with the continuation and completion
of the English Tripiṭaka project. Mr. Numata served for twenty-three years, leading
the project forward with enormous progress before his sudden passing on February
16, 2017, at the age of eighty-four. The Committee previously lost its able and
devoted first Chairperson, Professor HANAYAMA Shōyū, on June 16, 1995, at
the age of sixty-three. In October 1995 the Committee elected Professor MAYEDA
Sengaku (then Vice President of Musashino Women’s College) as Chairperson,
and upon the retirement of Professor Mayeda in July 2016, the torch was passed
to me to serve as the third Chairperson. Despite these losses and changes we, the
Editorial Committee members, have renewed our determination to carry out the
noble ideals set by Dr. NUMATA. Present members of the Committee are Kenneth
K. Tanaka (Chairperson), MAYEDA Sengaku, ICHISHIMA Shōshin, ISHIGAMI
Zennō, KATSURA Shōryū, NARA Yasuaki, SAITŌ Akira, SHIMODA Masahiro,
WATANABE Shōgo, and YONEZAWA Yoshiyasu.
The Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research was established
in November 1984, in Berkeley, California, U.S.A., to assist in the publication
of the translated texts. The Publication Committee was organized at the Numata
Center in December 1991. In 2010, the Numata Center’s operations were merged
with Bukkyō Dendō Kyōkai America, Inc. (BDK America), and BDK America
continues to oversee the publication side of the English Tripiṭaka project in close
cooperation with the Editorial Committee in Tokyo.
At the time of this writing, in February 2017, the project has completed about
sixty percent of the seven thousand one hundred and eighty-five Taishō pages
of texts selected for the First Series. Much work still lies ahead of us but we are
committed to the completion of the remaining texts in order to realize the grand
vision of Dr. Numata, shared by Mr. Numata and Professor Hanayama, to make
the Buddhist canon more readily accessible to the English-speaking world.
Kenneth K. Tanaka

Chairperson
Editorial Committee of
the BDK English Tripiṭaka

viii

Publisher’s Foreword
On behalf of the members of the Publication Committee, I am happy to present
this volume as the latest contribution to the BDK English Tripiṭaka Series. The
Publication Committee members have worked to ensure that this volume, as all
other volumes in the series, has gone through a rigorous process of editorial efforts.
The initial translation and editing of the Buddhist scriptures found in this
and other BDK English Tripiṭaka volumes are performed under the direction of
the Editorial Committee in Tokyo, Japan. Both the Editorial Committee in Tokyo
and the Publication Committee, headquartered in Moraga, California, are dedicated to the production of accurate and readable English translations of the
Buddhist canon. In doing so, the members of both committees and associated
staff work to honor the deep faith, spirit, and concern of the late Reverend Dr.
Yehan Numata, who founded the BDK English Tripiṭaka Series in order to disseminate the Buddhist teachings throughout the world.
The long-term goal of our project is the translation and publication of the
texts in the one hundred-volume Taishō edition of the Chinese Buddhist canon,
along with a number of influential extracanonical Japanese Buddhist texts. The
list of texts selected for the First Series of this translation project may be found
at the end of each volume in the series.
As Chair of the Publication Committee, I am deeply honored to serve as the
fifth person in a post previously held by leading figures in the field of Buddhist
studies, most recently by my predecessor, John R. McRae.
In conclusion, I wish to thank the members of the Publication Committee for
their dedicated and expert work undertaken in the course of preparing this volume
for publication: Managing Editor Marianne Dresser, Dr. Hudaya Kandahjaya, Dr.
Carl Bielefeldt, Dr. Robert Sharf, and Rev. Brian Kensho Nagata, Director of the
BDK English Tripiṭaka Project.
A. Charles Muller

Chairperson
Publication Committee

ix

Contents
A Message on the Publication of the English Tripiṭaka
NUMATA Yehan

v

Editorial Foreword

Kenneth K. Tanaka

vii

Translator’s Introduction

Shohei Ichimura

xiii

A. Charles Muller

Publisher’s Foreword

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

ix

Sutra 21. Brahmā’s Net
Sutra 22. One Who Cultivates Virtue
Sutra 23. Brāhmaṇa Kūṭadanta
Sutra 24. Kevaddha
Sutra 25. A Naked Brāhmaṇa Ascetic
Sutra 26. Knowledge of the Three Vedas
Sutra 27. The Rewards of the Life of a Śrāvaka
Sutra 28. Poṭṭhapada
Sutra 29. Lohitya
Sutra 30. A Buddhist Cosmology

3
33
49
75
83
93
107
123
141
151

Bibliography

307

A List of the Volumes of the BDK English Tripiṭaka (First Series)

331

Notes
Index

xi

305
311

Translator’s Introduction
The Textual Origin and Contents of the
Canonical Collection of Lengthy Discourses

The complex historical context in which the textual translation of the Dīrgha
Āgama took place is beyond the scope of this brief introduction. I attempt to
provide here, however, an evaluation of three major features of this canonical
tradition: the nature of this sutra collection and its contents, the translators and
the times of translation, and the canonical legacy from the point of view of the
premodern and modern contemporary Tripiṭaka Buddhist library.
The Chang ahan jing (Skt. Dīrgha Āgama), or the Canonical Collection of
Lengthy Discourses, is one of the four canonical collections that were upheld
by the orthodox Dharmaguptaka school. Since this school descended from the
Sthāvira orthodoxy that had a prominent position in the few centuries around
the Third Buddhist Council, held around 250 to 236 B.C.E.,1 centuries after the
Buddha’s demise, the origin of this school’s canonical tradition (Āgamas) may
be traced back to some scriptural matrix2 whose contents had been compiled
and authenticated by the time of the Third Council.
There were three or four general councils during Buddhism’s early centuries.
The First Council was held at Rājagṛha (present-day Rājgīr, Bihar) immediately
after Śākyamuni’s passing (485 or 486 B.C.E.) in order to assure the oral preservation of the core teachings Śākyamuni Buddha taught directly to his disciples.
The Second Council was held at Vaiśālī (Vesālī) a century later to settle some
controversies on the Vinaya rules and disciplines set forth by Śākyamuni as the
moral and spiritual codes for Buddhist monks and their communities. This
council contributed to the ascertainment of legality on the nature of Vinaya
codes, despite some challenges and disputes raised by changing historical and
social contexts. At that time, it is said that some elder monks still remembered
how some of the ﬁrst-generation disciples had upheld the discipline while remaining active in daily life.

xiii

Translator’s Introduction

Though our knowledge of it is conﬁned to Theravāda documents,3 the Third
Council was held under the auspices of the Mauryan Buddhist ruler Aśoka in
the seventeenth year of his reign (251 B.C.E.) at the capital city Pāṭaliputra (Patna,
Bihar). Although this council failed in its intended goal of preventing schism
from sectarian movements, the Third Council was pivotal to the subsequent
history of the Buddhist canonical tradition for two reasons. First, since the
Buddha’s teaching and organization evolved in various forms during the initial
two and a half centuries of its development, Buddhist leaders were compelled
to reexamine their canonical traditions and establish an authenticated standard
to prevent sectarian diversion and doctrinal variation. Second, it was during this
council that Buddhist scriptures were formally classiﬁed into the threefold categories of Sutra (teaching), Vinaya (discipline), and Abhidharma (doctrine), i.e.,
the threefold canonical baskets (Skt. Tripiṭaka; Pāli Tipiṭaka). From that time on,
the Tripiṭaka served as the basic categorization of Buddhist literature.
The last general conference was held in Kāśmīra under the auspices of King
Kaniṣka, the Kuṣāṇa ruler (known in China as Great Yüeji), toward the end of
the ﬁrst century C.E., and it centered on the Hinayana orthodoxy, the SthāviraSarvāstivāda school. Though the historical veracity of this conference is not
conclusive, the likelihood of its occurrence can be argued based on the detailed
Abhidharma discussions recorded in the Mahāvibhāṣā-śāstra,4 and especially
in the epilogue left by its translator Xuanzang, as well as the historical fact of
the massive Hindu reaction which spurred efforts to compile their literary legacy
in the early second century C.E.5 In any case, after the Fourth Council meeting
in Kāśmīra, Kuṣāṇa monks began to reach the continent of China during the
Late Han period.

The Synopsis between the Sanskrit Dīrgha
Āgama and the Pāli Dīgha Nikāya

The Canonical Collection of Lengthy Discourses was one of the four Āgamas
essential to the Sutra-piṭaka that was preserved by the Dharmaguptaka school.
To explain the nature of this Āgama, it is best to show the synopsis between the
content of the Dīrgha Āgama and that of the Dīgha Nikāya (DN), upheld by the
Theravāda school as part of the ﬁvefold sutta-piṭaka. The Theravāda school prospered in Sri Lanka, and its descendants in Southeast Asia (Burma, Thailand, and
Indochina) preserved the ﬁvefold Nikāyas through the Pāli canonical language.

xiv

Translator’s Introduction

The Dharmaguptaka school, one of the descendants of the Sthāvira-Sarvāstivāda
school that prospered in Northern India, inherited the Dīrgha Āgama as part of
their Sutra-piṭaka through the canonical language of Sanskrit or, more precisely,
Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit.6
The fourfold Āgamas that constitute the Sutra-piṭaka of the Hinayana orthodoxy were preserved throughout the medieval period as part of the Mahayana
Tripiṭaka corpus through the Chinese versions since the ﬁfth century C.E. The
following is a chart of the synopsis between the four Dharmaguptaka Āgamas
originally in Sanskrit and the ﬁve Nikāyas (Pāli sutta collections) preserved by
the Theravāda school.

Four Sanskrit Āgamas
(Dharmaguptaka)
1. Dīrgha Āgama (Lengthy
Discourses)
2. Madhyama Āgama (Middle-length
Discourses)
3. Saṃyukta Āgama (Mixed
Discourses)
4. Ekottarika Āgama (Gradually
Increased Discourses)

Five Pāli Nikāyas
(Theravāda)
1. Dīgha Nikāya (Lengthy Discourses)

2. Majjhima Nikāya (Middle-length
Discourses)
3. Saṃyutta Nikāya (Mixed Discourses)
4. Aṅguttara Nikāya (Increasing Each
by a Doctrine)
5. Khuddaka Nikāya (Short
Discourses)

As can be inferred from this table, the Sanskrit Dīrgha Āgama and the Pāli Dīgha
Nikāya have many synoptic parallels in their respective content, namely, between
the thirty sutras of the Chang ahan jing and the thirty-four suttantas of the Pāli
Dīgha Nikāya.7 There are twenty-seven sutras that are identiﬁed with the twentyseven suttantas, but differences in their respective ordering and arrangement of
scriptures must be recognized. Seven suttantas8 are omitted in the Chang ahan
jing, but this includes a sutra that is not found in the Dīgha Nikāya. Because of
this close synoptic correlations, it is reasonable to assume that the Sanskrit
Dīrgha Āgama and the Pāli Dīgha Nikāya had a common canonical matrix that
could have been determined as standard during the Third Buddhist Council.
The Chang ahan jing is unique in two ways. First, the editors of the Āgama in
organizing the sutras set forth four major sections, reﬂecting their major concerns:
xv

Translator’s Introduction

(1) the centrality of Śākyamuni Buddha as the primary subject, (2) the importance
of the Dharma and doctrine, (3) the resultant practice, discipline, and advanced
spiritual states, and (4) a record of the cosmological origins of the world. Second,
the “Sutra on Buddhist Cosmology,” which is totally absent in the Dīgha Nikāya
of the Pāli canon, was added as the last text in the collection in order to present
the Buddha’s teaching more effectively and attractively to a non-Buddhist Hindu
audience. According to some scholars, the underlying principle of the Chang
ahan jing reﬂects a conciliatory impulse that was intended to bridge the original
Buddha’s teaching (the ninefold or twelvefold categories of discourses) on the
one hand, and early Mahayana Buddhist teaching and scriptures on the other.9
The correlations between the two scriptural traditions, the sutras of the Chang
ahan jing and the suttantas of the Pāli Dīgha Nikāya, are presented below. In
addition, the corresponding texts are noted at the beginning of each sutra in this
translation.
Four Sutras on the Subject of Śakyamuni Buddha
1. The Great Origin (Daban jing)
DN 14: Mahāpadāna Suttanta
2. Last Journey and Sojourns,
DN 16: Mahāpariṇibbāna Suttanta
Parts 1, 2, 3
3. A Great Treasury Councilor
DN 19: Mahāgovinda Suttanta
4. Janavasabha’s Exhortation
DN 18: Janavasabha Suttanta

Fifteen Sutras on the Subject of Dharma and Doctrine
5. Lesser Causality
DN 27: Aggañña Suttanta
6. Universal Ruler (Cakravartin)’s
DN 26: Cakkavatti-sīhanāda Suttanta
Practice
7. Pāyāsi[’s Dialogue]
DN 23: Pāyāsi Suttanta
8. Sandhāna
DN 25: Udumbarika-sīhanāda Suttanta
9. Numerically Assembled Doctrines DN 33: Saṅgīti Suttanta
10. Ten Progressively Classiﬁed
DN 34: Dasuttara-Suttanta
Doctrines
11. Gradual Increase of Doctrines
No Parallel in DN
by One
12. Doctrines in Groups of Three
No Parallel in DN
13. Greater Causality
DN 15: Mahānidāna Suttanta
14. Indra’s Question on Causality
DN 21: Sakkapañha Suttanta
xvi

Translator’s Introduction

15. Anupiya Episode
16. Kalyāṇa-jātika
17. Purity
18. Happiness Caused by Oneself
19. Great Assembly

DN 24: Pāṭika Suttanta
DN 31: Sīṇgālovāda Suttanta
DN 29: Pāsādika Suttanta
DN 28: Saṃpasānīya Suttanta
DN 20: Mahāsamaya Suttanta

Ten Sutras on the Subject of Practice and Resulting Spiritual States
20. Ambaṭṭha
DN 3: Ambaṭṭha Suttanta
21. Brahmā’s [Net]
DN 1: Brahmajāla Suttanta
22. One Who Cultivates Virtues
DN 4: Soṇadaṇḍa Suttanta
23. Brāhmaṇa Kūṭadanta
DN 5: Kūṭadanta Suttanta
24. Kevaddha
DN 11: Kevaṭṭa Suttanta
25. A Naked Brāhmaṇa Ascetic
DN 8: Kassapa-sīhanāda Suttanta
26. Knowledge of Three Vedas
DN 13: Tevijja Suttanta
27. The Rewards of the Life of a
DN 2: Sāmañña-phala Suttanta
Śramaṇa
28. Poṭṭhapāda
DN 9: Poṭṭhapāda Suttanta
29. Lohitya
DN 12: Lohicca Suttanta

Sutra 30 on the Subject of Cosmology (No Parallel in DN)
A 1. The Land of Jambudvīpa
2. The Land of Uttarakuru
3. The Universal Ruler (Cakravartin)
B 4. The Worlds of the Hells
5. Dragons and Birds
C 6. The Asura Demigods
7. The Four Guardian Gods of Heaven
8. The Trāyastriṃśa Heavens
D 9. Three Kinds of Disasters
10. The Asura Demigods
11. Three Kinds of Medium-length Eons (Kalpas)

Translators and
Historical Times

The translator of the Chang ahan jing was the śramaṇa Buddhayaśas, a native
of Kāśmīra who moved to Khotan in Central Asia, where he resided for some

xvii

Translator’s Introduction

time before he was invited to Chang’an speciﬁcally to engage in scriptural translation. There are two stories of how Buddhayaśas was invited to Chang’an and
what contribution his translation was to accomplish.
Fifth-century China was divided into northern and southern political regions
separated by the Yangzi River. In the north were Louyang and Chang’an, which
were the two major government seats of the Han and Tang dynasties, as well as
several other political and cultural centers. Since the north was dominated by
the descendants of the ﬁve racially foreign regimes, resulting in the short-lived
Sixteen States period, Buddhism had a fair chance to develop its inﬂuence despite
competition from indigenous Confucian and Daoist traditions. Two centuries
from the initial introduction of Buddhism to China during the Late Han period,
Chinese Buddhists began to be aware that they needed more scriptural sources
for deeper understanding as well as for consolidating their communities through
Buddhist ethical and moral practice.
According to one story, Buddhayaśas was invited to the capital by the ruler
of the Late Qin, Yaoxing (r. 394–415 C.E.), with the assistance of Kumārajīva,
his religious counselor. Kumārajīva (344–413) was a scholar-monk from the
country of Kuccha in Eastern Turkestan. Born to Indian and Central Asian
parents, he excelled in training in Buddhist studies in Kāśmīra and acquired linguistic skill in Chinese. He had been brought to Liangzhou as the captive of
Fujian’s general, Lüguang, and was subsequently invited to Chang’an in 401 to
serve as Yaoxing’s religious counselor and lead the government’s Buddhist translation project. Buddhayaśas had been Kumārajīva’s teacher on the Sarvāstivāda
Vinaya (the Daśabhāṇavāra-vinaya, the subject of Abhidharma treatises) more
than two decades previously.10 Because he had once been Kumārajīva’s teacher,
Buddhayaśas was reverentially nicknamed the “red-bearded professor” or the
“senior doctrinal professor” (Vaibhāṣika) in Chang’an.
It is said that, in part, Kumārajīva needed Buddhayaśas’ help in collaborating
on completing the translation of the Daśabhūmika-sutra (Sutra on the Ten Stages
of the Bodhisattva Career), and that the ruler Yaoxing also requested the śramaṇa
in 410 C.E. to translate both the Dharmaguptaka Vinaya (Dharmaguptaka-vinaya;
Sifen lü; Vinaya in Four Divisions) and the Dīrgha Āgama of the same school.
The Vinaya translation was completed 412 C.E. The next year, 413, Buddhayaśas began to translate the Dīrgha Āgama with Zhu Fonian, a śramaṇa of
Liangzhou, as co-translator, and the translation was completed that same year.

xviii

Translator’s Introduction

As for the reasons the Chang ahan jing originally belonged to the Dharmaguptaka school, we have four indirect proofs. First, the editorial point of view of
the Chang ahan jing itself coincides with the Dharmaguptaka tradition in which
the principle of the centrality of the Buddha is emphasized in terms of veneration
for Śākyamuni as founder of the religion. Second, the text displays a great emphasis
on the merit to be accrued by the cult worship of the sacred relics enshrined in
stupas (commemorative towers). Third, the text’s translator, Buddhayaśas, who
also translated the Dharmaguptaka-vinaya, was a bhikṣu afﬁliated with the Dharmaguptaka school. Finally, the Vinaya text, especially its ﬁfty-fourth chapter, refers
to seven sutras that were included in the Chang ahan jing, including the “Sutra
on Buddhist Cosmology” that is not found in the Pāli Dīgha Nikāya.11
The second story comes from the introduction to the Dharmaguptaka-vinaya,
which gives a somewhat different version. Zhi Faling, a Chinese śramaṇa, traveled to the Central Asia on the instructions of his master, Huiyüen, to search for
Vinaya texts, and happened to meet Buddhayaśas in Khotan, where he was
already renowned as a Mahayana Tripiṭaka master. With due respect, Faling
requested him to visit Chang’an and accompanied him there, transporting Uighur
textual sources. Faling’s master Huiyüen was a close friend of Kumarajīva, and
is known to have organized the Lotus Association at Lushan in the Pure Land
sectarian faith, whose adherents devoted their lives to the ideal of rebirth in the
Pure Land. There was a growing concern among Chinese Buddhists at the time
to consolidate their growing communities and regulate the conduct of their followers, and so there was a need for the Vinaya-piṭaka. As requested, Buddhayaśas
immediately began to translate the Dharmaguptaka-vinaya with the assistance
of three hundred monks and scholars involved in the project. Zhi Faling is said
to have had his own disciple, Huibian, participate in the sessions as he had excellent knowledge of Central Asian languages. The fact that active pursuit of Vinaya
texts was the major trend of the time can be attested by the independent case of
the monk Faxian’s (339–420) risky journey to India in search of Vinaya texts.12
Buddhayaśas did not extend his stay in Chang’an upon completion of the
translation project and soon returned to Kāśmīra. Kumārajīva likely suffered an
illness (Huangshi, thirteenth year) soon after completing the translation of the
Satyasiddhi-śāstra (Cheng shi lun; Treatise on the Establishment of Truth) and
passed away in 413 (Huangshi, ﬁfteenth year). Yaoxing abdicated his rule in the
seventeenth year of Huangshi (415 C.E.). Buddhayaśas is said to have sent the

xix

Translator’s Introduction

Xukongyun pusa jing (Ākāśagarbha-sūtra; Sutra on Ākāśagarbha Bodhisattva)
as a gift to the sangha of Liangzhou through a traveling messenger. In fact, the
translation of this text ascribed to him is recorded in the Chu sanzang ji ji (Collection of the Tripiṭaka Textual Records) (Taishō vol. 13, no. 405) compiled by
Sengyou (445–518).

The Significance of the Text in the
New Taishō Tripitaka Edition

The Chang ahan jing is placed at the very beginning of the ﬁrst volume of the
Taishō shinshū daizōkyō (Taishō New Tripiṭaka Edition) compiled by Japanese
Buddhists from 1924–1934 (Taishō 13 to Shōwa 9). This may represent an
entirely different reorganization of the Buddhist canon from all of the preceding
Tripiṭaka editions. The format of the preceding editions were based on the classiﬁcation order of Mahayana ﬁrst, Hinayana second, each of which was again
divided into the order of Sutra, Vinaya, and Abhidharma texts. The historical
legacy of the Chang ahan jing should be examined as to what the text is meant
to represent in the modern Taishō edition.
The earliest reliable catalogue of Buddhist texts was due to the work of
Dao’an (314–385), author of the Zhongjing mulu (Comprehensive Record of
the Textual Catalogues), and Sengyou, author of the Chu sanzang ji ji. Of the
two, Dao’an’s catalogues formed the core foundation of Sengyou’s enlarged
record of textual catalogues. These two sets of catalogues thus mark the reliable
beginning of all subsequent Chinese Tripiṭaka editions.
By the turn of the ﬁfth century, Buddhist communities in Chang’an began
to exercise their own choices in the history of Buddhist affairs. This change was
a natural development, because Buddhist leaders were more or less trained in
Confucian academism or Daoist philosophical training. Dao’an was invited to
Chang’an to serve as the religious counselor of Fujian (Yaoxing’s predecessor)
from the capital of a southern state. Dao’an profoundly regretted that the Buddhist
communities in China had not been properly equipped with the Tripiṭaka divisions
of Sutra, Vinaya, and Abhidharma. He actively promoted study on the Mahayana
Wisdom sutras, especially the Prajñāpāramitā sutras, and he recruited talented
young Buddhist converts to engage in exploration of their philosophical and
spiritual meaning. It is within this historical circumstance that Kumārajīva was

xx

Translator’s Introduction

invited to Chang’an in 401 by Yaoxing (Fujian’s successor) as his religious counselor. Sengzhao (374–414), a young Buddhist convert from a Daoist background,
became Kumārajīva’s dedicated disciple and quickly proved himself to be an
excellent scholar-monk among the Chang’an academic community. His monograph,
the Zhao lun, was praised as exhibiting superb comprehension of prajñā insight
and the philosophy of emptiness (śūnyatā),second only to that of his master.
Sengzhao’s introduction to the Chang ahan jing reﬂects Dao’an’s cherished
objective. At the outset he calls attention to the Tripiṭaka canonical tradition:
The great teaching consisted of three [basic] divisions. For regulating physical
and verbal behavior there is the collection of injunctive disciplines (Vinaya).
For guiding human conduct by distinguishing good and bad there is the collection of doctrinal scriptures (Sutra). For differentiating subtle and delicate
subject matter, there is the collection of analytical characteristics of the mental
and conscious elements (Abhidharma). Thus, there came to be the three
baskets of scriptures (Tripiṭaka).

Buddhayaśas’ translation of the Chang ahan jing was perhaps partial fulﬁllment of the goal sought by Dao’an.
Following Dao’an’s and Sengyou’s catalogues, a series of records of Buddhist
textual catalogues was compiled in the Gezhong qinding zhongjing mulu (Buddhist
Canonical Textual Catalogues or Complete Buddhist Tripiṭaka Library, literally,
“Great Textual Storehouse”). During the sixth century, the four catalogues came
to exist under the auspices of four different regimes. Unlike Dao’an’s and Sengyou’s catalogues, which placed the texts by the translators’ names in chronological
order, these state-supported enterprises adopted the new order of classiﬁcation by
placing the Mahayana Tripiṭaka catalogues ﬁrst, followed by those of the Hinayana
Tripiṭaka. The short-lived Sui dynasty (which dissolved at the uniﬁcation of north
and south into an empire in 589), twice supported the compilation of the entire
inclusive catalogues of the Tripiṭaka library: ﬁrst, the Sui Kaihuang lidai sanbao
ji (Sui Kaihuang Record of the Threefold Buddhist Treasures of the Successive
Dynasties) in 598, followed by its revised edition, the Renshou zhongjing mulu
(Renshou Record of Textual Catalogues) in 602, which streamlined the preexistent
catalogues and scrutinized the authenticity of each text. The Renshou zhongjing
mulu became the basic model of all subsequent Buddhist Tripiṭaka libraries.

xxi

Translator’s Introduction

The ﬁling of the catalogues of the Tripiṭaka library reached its apex during
the Tang period. The dynastic enterprises successfully compiled seven major
editions together with their respective records of catalogues. Any record of catalogues is supposed to provide not only the basic principles of textual classiﬁcation and those texts already catalogued as authentic, but also include new
translations and new discoveries as well as exclude suspicious and fraudulent
texts. For instance, the Kaiyuan shijiao lu (Kaiyuan Record of Buddhist Textual
Catalogues), compiled in 731, is said to have represented the best model format,
so that all subsequent editions followed it in recording catalogues of hand-copied
texts as well as printed texts. The classiﬁcation order, however, was unchanged
from the Sui-era Renshou zhongjing mulu of 602, following the format of: (1)
Mahayana sutras, (2) Mahayana Vinaya texts, (3) Mahayana Abhidharma texts,
(4) Hinayana sutras, (5) Hinayana Vinaya texts, (6) Hinayana Abhidharma texts,
and (7) works written by the “wise and saints.” We know, therefore, that the
Renshou zhongjing mulu model and that of Kaiyuan shijiao lu together became
the standard format of the Buddhist Tripiṭaka library as a whole, of which very
little had changed until the modern Taishō Tripiṭaka edition.
This extremely conservative nature developed due to two reasons. First, toward
the end of Tang dynasty the dissemination of the complete Tripiṭaka library was
based on hand-copied texts made under government supervision. Second, from
the Northern Song period on, the dissemination of the Buddhist Tripiṭaka was
based on printed texts, for which printing blocks had to be carved, a laborious
and expensive process. In the Northern Song, for instance, a 972 decree stipulated
the production of the entire set of textual woodcut prints and the carving of one
hundred and thirty thousand woodblocks by the year 983. The dissemination of
the Buddhist scriptures was under government supervision for centuries but gradually transferred to a number of Buddhist temples. While the main task of carving
woodblocks was still carried out by dynastic enterprises, private temple versions
began to appear and the distribution of texts was soon widely localized and even
spread beyond the Chinese border. This was roughly the history of the Buddhist
Tripiṭaka library through the Song, Yuan, Ming, and Jing periods.
The Taishō Tripiṭaka edition shows a striking innovation, especially in the
change of classiﬁcation order that follows the general historical development
of Buddhism. The method of detailed examination of textual contents for the

xxii

Translator’s Introduction

sake of new classiﬁcations also developed more precision due to modern scholarship. First, the Taishō Tripiṭaka editors changed the order by placing the Hinayana Sutra-piṭaka before the Mahayana texts. They set the Hinayana canon of
the four Āgamas and individual texts bearing their strains in the ﬁrst two volumes,
under the Āgama section. Second, they created a new classiﬁcation under the
name of “original causality” to collect those texts in which the bodhisattva ideal
and career is germinated in reference to early Mahayana history. Third, the
remaining Mahayana sutras are classiﬁed, more or less, similarly to those of
preceding editions, but each is assigned to different volumes by specifying type
or class:
1. Prajñā section: Taishō Tripiṭaka vols. 5–8;
2. Lotus and Huayan section: vol. 9 (both groups) and vol. 10 (Huayan only);
3. Ratnakūṭa and Nirvana section: vol. 11 (Ratnakūṭa only) and vol. 12 (both
groups);
4. Mahāsaṃnipāta-sutra (Great Collection Sutra) section: vol. 13;
5. Sutra collection (Hinayana and Mahayana) section: vols. 14–17;
6. Esoteric sutras section: vols. 18–21.

Fourth, the Taishō Tripiṭaka editors also placed the Vinaya- and Abhidharmapiṭakas after the Sutra-piṭaka in the order of Hinayana ﬁrst, then Mahayana:
1. Vinaya section: vols. 22–23 (all Hinayana) and vol. 24 (both Hinayana
and Mahayana);
2. Sutra expository treatise section: vols. 25–26 (partial Abhidharma);
3. Abhidharma section: vols. 27–29;
4. Madhyamaka-Yōgācāra section: vol. 30 (Madhyamaka only), vol. 31 (partially Yogācāra), and vol. 32 (Yogācāra only);
5. Collected logical treatises section: vol. 32.

From here, the Taishō Tripiṭaka places texts written as commentaries on
sutras and treatises (śāstras),13 sectarian documents and writings, and so forth
up to the one-hundredth volume, but for the purpose of evaluating the legacy
of the Chang ahan jing, these can be excluded from consideration.
Modern scholarship focuses on the fundamental spirituality of Śākyamuni
Buddha, because his spiritual insight and evangelical life were the foundation
of all the doctrines and practices that developed in the later history of Buddhism.

xxiii

Translator’s Introduction

In medieval China, every Tripiṭaka library started with the class of Wisdom texts
(Prajñāpāramitā sutras) under the Mahayana category, beginning with the massive,
six hundred-fascicle Mahāprajñāpāramitā-sutra (Great Perfection of Wisdom
Sutra) translated by Xuanzang. In contrast, the Hinayana Āgamas, which are
supposed to comprise the original, earliest sources and present Śākyamuni’s life
and teaching as closely as possible to his original time and social context, were
all buried amid thousands of ﬁles of textual catalogues or among the books and
fascicles in the Hinayana section. Finally, after many centuries, the Taishō edition
restored the proper place for the Hinayana Āgamas by moving this text to the
very beginning of the collection.
In his preface to the Chang ahan jing, Sengzhao deﬁnes Ahan (Āgama) as
“the authority to which the laws return” (fa-gui). The “authority to which laws
return” means, in all probability, the profound collection of all that is good upheld
by the secluded cloister of contemplative recollection (dhāraṇī). These are made
into the collection of sutras as the source of authority. It was in this sense that
Chang’an’s Buddhist communities, by the turn of the ﬁfth century, were motivated
to have the Prajñāparāmitā texts translated rapidly, within a decade, and to also
have the earliest canonical Sutra-piṭaka translated along with the Vinaya texts.
Most of all, this active motivation arose from the critical study of textual records
of translation and visually corroborated reliable textual collections.
Modern Buddhist studies began in the mid-nineteenth century, based on the
method of text criticism and aided by scholars’ knowledge of Pāli, Sanskrit,
Chinese, and Tibetan, and it has successfully promoted Buddhist studies throughout the world. It beneﬁted contemporary Japanese Buddhists in publishing the
Taishō Tripiṭaka library and its catalogue, with some success in reforming and
improving the longstanding Tripiṭaka traditions. Nearly three quarters of a
century after publication of the Taishō shinshū daizōkyō, Dr. Yehan Numata and
his associates established the project to put the entire corpus of texts collected
in the Taishō Tripiṭaka into English translation, with the global cooperation of
Buddhist scholars. When this massive project is completed, there will be a new
demand to build another ediﬁce of the Buddhist Tripiṭaka library for the sake
of Buddhist and human communities worldwide. Once again, the Chang ahan
jing will be highlighted as representing the earliest phase of Buddhism that
marked its beginning.

xxiv

Translator’s Introduction

Epilogue

I would like to make a few points regarding the way in which this translation has
been accomplished. First, since the original Sanskrit text is no longer extant, I
relied almost exclusively on the Pāli Dīgha Nikāya and its English translation,
especially that rendered by the founding members of the Pali Text Society, as
the sole corroborative references for the Chinese text.14 For instance, it is extremely
difﬁcult to identify from Chinese transliteration what a given proper name or
proper noun might be in the Sanskrit original. Second, I preferred a straightforward
style of narration to the Chinese idiomatic deﬁnitive style. As a cognate language
of Sanskrit, though to a lesser degree, Pāli has an intricate case system to specify
the contextual relationships between things that are referred to by words through
case indicatives, whereas Chinese expression often relies on word order alone,
without case indicative changes. Hence, in my English presentation of the Chang
ahan jing, I have relied on the English version of the Dīgha Nikāya presented in
scholarly translations of the text. This English version of the Chang ahan jing
may thus appear to be more like a translation made from the Pāli Dīgha Nikāya
than a directly rendered English version vis-à-vis the Chinese original. As English
is not my native language, I did not consider that presenting the textual contents
only through a grammatically learned second language would be successful. This
is the ﬁnal volume of the translation, containing sutras 21–30. Volume I (published
in 2015) includes the Preface by Shi Sengzhao and contains sutras 1–10; Volume
II (published in 2016) contains sutras 11–20.
I looked for a model narrative format to translate foundational Buddhist texts,
such as the Chang ahan jing. After searching for a feasible format among various
samples of translations of Buddhist texts, I ﬁnally decided that it was best to follow
the traditions established by the Pali Text Society in dealing with ancient Buddhist
literature by means of modern languages. I am, however, obliged to assert that
this translation has been produced totally based on my own understanding of
Buddhism accrued through my lifelong study and practice of the religion.
Śākyamuni’s religion began with a dialectical insight underling the fourfold
truths of the life process. While engaged in ﬁnal revision of this translation, I
personally encountered the messengers of old age, illness, and death, and my
attention was drawn to these messagers more acutely because of my engagement
in rereading the draft translation. It is my hope that readers of this text will

xxv

Translator’s Introduction

realize the fundamental wisdom of Buddhist spirituality in regard to these serious
matters. May the reader discover from this text his or her successful pathway
toward liberation.

xxvi

THE CANONICAL BOOK OF THE BUDDHA’S
LENGTHY DISCOURSES
VOLUME III

Sutra 21

Brahmā’s Net

(Dīgha Nikāya 1: Brahmājāla Suttanta)
Thus have I heard. Once, when the Buddha was visiting the communities of
the country of Magadha, accompanied by one thousand two hundred and ﬁfty
disciples (bhikṣus), he stopped at the king’s pavilion in the bamboo forest for
an overnight stay. A brāhmaṇa ascetic called Suppiya, accompanied by his
student Brahmadatta, always followed the Buddha on his travels. The teacher
Suppiya denigrated the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha in various ways, but his
student Brahmadatta praised the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha in innumerable
ways. Thus, teacher and student, having different minds, were in opposition
to each other. Why did they behave in this way? It was because they differed
in their customs, views, and manner of making known their views.
On this occasion, a number of bhikṣus, having completed almsrounds,
gathered in the lecture hall and began to talk [about current events]:

It is marvelous, indeed marvelous, that the World-honored One commands
great supernormal powers and is endowed with the meritorious virtue of
knowing what sentient beings wish for and their destinies. Yet this brāhmaṇa ascetic Suppiya and his student Brahmadatta always follow the
Tathāgata and the assembly of his disciples. Suppiya denigrates the Buddha,
Dharma, and Sangha of the bhikṣus in innumerable ways, while Brahmadatta praises the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha in innumerable ways. Thus,
teacher and student are of different minds and oppose one another. Why
is this so? It is because they have different customs, views, and ways of
making their views known.

While this was going on, the World-honored One, meditating in seclusion,
heard what the bhikṣus were saying through a supernormal power of hearing
exceeding the capacity of ordinary people. The World-honored One stood
up from his seat, proceeded to the lecture hall, sat down before the group of

3

88b12

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

88c

bhikṣus, and though he already knew what they were discussing, deliberately
asked them, “O bhikṣus, why have you gathered in this hall? What are you
discussing?”
The bhikṣus replied to the Buddha:

Having returned from almsrounds we gathered in this hall to discuss a
topic of [current] concern: “It is marvelous, indeed marvelous, that the
World-honored One commands great supernormal powers and is endowed
with the meritorious virtue of knowing what sentient beings wish for and
their destinies. Yet the brāhmaṇa ascetic Suppiya and his student Brahmadatta always follow the Tathāgata and the assembly of disciples. While
Suppiya denigrates the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha in innumerable
ways, Brahmadatta praises the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha in innumerable ways. Teacher and student are of different minds and oppose one
another. Why are they different? They have different customs and views
and also differ in their manner of making their views known.” We have
been engaged in discussion about this matter, sir.
The World-honored One said to the bhikṣus:

Even if the person in question deliberately denigrates the Tathāgata, the
Dharma, and the Sangha, you should neither become angry nor have ill
intent against him. Why? If you become angry and have ill intent because
he has denigrated the Tathāgata, Dharma, and Sangha, you will have
become entrapped and fallen into a pit. To avoid this danger you should
never generate ill intent against him. And if he were to praise the Buddha,
Dharma, and Sangha, you should not feel delight or gratiﬁcation. Why?
If you were delighted or gratiﬁed, you would have become entrapped and
fallen into a pit again. To avoid this danger you should never be swayed
by such sweet words. Why? When a person either denigrates or praises
something, his words are brought about only by lesser factors of conduct
or moral discipline. An ordinary person, with little learning, cannot reach
a deeper level of understanding. He takes whatever he observes externally
as real and, because of this, praises it.
What do “lesser factors of conduct or moral discipline” mean? An ordinary person, with little learning, cannot understand any deeper meaning.

4

Sutra 21

He takes whatever he observes externally as real. Because of this, he
praises it. He may praise me: “The śramaṇa Gautama has discarded the
sword and cane (i.e., weapons), removed any intent to harm life, and extinguished every action that injures life, extending compassion in good conscience to all sentient beings.” What these words praise are only lesser
factors of conduct or moral discipline. An ordinary person, with little
learning, praises the Buddha because of these external factors.
A person may again praise me: “The śramaṇa Gautama has removed
any intention to commit theft, extinguished every desire to take what is
not given, and is totally free from any thought of theft.” Or he may offer
this kind of praise: “The śramaṇa Gautama has abandoned carnal desire
and adheres to the genuine practice of austerity, upholds the precepts,
avoids dissolute behavior, and maintains pure and genuine conduct.” Or
[he may offer this praise:] “The śramaṇa Gautama has abandoned and
eradicated false speech; whenever he speaks he does so with utmost sincerity. Whatever he says is true and factual, and he never deceives the
people of the world.” Or [he may offer this praise:] “The śramaṇa Gautama
has abandoned and eradicated duplicitous speech; he never harms anyone
by repeating to them another’s words, [or vice versa]. If two people are
in a dispute he tries to reconcile them, and when they are reconciled he
is even more greatly pleased. If he wishes to say something to either party,
he does so with both of them together before him. He knows the right
time for whatever he does.” Or [he may offer this praise:] “The śramaṇa
Gautama has abandoned and eradicated harsh speech. When spoken, harsh
words may hurt the feelings of listeners and give rise to enmity in those
to whom such speech is directed. Since harsh words can aggravate feelings
of afﬂiction or malice, he never utters them. He always uses good words,
pleasing the one to whom they are directed. Thus he endears himself to
all members of the sangha, who never tire of listening to his words. Such
is the nature of whatever he says.” Or [he may offer this praise:] “The
śramaṇa Gautama has abandoned and eradicated ﬂattery. He speaks when
it is the right time; he utters words that correspond to facts, words that
beneﬁt others, words that are in compliance with the Dharma, words that
are in compliance with the rules of Vinaya discipline, and words that
forbid evil. Such is the nature of whatever he says.”

5

89a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

Or [he may offer this praise:] “The śramaṇa Gautama has abandoned
the use of intoxicants and distanced himself from them. He uses no perfumes or ﬂowers as ornaments, he does not attend theatrical entertainments
involving song and dance, he does not use a high, wide couch [for a bed],
nor does he partake of food other than at the proper time each day. He
neither accepts nor keeps money in gold and silver coins, nor does he
marry or live with a woman, or keep a servant or maid, or an elephant,
horse, boar, sheep, hen, dog, or any other bird or animal. He does not keep
an army, whether a division of elephants, or cavalry, chariots, or foot soldiers, nor does he own rice ﬁelds or residential houses, or plant the ﬁve
kinds of crops for harvest. He does not threaten others with his hands and
ﬁsts, nor does he cheat others by using rigged scales for weights and quantities, engage in usury, or haggle over the price [for goods]. He does not
neglect repayment after receiving a request for payment of a debt, nor
does he conspire against anyone. He never acts at an improper time and
he nurtures his health to lengthen his life span and takes only the proper
amount of food for his needs. Wherever he goes his robe and almsbowl
accompany him, just as a bird’s feathers never leave it when it ﬂies.” All
these are lesser factors of moral discipline. An ordinary person, with little
learning, praises the Buddha for such externally observable things.
[Such an ordinary person may also praise the Tathāgata in regard to
these minor points:] “Other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, having received
charity from their devotees, actively seek more and more in order to store
up extra goods, knowing no limit or contentment in regard to clothing,
food, and drink. The śramaṇa Gautama has never engaged in this behavior.
“Other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, having received charity from their
devotees, engage in various means of livelihood as well as planting crops,
thus inviting evil spirits. The śramaṇa Gautama has never engaged in
such behavior.
“Other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, having received charity from their
devotees, use expedient means to acquire various material goods such as
ivory and other precious items, high and comfortable beds, embroidered
cloth, carpets, bamboo ﬂoor mats, and cushions. The śramaṇa Gautama
has never engaged in such behavior.

6

Sutra 21

“Other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, having received charity from their
devotees, vainly seek to improve their appearance [to impress their devotees], using various measures such as applying thyme-seed oil to the body,
bathing in scented water, wearing scented powder on the body, applying
fragrant hair oil, wearing a ﬂower garland, using blue eye shadow and
applying makeup to their faces, wearing a shiny clasp ring and string on
their garments, examining their appearance in a mirror, donning a pair of
multicolored shoes and a white upper garment, holding a canopy over their
heads, carrying a ﬂy whisk, and decorating their carriages with banners.
The śramaṇa Gautama has never engaged in such behavior.
“Other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, [having received charity from their
devotees,] engage in various games and amusements such as chess, checkers played on boards of eight or ten squares, and gambling in as many as
a hundred thousand ways. The śramaṇa Gautama has never engaged in
such behavior.
“Other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, having subsisted on charity from
their devotees, engage in idle talk that obstructs religious pursuits, such
as gossiping about royal affairs or various battles or the uses of cavalry,
or how well certain bureaucrats and ministers ride their horses when they
go on excursions, going to and from parks and pleasure gardens; or they
talk about the daily activities of women, such as when they are lying
down, sitting, and walking; or [they talk] about clothing, food, and drink,
or the behavior of relatives, or the activities of sea divers and their collections of treasures from the ocean. The śramaṇa Gautama has never
engaged in such behavior.
“Other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, having subsisted on charity from
their devotees, seek wrong livelihood through innumerable devices, such
as engaging in ﬂattery or slander, thereby seeking to take advantage of
one another. The śramaṇa Gautama has never engaged in such behavior.
“Other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, having subsisted on charity from
their devotees, engage in disputes wherever they may be, whether in a
pleasure grove, a bathing pond, or pavilion, accusing each other as to who
is right or wrong. They say, ‘I know the text and rules but you have little
knowledge of them. I am on the right course but yours is a deviation. Your

7

89b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

argument is confused, asserting too late what should have been stated earlier, while giving out too early what should have been saved for later. I
am able to tolerate you but you cannot tolerate me. Whatever you say is
neither true nor real. Whenever you feel some doubt about your position,
come and ask me about it. I surely can answer all your questions.’ The
śramaṇa Gautama has never engaged in such behavior.
“Other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, having subsisted on charity from
their devotees, seek greater [rewards or beneﬁts] by contriving various
measures. For instance, they may carry an ofﬁcial communication or
private message on behalf of a king or a minister, or a brāhmaṇa or a
householder, going from place to place while traveling about. They may
carry letters for clients, delivering them to their designated recipients, and
convey the replies to their clients. Or they may even give instruction about
how to conduct the business of mail delivery for their own sake or for
others. The śramaṇa Gautama has never engaged in such behavior.
“Other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, having subsisted on charity from
their devotees, are engaged solely in learning the ins and outs of military
strategy, warfare, and conﬂict; or learning about armaments such as swords,
canes, bows and arrows; or learning how to make domestic animals, such
as roosters, dogs, boars, or goats, ﬁght; or how to stage ﬁghts between men
and women; or how to perform various skills, such as making the sound
of a multitude [of soldiers] by blowing conch shells, beating drums, singing,
dancing, brandishing streamers; and all sorts of other activities. The śramaṇa
Gautama has never engaged in such behavior.
“Other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, having subsisted on charity from
their devotees, are engaged in ignoble ways of life (lit., “animalistic behavior”), learning false paths [that obstruct the authentic path of religion] and
taking up wrong livelihoods, such as fortune-telling for male or female
clients for material gain. Interpreting auspicious or ominous signs, they
predict whether their clients will be handsome or ugly and make similar
predictions regarding animals [for their clients in the husbandry business].
The śramaṇa Gautama has never engaged in such behavior.
“Other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, having subsisted on charity from
their devotees, engage in ignoble ways of life by learning false paths that
obstruct [the authentic path of religion] and taking up wrong livelihoods,

8

Sutra 21

such as performing magical incantations to invoke the presence of ghostly
spirits or to drive them away, or to cause them to linger with various repugnant spells. Thus, through many strategies, they may threaten people and
cause them to feel extreme fear, or draw people together or disperse them,
or torment them, or bring them pleasure. They may use incantations to
calm a pregnant woman, providing a [magical] garment for the safety of
her fetus, or to change a human being into a donkey, or to cause someone
to become totally deaf and dumb. Displaying a multitude of techniques,
they may be seen facing the sun or moon, holding it in both hands, and
performing various ascetic feats to solicit material gain. The śramaṇa Gautama has never engaged in such behavior.
“Other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, having subsisted on charity from
their devotees, engage in ignoble ways of life by learning false paths that
obstruct [the authentic path of religion] and taking up wrong livelihoods,
such as chanting magical spells for curing illness or applying evil spells
or good spells, or giving medical treatment, acupuncture, moxa cautery,
or medicines to treat various illnesses [in order to obtain material gain].
The śramaṇa Gautama has never engaged in such behavior.
“Other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, having subsisted on charity from their
devotees, engage in ignoble ways of life by learning false paths that obstruct
[the authentic path of religion] and taking up wrong livelihoods, such as
casting magical spells for water or ﬁre, or to summon a ghostly spirit, or to
assure victory in a political or military campaign, or for elephants, or bodily
limbs, or a talisman to ensure the safety of a residence, or for recovery from
burns, or to effect a cure from rat bites. They may intone a written incantation
to discern the life or death of the concerned person, or to decipher dreams,
or they may read palms (chiromancy) and facial features (physiognomy), or
chant astronomical texts or the alphabetical characters. The śramaṇa Gautama
has never engaged in such behavior.
“Other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, having subsisted on charity from
their devotees, engage in ignoble ways of life by learning false paths that
obstruct [the authentic path of religion] and taking up wrong livelihoods,
such as observing the weather and the cycle of the seasons in order to predict whether or not it will rain, whether the price of crops will go up or
down, whether there will be an epidemic, whether a fearful event will

9

89c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

take place, or whether there will be peace and safety. Or they may predict
earthquakes or the appearance of a comet, a solar or lunar eclipse, or a
stellar eclipse, or the nonappearance of such an eclipse, in order to determine whether it is a good or bad omen. The śramaṇa Gautama has never
engaged in such behavior.
“Other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, having subsisted on charity from
their devotees, engage in ignoble ways of life by learning false paths that
obstruct [the authentic path of religion] and taking up wrong livelihoods,
such as asserting that this country is superior to that country, or that that
is not like this, or that another country is superior to this country, or that
this is not like that. Observing good or bad omens, they predict the fortunes
and fates of those countries with which they are concerned. The śramaṇa
Gautama has never engaged in such behavior.”
O bhikṣus, all of the foregoing are invariably lesser moral virtues and
factors. An ordinary person, with little learning, praises the Buddha on
account of such [observable] virtues.

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

There is, however, a greater insight (i.e., the Dharma), most profound and
subtle, and far more radiant. Only wise and saintly disciples can praise
the Tathāgata by referring to this greater insight. What is this greater
insight, most profound and subtle and far more radiant, on account of
which the wise and saintly disciples alone can praise the Tathāgata?
Some śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas have conjectured, in relation to the
initial eon (kalpa) of the past and the ﬁnal eon of the future, innumerable
varieties of views as freely as they may wish, but all the theories they
have thus advanced, without exception, fall into sixty-two variations. All
these philosophical views, insofar as they are speculative in regard to the
initial eon of the past and the ﬁnal eon of the future, no matter how numerous and obsessively formulated, never exceed sixty-two variations. Why
are these philosophical views formulated in regard to the initial eon and
the ﬁnal eon, no matter how numerous and obsessively speculative, invariably limited to sixty-two variations, never exceeding that number?
[Moreover,] regardless of the innumerable varieties of views advanced
by śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, insofar as these views are speculative and

10

Sutra 21

asserted in relation to the initial eon of the world, all these theories can
be classiﬁed exhaustively into eighteen variations. Any philosophical
views, insofar as they are conjectured in regard to the initial eon of the
past, no matter how numerous and obsessively formulated, are invariably
limited to eighteen variations and never exceed that number. Why are
these philosophical views formulated in regard to the initial eon, no matter
how numerous and obsessively conjectured and asserted, invariably limited
to eighteen variations, never exceeding that number?
Many śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, while speculating about the initial eon
of the past, propose an eternalist view (śāśvata-vāda), asserting that “the
self and the world are permanent.” Any theory that asserts this eternalist
view falls within four variations and does not exceed those four. Why is the
eternalist view proposed by those śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas concerning the
initial eon of the past, namely, that “the self and the world are permanent,”
limited to four variations without exceeding that number?
Again, a śramaṇa or brāhmaṇa, having entered mental concentration
by various means, recollects with a concentrated mind the twenty evolving
and devolving eons. He then asserts his theory: “The self and the world
are permanent. This theory is true while the rest is false. Why? Because
I entered the state of mental concentration through various means and
with a concentrated mind recollected twenty evolving and devolving eons.
The sentient beings of the world have neither increased nor decreased
throughout those eons. They always assembled together and never dispersed. Because of this, I know that the self and the world are permanent.
This theory alone is true while the rest is false.” This is the ﬁrst variation.
On the basis of this assertion, other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas conjectured
that the self and the world are permanent. This theory is limited to four
variations, however, and does not exceed that number.
Again, a śramaṇa or brāhmaṇa, having entered mental concentration
through various means, recollects with a concentrated mind forty evolving
and devolving eons and asserts his theory: “The self and the world are permanent. This theory is true while the rest is false. Why? Because I entered
mental concentration through various means and with a concentrated mind
recollected forty evolving and devolving eons. The sentient beings in the
world neither increased nor decreased; they always assembled together

11

90a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

and never dispersed. Because of this, I know that the self and the world
are permanent, and this theory alone is true while the rest is false.” This
is the second variation. Thus, on the foregoing assertion concerning the
initial eon, other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas conjectured that the self and
the world are permanent. But this theory is limited to four variations and
does not exceed that number.
Again, a śramaṇa or brāhmaṇa, having entered mental concentration
through various means, recollects with a concentrated mind eighty evolving
and devolving eons and asserts his theory: “The self and the world are
permanent. This theory is true while the rest is false. Why? Because I
entered mental concentration through various means and with a concentrated mind recollected eighty evolving and devolving eons. The sentient
beings of the world neither increased nor decreased; they always assembled
together and never dispersed. Because of this I know that the self and the
world are permanent, and this theory alone is true while the rest is false.”
This is the third variation. Thus, on the foregoing assertion concerning
the initial eon, other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas conjectured that the self
and the world are permanent. But this theory is limited to four variations
and does not exceed that number.
Again, a śramaṇa or brāhmaṇa with a rationally skeptical mind examines the case carefully and investigates the theories in various ways through
his knowledge of logic and sophistry. He says that these theories require
examination. Based on his own view and on the rhetoric of reason, he
theorizes: “The self and the world are permanent, and this theory has four
variations.” Similar śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas have conjectured in relation
to the initial eon that the self and the world are permanent. On account
of there being four variations of the [eternalist] view, this theory does not
go beyond them. Originally each śramaṇa or brāhmaṇa speculated about
the initial eon and theorized that the self and the world are permanent. In
this manner, all the theories previously advanced fall into four variations
and do not exceed that number.
The Tathāgata alone, however, knows the basis of the views held by
the eternalists, to which they are attached, and from which they receive
[theoretical] retribution. The Tathāgata’s knowledge goes beyond these
variations because he knows the very basis of these eternalist views but

90b

12

Sutra 21

does not become attached to such views. Since he is not attached to such
a view, he is in a state of quiescence and cessation (i.e., free from conceptualization). He knows the arising of sensation (vedanā), its dissolution
(bhaṅga), its taste (āsvāda), its danger (ādīnara), and the method of transcending it (niḥsaraṇa). Thus he is liberated [from eternalist speculation]
because of his nonattachment (anupādāya-vimukti) [to the basis of that
view] through the very insight of seeing things universally as they really
are ( yathābhuccaṃ samā). Therefore he is called the Tathāgata. This is
the great insight, most profound and subtle, and far more radiant. In reference to this insight wise and saintly disciples can properly praise the
Tathāgata for the universal insight that sees things as they really are.
Again, there is another great insight, most profound and subtle and far
more radiant, in reference to which wise and saintly disciples can [properly]
praise the Tathāgata for the universal insight that sees things as they really
are. What is this insight?
Many śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas propose an eternalist view in their
speculations on the initial eon of the past and assert that “the self and the
world are in part permanent and in part impermanent.” On the basis of this
theory, other śramaṇas or brāhmaṇas speculated about the initial eon of
the past and asserted that the self and the world are in part permanent and
in part impermanent. But this theory essentially coincides with the four
variations and does not go beyond them. At the beginning, when this eon
began to evolve, the remaining sentient beings, having exhausted their
merits, life spans, and predispositional forces, died in Ābhāsvara Heaven
(the highest attainable in the second dhyāna) and were reborn in the vast
empty space of Brahmā Heaven. They became fond of that abode and
wished to be born there again together with other sentient beings. In this
way, the [ﬁrst generation] of sentient beings there already conceived an
attachment to that abode. As other sentient beings ended their life in Ābhāsvara Heaven and were reborn in the vast, empty space of Brahmā Heaven,
those who were already there thought to themselves, “I am Brahmā, the
great Brahmā. By nature I exist and there is no one who can create me. I
am omniscient and control a thousand worlds in which I am the absolutely
free presider and the noblest and most honorable, for I have the miraculous
power of changing forms. I alone have been here before as father of all

13

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

sentient beings prior to their appearance, because they appeared here after
I did, and those beings are ones whom I created.”
Those who came after the ﬁrst generation thought to themselves, “He
is the great Brahmā, he has created himself and no one else could create
him. He is omniscient and controls a thousand worlds where he is the
absolutely free and most honorable presider, for he has the miraculous
power of changing forms. He alone has been here before us as the father
of all sentient beings prior to our appearance. We came to be born after
him and were created by him.” Some of the gods of Brahmā Heaven, having ended their life spans and exhausted all their predispositions, were
then born in the human world and gradually grew to adolescence. They
shaved their hair and beards, donned the three robes, and renounced domestic life to take up religious practice. Having entered mental concentration,
some came to know with a concentrated mind their original nature and
asserted, “That great Brahmā created himself; no one else could create
him. He is omniscient and controls a thousand worlds where he is the
absolutely free and most honorable presider. He has the miraculous power
of changing forms and is the father of all sentient beings. He is the one
that is permanent and, as Brahmā, he created us, we human beings who
are impermanent, subject to change, and mortal, unable to exist forever.”
Because of this, they asserted, “The self and the world are in part permanent
and in part impermanent. This theory is true while the rest is false.” This
is called the ﬁrst view. On the basis of this theory, other śramaṇas and
brāhmaṇas proposed their own theories concerning the initial eon. But
this “in part permanent and in part impermanent” theory is identical with
the others within the four variations and does not go beyond them.
Again, some sentient beings in Brahmā Heaven enjoyed amusements
(lit., “played and laughed”) and wanted a leisurely life. They played games
and sought amusement frequently, enjoying their [heavenly] lives. In
pursuit of that life, they eventually fell into exhaustion and lost consciousness, and their life spans came to an end. Being reborn in the human world,
they gradually grew to adolescence and shaved their hair and beards,
donned the three robes, and renounced domestic life for a life of religious
practice. Entering mental concentration, some of them came to know their
origin with a concentrated mind and said, “Some sentient beings (i.e., the

90c

14

Sutra 21

gods of Brahmā Heaven) are not born in the human world as often as we
are, nor do they pursue fun and amusement, and so they remain forever
in that heaven, without any change at all. On the other hand, we often
seek fun and engage in the pursuit of amusement, and so we are subject
to change and the law of impermanence.” Because of this, they asserted,
“The self and the world are in part permanent and in part impermanent.
This theory is true while the rest is false.” This is the second variation.
On the basis of this view, other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas proposed theories
about the initial eon and asserted that “the self and the world are in part
permanent and in part impermanent.” Yet this theory is essentially identical
with the others within the four variations and does not go beyond them.
Again, some sentient beings [in Brahmā Heaven] engaged in meditation
or mutual reﬂection and, while doing so, lost consciousness. Ending their
lives in this manner, they were born in the human world. Growing to adolescence, they shaved their hair and beards, donned the three robes, and
renounced domestic life for religious practice. Entering mental concentration, some of them came to know their origin with a concentrated mind
and said, “Some sentient beings (i.e., the gods of Brahmā Heaven) do not
meditate or mutually reﬂect upon each other and so do not lose consciousness. They therefore remain [in that heaven], unchanged at all times.
[Unlike them,] we looked at each other often and in doing so we lost consciousness. This was due to the impermanence of all things and in compliance with the law of change. Because of this, we know that the self
and the world are in part permanent and in part impermanent. This theory
alone is true while the rest is false.” This is the third variation. On the
basis of this view, other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas proposed theories about
the initial eon and asserted, “The self and the world are in part permanent
and in part impermanent.” But this theory is identical with the others
within the four variations and does not go beyond them.
Again, a śramaṇa or brāhmaṇa with a rationally skeptical mind examines
the case carefully and investigates the theories in various ways through
his knowledge of logic and sophistry. He asserts, “The self and the world
are in part permanent and in part impermanent. This theory alone is true
while the rest is false.” This is the fourth variation. On the basis of this
view, other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas proposed theories concerning the

15

91a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

initial eon of the past and asserted, “The self and the world are in part permanent and in part impermanent.” But this theory is identical with the
others within the four variations and does not go beyond them.
Thus, in relation to the initial eon, some śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas proposed theories that the self and the world are in part permanent and in part
impermanent, and this view is limited to four variations and does not go
beyond them. Only the Tathāgata, however, knows the very basis of the
[common] view to which those who espouse the foregoing four theories
hold fast, to which they become attached, and from which they receive its
[theoretical] retribution. The Tathāgata’s knowledge goes beyond the conﬁnes of these variations because he knows the very basis of the eternalist
view but he does not become attached to such a view. Since he is not
attached to this view, he is in a state of quiescence and cessation (i.e., free
from conceptualization). He knows the causal concatenation of sensation
and its cessation, its gratiﬁcation and danger, and the method of transcending
it. Thus he is liberated [from eternalist speculation] because of his nonattachment [to the basis of that view] through the very insight of seeing
things universally as they really are. Therefore he is called the Tathāgata.
This is the great insight, most profound and subtle and far more radiant.
In reference to this insight, wise and saintly disciples can properly praise
the Tathāgata for the universal insight that sees things as they really are.
Again, there is another great insight, most profound and subtle and far
more radiant, in reference to which wise and saintly disciples can [properly]
praise the Tathāgata for the universal insight that sees things as they really
are. What is this insight? Many śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas proposed a
speculative view of the initial eon of the past and asserted, “The self and
the world are limited and limitless.” Other śramaṇas or brāhmaṇas, relying
on this view, speculated further about the initial eon of the past and asserted
that the self and the world are limited and limitless. [Again,] this theory
is essentially identical with the others within the four variations and does
not go beyond them.
For instance, some śramaṇas or brāhmaṇas, having entered mental
concentration through various means, observed the world with a concentrated mind and formulated the thought that there is a limit to this world.
They asserted the theory, “This world has a limit, and this alone is true

16

Sutra 21

while the rest is false. Why? Because I entered mental concentration
through various means and with a concentrated mind intuited the limit of
this world. Therefore this world is limited. This theory alone is true while
the rest is false.” This is the ﬁrst variation. Other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas,
having relied on this view, speculated about the initial eon of the past and
proposed the same theory that the self and the world are limited, but this
theory is essentially identical with the others within the four variations
and does not go beyond them.
Again, some śramaṇas or brāhmaṇas, having entered mental concentration
through various means, observed the world with a concentrated mind and
formulated the thought that this world is limitless; thus they asserted the
theory “This world is limitless, and this alone is true while the rest is false.
Why? Because I entered mental concentration through various means and
with a concentrated mind intuited no limit to this world. Therefore this world
is limitless. This alone is true while the rest is false.” This is the second variation. Other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, having relied on this view, speculated
about the initial eon of the past and proposed similar theories that the self
and the world are limitless. But these theories are essentially identical with
the others within the four variations and do not range beyond them.
Again, some śramaṇas or brāhmaṇas, having entered mental concentration through various means, observed the world with a concentrated
mind and formulated the thought that the world is limited vertically in
the upward direction but has no limit in all four horizontal directions, and
thus they asserted, “The world is both limited and limitless. This alone is
true while the rest is false. Why? Because I entered mental concentration
through various means and with a concentrated mind intuited that this
world has a limit in the upward direction but has no limit in all four horizontal directions. Therefore [the self and] this world are both limited and
limitless. This theory alone is true while the rest is false.” This is the third
variation. Other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, having relied on this view,
speculated about the initial eon of the past and proposed theories that [the
self and] the world are both limited and limitless. But these theories are
essentially identical with the others within the four variations and do not
range beyond them.

17

91b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

Again, some śramaṇas or brāhmaṇas examined the case carefully with
a rationally skeptical mind and investigated the theories in various ways
through their knowledge of logic and sophistry. They said, “The self and
the world are neither limited nor limitless. This alone is true and the rest
is false.” This is the fourth variation. On the basis of this theory, [however,]
other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas proposed similar theories about the initial
eon and asserted, “The self and the world are both limited and limitless.”
Yet these theories are identical with the others within the four variations
and do not range beyond them.
Thus the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas formulated their theories about the
initial eon and asserted that the self and the world are both limited and
limitless, yet all of this falls within the four variations without exceeding
that number. Only the Tathāgata, however, knows the very basis of the
[common] view to which those who espouse the foregoing four theories
hold fast, to which they are attached, and from which they receive [theoretical] retribution. The Tathāgata’s knowledge exceeds these variations
because he knows the very basis of their views but does not become
attached to such a view. Since he is not attached to this view, he is in a
state of quiescence and cessation (i.e., free from conceptualization). He
knows the causal concatenation of sensation and its cessation, its gratiﬁcation and danger, and the method of transcending it. Thus he is liberated
[from eternalist speculation] because of his nonattachment [to the basis
of that view] through the very insight of seeing things universally as they
really are. Therefore he is called the Tathāgata. This is the great insight,
most profound and subtle and far more radiant. In reference to this insight,
wise and saintly disciples can properly praise the Tathāgata for the universal
insight that sees things as they really are.
Again, there is another great insight, most profound and subtle and far
more radiant, in reference to which wise and saintly disciples can properly
praise the Tathāgata for the universal insight that sees things as they really
are. What is this insight? Some śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas raise inconsistent
questions and reply with inconsistent answers. When one asks an incongruent question of another, the latter replies to the former with an incongruent answer. Within the four variations of this view, each theory is essentially identical and does not go beyond the limit of those variations. On

18

Sutra 21

the basis of this view, śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas raise incongruent questions
and reply with incongruent answers while speculating about the initial
eon of the past. Any of their theories is identical with the others within
the four variations and does not go beyond them.
For instance, some śramaṇas or brāhmaṇas formulate a theory and
assert, “I have neither seen nor known whether there is a resulting effect
for good or bad [conduct, respectively]. Since I have neither seen nor
known [such an effect], I raise this question [in formulating the theory]:
‘Are there causal effects for good and bad [conduct], respectively?’ In this
world there are śramaṇas or brāhmaṇas who are learned and erudite, sagacious and knowledgeable, who are always delighted to stay in a secluded
place, who are excellent in speech and precise in debate, and so [these śramaṇas or brāhmaṇas] are honored in this world. With their wisdom they
can analyze a multiplicity of worldly views [into some type of a system].
[They say, however,] ‘If I am asked a question that involves profound
meanings, I may not be able to give an answer. I feel ashamed before the
questioner and I am afraid. [So] I give my answer in a certain manner that
I regard as my refuge, my island, my shelter, and my ultimate path.’ Whenever someone like that asks me a [profound] question, I answer in the following manner: (1) ‘This fact is like this.’ (2) ‘This fact is identical (i.e.,
true).’ (3) ‘This fact is different.’ (4) ‘This fact is not different.’ (5) ‘This
fact is neither different nor not different.’” This is the ﬁrst question-andanswer variation. Based on these responses, other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas
may also reply with incongruent answers to incongruent questions. These
[theoretical] answers are identical with the others within the four variations,
however, and do not range beyond them.
Again, some śramaṇas or brāhmaṇas formulate a theory and assert:
“I have neither seen nor known [personally] whether or not there is an
afterlife. Many śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas are able to see things at remote
distances through their supernormal vision and power of reading others’
minds. Even when they are approached by other people they do not see
them. That kind of person should be able to know whether or not there is
an afterlife. I myself have neither seen nor known [personally] whether
or not there is an afterlife. If I were to express my view [in either the afﬁrmative or the negative], I am afraid that my answer is bound to be false.

19

91c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

Therefore, I regard [‘non-assertion’] as my refuge, my island, my shelter,
and my ultimate path. If such a person were to ask me a [profound] question,
I would answer in the following manner: (1) ‘This fact is like this.’ (2) ‘This
fact is identical (i.e., true).’ (3) ‘This fact is different.’ (4) ‘This fact is not
different.’ (5) ‘This fact is neither different nor not different.’” This is the
second question-and-answer variation. Based on these responses, other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas may reply with an incongruent answer when the
question is incongruent. But these [theoretical] answers are identical with
the others within the four variations and do not range beyond them.
Again, some śramaṇas or brāhmaṇas formulate a theory and assert:
“I have neither seen nor known what is good and what is not good. I do
not know nor have I encountered a theory that asserts ‘This is good’ or
‘This is bad.’ Because I do not know either one, I feel desire [for a certain
thing]; because of this desire, I feel anger. Whenever there is desire and
anger I am bound to have a sensation [about a certain thing]. I wish to
annihilate this sensation. Therefore, I have renounced domestic life for
religious practice.” [In this case,] such a person is very much afraid of
incurring sensation and regards [the absence of sensation] as a refuge, an
island, a shelter, and an ultimate path, saying, “If someone asks me a question [about what is good and what is bad], I shall reply to him in the following manner: (1) ‘This fact is like this.’ (2) ‘This fact is identical (i.e.,
true).’ (3) ‘This fact is different.’ (4) ‘This fact is not different.’ (5) ‘This
fact is neither different nor not different.’” This is the third question-andanswer variation. Based on these responses, other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas
may reply with an incongruent answer when the question is incongruent.
Yet these [theoretical] answers are identical with the others within the
four variations and do not range beyond them.
Again, some śramaṇas or brāhmaṇas are unintelligent and stupid. If
someone questions them, they reply according to someone else’s answer,
namely, (1) “This fact is like this.” (2) “This fact is identical (i.e., true).”
(3) “This fact is different.” (4) “This fact is not different.” (5) “This fact
is neither different nor not different.” This is the fourth question-andanswer variation. Based on these responses, other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas
may reply with an incongruent answer when the question is incongruent.

92a

20

Sutra 21

Their [theoretical] answers are identical with the others within the four
variations, however, and do not range beyond them.
Some śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas raise inconsistent questions and reply
with inconsistent answers in regard to the initial eon of the past. These
theoretical answers are limited to the four variations, are [essentially]
identical, and do not exceed that limit. Only the Tathāgata knows the very
basis of the [common] answers to which the foregoing four theorists hold
fast, to which they are attached, and from which they [theoretically] receive
retribution. The Tathāgata’s knowledge exceeds these variations because
he knows the very basis of their views but does not become attached to
such a view. Since he is not attached to this view, he is in a state of quiescence and cessation (i.e., free from conceptualization). He knows the
causal concatenation of sensation and its cessation, its gratiﬁcation and
danger, and the method of transcending it. Thus he is liberated [from eternalist speculation] because of his nonattachment [to the basis of that view]
through the very insight of seeing things universally as they really are.
Therefore he is called the Tathāgata. This is the great insight, most profound
and subtle and far more radiant. In reference to this insight, wise and
saintly disciples can properly praise the Tathāgata for the universal insight
that sees things as they really are.
Again, there is another great insight, most profound and subtle and far
more radiant, in reference to which wise and saintly disciples can properly
praise the Tathāgata for the universal insight that sees things as they really
are. What is this insight? Some śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas speculate about
the initial eon of the past and assert, “This world has arisen without a
cause.” This view is conﬁned to two variations. When they propose that
“this world has arisen without a cause,” this theory is conﬁned to two
variations and does not exceed that number. But why should the theory
that “the world has arisen without a cause” be conﬁned to two variations
without exceeding that number?
Some sentient beings (here, “some gods,” devas) have no thought or
knowledge. No sooner do they give rise to a thought than they come to
the end of their life span. Once born in this human world, they gradually
grow into adolescence, shave their hair and beards, don the three robes,

21

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

and renounce domestic life for religious practice. Some of them, entering
into mental concentration, recognize with a concentrated mind the origin
of their birth and say, “I did not exist originally but now I have suddenly
appeared. This world was nonexistent originally but now it exists. This
theory is true, while the rest is false.” This is the ﬁrst variation. On the
basis of this view, other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas speculate about the
initial eon of the past and assert that the world exists without a cause. This
theory is identical with the other of the two variations.
Again, some śramaṇas or brāhmaṇas, with a rationally skeptical mind,
examine the case carefully and investigate the theory in various ways through
their knowledge of logic and sophistry. They assert, “This world exists without cause. This theory alone is true while the rest is false.” This is the second
variation. On the basis of this theory, other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas propose
a theory concerning the initial eon of the past and assert, “This world exists
without cause.” This theory is identical with the other variation and does
not go beyond it. So while the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas thus formulate
their theory concerning the initial eon of the past, asserting that this world
exists without cause, the theory is limited to two variations and does not
exceed that number. Only the Tathāgata knows the very basis of the [common] view, and so on, just as has been repeatedly stated.
Other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas conjecture theories about the initial
eon of the past in innumerable and obsessive ways. But all the theories
thus asserted can be classiﬁed exhaustively into eighteen kinds of views.
Whatever these views may be, insofar as they are speculative concerning
the initial eon of the past, no matter how numerous and obsessively formulated, they will invariably be classiﬁed into eighteen variations without
exceeding that number. Again, the Buddha alone knows the very basis of
those theories, and so on, just as has been repeatedly stated.
Again, there is another great insight, most profound and subtle and far
more radiant. What is this insight? While some śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas
form innumerable speculations about the ﬁnal eon of the future, as freely
as they may wish, all the theories thus asserted can be classiﬁed exhaustively into forty-four kinds of views. Whatever those views may be, insofar
as they are speculative concerning the ﬁnal eon of the future, no matter how
numerous and obsessively theorized, they can all invariably be classiﬁed

92b

22

Sutra 21

into forty-four types of views without exceeding that number. Why should
the theories of those śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas who speculate about the
ﬁnal eon of the future without limit be exhaustively classiﬁed into fortyfour variations without exceeding that number?
Some śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas speculate in regard to the ﬁnal eon of
the future and form the theory that individual consciousness exists after
death, thus asserting the existence of individual consciousness in the world
after death. Any theory that asserts the existence of consciousness in the
world after death falls into sixteen variations without exceeding that number. Why should the theories of those śramaṇa and brāhmaṇas who speculate about the ﬁnal eon of the future and assert that consciousness exists
in the world after death be conﬁned to sixteen variations without exceeding
that number?
Some śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas speculatively form this view: “After
my death a consciousness that has a form (i.e., a self with form and consciousness) will exist. This theory alone is true while the rest is false.”
This is called the ﬁrst view. Based on this view, other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas who speculate in regard to the ﬁnal eon of the future hold this
theory of the existence of consciousness, asserting that consciousness will
exist in the world after their death. This theory belongs to the sixteen variations and does not range beyond them.
Some śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas assert, “After my death there will be
a formless consciousness (i.e., a self without form but with consciousness).
This alone is true while the rest is false.”
Some other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas assert, “After my death there
will be a consciousness with both form and formlessness (i.e., a self with
consciousness and with both form and nonform). This alone is true while
the rest is false.”
Some other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas assert, “After my death there
will be a consciousness that has neither form nor formlessness (i.e., a self
with consciousness but with neither form nor nonform). This alone is true
while the rest is false.”
Some other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas assert, “After my death there
will be a consciousness with a limit [or end] (i.e., a self having an end).
This alone is true while the rest is false.”

23

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

Some other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas assert, “After my death there
will be a consciousness that has no limit (i.e., a self with no limit or end).
This alone is true while the rest is false.”
Some other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas assert, “After my death there
will be a consciousness that has both a limit and no limit (i.e., a self with
consciousness that also has both a limit and no limit). This alone is true
while the rest is false.”
Some other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas assert, “After my death there will
be a consciousness that has neither a limit nor no limit (i.e., a self with consciousness that also has neither a limit nor no limit). This alone is true while
the rest is false.”
Some other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas assert, “After my death there
will be a consciousness that is one-sidedly happy (i.e., a self with a onesidedly happy consciousness). This alone is true while the rest is false.”
Some other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas assert, “After my death there
will be a consciousness that one-sidedly suffers (i.e., a self with a onesidedly suffering consciousness). This alone is true while the rest is false.”
Some other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas assert, “After my death there
will be a consciousness that both is happy and suffers (i.e., a self with a
consciousness that is happy and that suffers). This alone is true while the
rest is false.”
Some other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas assert, “After my death there
be a consciousness that neither is happy nor suffers (i.e., a self with a consciousness that neither is happy nor suffers). This alone is true while the
rest is false.”
Some other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas assert, “After my death there
will be a singular consciousness (yi xiang; ekatta-saṃjñī ātmā, i.e., a self
with a uniﬁed consciousness). This alone is true while the rest is false.”
Some other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas assert, “After my death, there
will be a multiple consciousness (re gan xiang; nānatta-saṃjñī ātmā, i.e.,
a self with equivocal or multiple consciousness). This alone is true while
the rest is false.”
Some other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas assert, “After my death there
will be a small consciousness (shao xiang; parītta-saṃjñin, i.e., a self
with a small separate consciousness).”

92c

24

Sutra 21

Some other śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas assert, “After my death there
will be an immeasurable consciousness (i.e., a self with an immeasurable
consciousness). This alone is true while the rest is false.”
The foregoing groups of śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas all formulate theories
in regard to the ﬁnal eon of the future, asserting that there will be consciousness after death, but all their theories fall into sixteen variations
without exceeding that number. Once again, only the Buddha knows the
very basis of their theories, and so on, just as has been repeated before.
Again, there is another great insight, most profound and subtle and far
more radiant. What is this insight? Some śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas formulate various theories in regard to the ﬁnal eon of the future and assert
that there will be no consciousness in the world after death. Any theories
that speculate about the ﬁnal eon of the future can be classiﬁed exhaustively
into eight variations without exceeding that number. Why should the theories
of those śramaṇa and brāhmaṇas who speculate about the ﬁnal eon of the
future, asserting that there is no consciousness in the world after death, be
conﬁned to only eight variations? Why don’t they exceed that number?
Some śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas speculatively form this view: “After
my death there will be no consciousness other than a form [of a self] (i.e.,
a self with a form but no consciousness). This alone is true while the rest
is false.”
A second group of śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas asserts, “After my death
there will be neither consciousness nor a form [of a self] (i.e., a self with
no form and no consciousness). This alone is true while the rest is false.”
A third group asserts, “After my death there will be no consciousness
other than [a self] that has both form and formlessness (rūpī ca arūpī ca
ātmā asaṃjñī, i.e, a self with form and nonform and no consciousness).
This alone is true while the rest is false.”
A fourth group asserts, “After my death there will be no consciousness
other than a self that has neither form nor formlessness (n’eva rūpī nārūpī
ca ātmā asaṃjñī, i.e., a self that does not have form, nonform, or consciousness). This alone is true while the rest is false.”
A ﬁfth group asserts, “After my death there will be no consciousness
other than a self with a limit [or end] (i.e., a self that has an end or limit
but no consciousness). This alone is true while the rest is false.”

25

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

A sixth group asserts, “After my death there will be no consciousness
[other than a self] with no limit or end (i.e, a self with no end or limit and
no consciousness). This alone is true while the rest is false.”
A seventh group asserts, “After my death there will be no consciousness
[other than a self] with both an end and no end (i.e., a self with both an
end and no end, and no consciousness). This alone is true while the rest
is false.”
An eighth group asserts, “After my death there will be no consciousness
[other than a self] with neither an end nor no end (i.e., a self with neither
an end nor no end, and no consciousness). This alone is true while the
rest is false.”
The foregoing are the eight variations of the theories with which śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas speculate in regard to the ﬁnal eon of the future,
asserting that there will be no consciousness in the world after death. All
the theories fall into these eight variations and do not exceed that number.
Once again, only the Buddha knows the very basis of these theories, and
so on, just as has been repeated before.
Again, there is another great insight, most profound and subtle and far
more radiant. What is this insight? Some śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas speculate about the ﬁnal eon of the future and frame a theory of “neither consciousness nor nonconsciousness,” asserting that there will be neither
consciousness nor nonconsciousness in the world after death. These
theories too can be classiﬁed exhaustively into eight variations without
exceeding that number. On what basis can the speculative theories about
the ﬁnal eon of the future be classiﬁed exhaustively into eight variations
without exceeding that number? On what basis can the theories of those
śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas who speculate in regard to the ﬁnal eon of the
future, asserting that there is neither consciousness nor nonconsciousness
in the world after death, be conﬁned to only eight variations? Why don’t
they exceed that number?
Some śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas speculatively form this view, “After
the end of my life there will be [a self] with neither consciousness nor
nonconsciousness (i.e., a self with a form but with neither consciousness
nor nonconsciousness). This alone is true while the rest is false.”

93a

26

Sutra 21

A second group of śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas asserts, “After my death
there will be [a self] with no form and neither consciousness nor nonconsciousness. This alone is true while the rest is false.”
A third group asserts, “After my death, there will be [a self] with both
a form and no form and with neither consciousness nor nonconsciousness.
This alone is true while the rest is false.”
A fourth group asserts, “After my death, there will be [a self] with neither form nor no form and with neither consciousness nor nonconsciousness. This alone is true while the rest is false.”
A ﬁfth group asserts, “After my death, there will be [a self] with an
end (i.e., a limit) but with neither consciousness nor nonconsciousness.
This alone is true while the rest is false.”
A sixth group asserts, “After my death, there will be [a self] with no
end (i.e., no limit) and with neither consciousness nor nonconsciousness.
This alone is true while the rest is false.”
A seventh group asserts, “After my death, there will be [a self] with
both an end and no end and with neither consciousness nor nonconsciousness. This alone is true while the rest is false.”
An eighth group asserts, “After my death, there will be [a self] with
neither an end nor no end and with neither consciousness nor non consciousness (n’eva antavā-anantavā ātmā n’eva saṃjñi-nāsaṃjñi). This
alone is true while the rest is false.”
These are the eight variations of speculative theories held by śramaṇas
and brāhmaṇas in regard to the ﬁnal eon of the future, asserting that there
will be neither consciousness nor nonconsciousness in the world after
death. They all form eight variations and do not exceed that number. Once
again, only the Buddha knows the very basis of these theories, and so on,
just as has been stated repeatedly.
Again, there is another great insight, most profound and subtle and far
more radiant. What is this insight? Some śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas speculate
in regard to the ﬁnal eon of the future and form a theory of annihilationism,
asserting that living beings are completely destroyed after their deaths [or
after the dissolution of their bodies], without remainder. This kind of theory
can be classiﬁed into seven variations without exceeding that number. On

27

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

what basis can the theories of the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas who speculate
in regard to the ﬁnal eon of the future, asserting that there is no self after
death, be classiﬁed into seven variations and not exceed that number?
Some śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas speculatively form this view, “My body
consists of four material principles and six cognitive faculties, and it was
born of my father and mother, reared initially by milk, and later sustained
by food and clothing and physically protected. The result, however, is subject
to change and will eventually be destroyed and obliterated. As it is like this,
it is called annihilation.” This is the ﬁrst theory of annihilationism.
A second group of śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas asserts, “This may not be
total annihilation [of a sentient being]. Only when one reaches the heaven
in the realm of desire (kāmadhātu) is the body totally annihilated after death.”
A third group asserts, “This may not be total annihilation [of a sentient
being]. The body that takes shape in the realm of form (rūpadhātu) is
endowed with all cognitive faculties. Only when these faculties are
destroyed and obliterated after one’s death can the dissolution of faculties
be regarded as total annihilation.”
A fourth group asserts, “This may not be total annihilation [of a sentient
being]. Only when one reaches the formless realm (arūpyadhātu) of inﬁnite
space can it be regarded as total annihilation.”
A ﬁfth group asserts, “This may not be total annihilation [of a sentient
being]. Only when one reaches the formless realm of inﬁnite consciousness
can it be regarded as total annihilation.”
A sixth group asserts, “This may not be total annihilation [of a sentient
being]. Only when one reaches the formless realm of nothingness can it
be regarded as total annihilation.”
A seventh group asserts, “This may not be total annihilation [of a sentient
being]. Only when one reaches the formless realm, namely, the realm of
neither thought nor nonthought, can it be regarded as total annihilation.”
These are the seven variations of the theories held by those śramaṇas
and brāhmaṇas who speculate in regard to the ﬁnal eon of the future,
asserting that there is total destruction and obliteration of living beings
after their death. The theories all fall into seven variations and do not
exceed that number. Once again, only the Buddha knows the very basis
of these theories, and so on, as has been stated repeatedly.

93b

28

Sutra 21

Again, there is another great insight, most profound and subtle and far
more radiant. What is this insight? Some śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas who
speculate about the ﬁnal eon of the future assert a theory of nirvana and
hold that living beings should acquire nirvana in their present lives. This
kind of theory can be classiﬁed into ﬁve variations without exceeding that
number. On what basis, however, do the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas who
speculate about the ﬁnal eon of the future assert that living beings should
acquire nirvana in their present lives? How can this theory be classiﬁed
into ﬁve variations and not exceed that number?
Some śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas speculatively form this view, “Since
I am able to enjoy all ﬁve senses as freely as I wish, I regard this as the
realization of nirvana in this present life.” This is the ﬁrst variation.
A second group of śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas asserts, “I think that this
is the nirvana acquired in the present life and I cannot deny this subtle
state. You may not understand this as I alone have experienced it. If you
forsake all evil desires and all that is not good, even though there may be
awareness of an object ( you jia; vitarka) and the act of examining ( you
guan; vicāra), you will acquire the sense of joy ( prīti) and bliss (sukha)
that removes the cause of birth. You will enter the ﬁrst meditative state
of absorption (dhyāna). This may be regarded as nirvana acquired in the
present life.” This is the second variation.
A third group asserts, “I think that this is the nirvana acquired in the
present life and I cannot deny this subtle state. You may not understand
it as I alone have experienced it. If you eliminate awareness of an object
and the subjective act of examination, with increasing tranquility or selfconﬁdence (Pāli saṃpasādana) and continual application of mental concentration, you will proceed to the second meditative state of absorption.
According to my experience, this may be regarded as nirvana acquired
in the present life.” This is the third variation.
A fourth group asserts, “I think that this is the nirvana acquired in the
present life and I cannot deny this state of subtlety. You may not understand
it as I alone have experienced it. If you eliminate deﬁled affectations and
forsake the feeling of delight while remaining mindful of the blissful state
and experience it in the body, which the wise and saintly disciples commend,
you will then enter the third meditative state of absorption. According to

29

93c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

my experience, this may be regarded as nirvana acquired in the present
life.” This is the fourth variation.
A ﬁfth group asserts, “I think that this is the nirvana acquired in this
present life and I cannot deny this subtle state. You may not understand
it as I alone have experienced it. If you eradicate feelings of happiness
and suffering and remove sorrow and joy, as I have done, you will realize
the state of equanimity in which neither suffering nor pleasure is experienced, and thus enter the fourth meditative state of absorption, which is
primary nirvana.” This is the ﬁfth variation.
When śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas speculate in regard to the ﬁnal eon
of the future and assert these views of nirvana that may be acquired in
the present life, their theories can be classiﬁed into ﬁve variations without
exceeding that number. Once again, only the Buddha knows the very basis
of these theories, and so on, just as has been stated repeatedly.
Some śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas obsessively assert innumerable speculative views about the ﬁnal eon of the future, but the various theories
they advance about the ﬁnal eon of the future can invariably be classiﬁed
into forty-four variations without exceeding that number. Once again,
only the Buddha knows the very basis of these theories, and so on, just
as has been stated repeatedly.
Some śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas obsessively assert innumerable views
about the initial eon of the past and the ﬁnal eon of the future, but the various theories they advance about the initial eon of the past and the ﬁnal
eon of the future can be classiﬁed exhaustively into sixty-two variations
without exceeding that number. Once again, only the Buddha knows the
very basis of these theories, and so on, just as has been stated repeatedly.
Some śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, speculating about the initial eon of
the past, assert a theory of eternalism and hold that the self and the world
are permanent. On the basis of this theory, these śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas
acquire knowledge, namely, heretical notions of belief, desire, learning,
[causal] conditions, sensation, view, concentration, and acknowledgment.
They then acquire knowledge from these [heretical notions], namely, the
notion of sensation and so on, up to the notion of nirvana as well.
Some śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, speculating about the initial eon of
the past, assert a theory of eternalism and hold that the self and the world

30

Sutra 21

are permanent. Since these theories are invariably occasioned by the
contact of the senses [with their respective objects], it is impossible to
advance any of these theories apart from the fact of sense contact. This
holds true even with the theory of nirvana acquired in the present life.
Some śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas assert innumerable views about the
initial eon of the past and the ﬁnal eon of the future. Whatever theories
they advance concerning the initial eon of the past and the ﬁnal eon of
the future are invariably accomplished within these sixty-two variations.
Therefore, whatever speculative view one may assert as a theory is conﬁned
to these sixty-two variations [and can never be accomplished outside these
variations]. This state of affairs can be compared to the situation of a skillful
ﬁsherman who casts a ﬁne-meshed net over a small pond and covers it
entirely. It should be understood that whatever creatures exist within that
small pond will invariably be trapped in the net and cannot escape from it;
they are all contained within it and cannot go beyond it. The śramaṇas and
brāhmaṇas are also like this. All the various speculative theories they hold
concerning the initial eon of the past and the ﬁnal eon of the future are
invariably conﬁned within the ﬁne-meshed net of these sixty-two variations
and may equal but never go beyond them.
If a bhikṣu acquires insight into the causal concatenation of the six
senses and contact with their objects (i.e., sensation, its cessation, its gratiﬁcation, its danger, and the method of its transcendence), universally as
they really are, this would be his highest achievement, [precisely] because
this insight goes beyond the theories contained within the sixty-two variations. The Tathāgata has directly experienced in the present life that the
cause of birth and death has been exhausted. The only reason he continues
to appear in this world is because of his [resolution] to help gods and
humans realize the goal of nirvana. Without this [great] resolution, there
would be no one in this world on whom gods and humans can rely as their
refuge. Such a state of affairs can be compared to the tāla tree: if the top
is chopped off, the tree never revives. In case of the Buddha, too, because
he has already terminated the cause of life and birth, once he enters nirvana
he will never again return to this world.

The time this discourse was completed must have been the right time for
the Buddha, because the entire earth quaked three times in six different ways.

31

94a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

At that moment Ānanda was standing behind the Buddha, fanning him.
He rearranged his outer robe to expose his right shoulder and, kneeling with
his palms joined, he said to the Buddha, “The foregoing discourse is very
profound, sir. What title should be given to this discourse? And how can this
discourse be sustained and carried out, sir?”
The Buddha said to Ānanda, “This sutra should be called the net of meanings, the net of insights, the net of views, the net of catching evil ones, and
the net of Brahmā.”
At that, having heard the Buddha’s teaching, Ānanda was delighted to
receive it, and he reverentially carried out what the Buddha taught.
[End of Sutra 21: Brahmā’s Net]

32

Sutra 22

One Who Cultivates Virtue

(Dīgha Nikāya 4: Soṇadaṇḍa Suttanta)
Thus have I heard. Once, when the Buddha was traveling through the communities of the country of Aṅga, accompanied by one thousand two hundred
and ﬁfty disciples, he stopped overnight by the bank of Queen Gaggarā’s
lotus pond near the city of Campā.
A brāhmaṇa called Soṇadaṇḍa resided in Campā, a well-populated and
prosperous city with abundant greenery. King Prasenajit [of Kauśala]15 had
granted the city to the brāhmaṇa Soṇadaṇḍa as a ﬁef, exempting it from taxation. This brāhmaṇa had been born into a pure family line of seven generations and had never been slighted by anyone in society. He was thoroughly
versed in the three ancient collections of hymns (Vedas) and had detailed
knowledge of the various brāhmaṇa scriptures as well as a comprehensive
command of the subtleties of secular literature. He was also well trained in
reading the physiognomy of magnanimous personalities, in divining good
and bad omens, and in conducting ceremonial proceedings and sacriﬁcial
rites. He had ﬁve hundred student disciples and never tired of teaching them.
On this occasion, many of the brāhmaṇas and wealthy householders of
the city were duly informed:

The śramaṇa Gautama, son of the Śākya clan, having renounced domestic
life and realized the ultimate goal of religion, has been traveling through
the communities of the country of Aṅga and has [now] reached the bank
of Queen Gaggarā’s lotus pond in the city of Campā. Gautama’s good
name is renowned and [his accomplishment] has been proclaimed everywhere, in all lands under the sky, as worthy of the ten supreme titles,
namely One Perfected in Practice (Tathāgata), One Liberated from Attachment (Arhat), Perfectly Enlightened One (Samyak-saṃbuddha), and so
on. Among all the gods and humans, as well as all the evil ones and their
lord, and the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas too, he alone has directly experienced
33

94b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

the realization of enlightenment and has been teaching others [how to realize
that goal]. When he expounds on religion his words are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end. All the words he utters are
invariably endowed with true meanings and real essences, and they are in
accord with his practice of pure and genuine austerity.

[Each of them was struck by the same thought:] “I too have heard that
we should visit this sage and pay our respects. I will go to see this man
together with the others.” Thereupon, all of the citizens, brāhmaṇas and
wealthy householders alike, immediately departed to go to the place where
the Buddha was resting, [resulting in a great exodus from the city].
The brāhmaṇa Soṇadaṇḍa, observing from atop his high tower the passage
of a multitude of citizens [through the streets], asked his attendants, “Why
are all these people gathered together and where are they going?”
The attendants replied:
I have heard, sir: “The śramaṇa Gautama, son of the Śākya clan, having
renounced domestic life and realized the ultimate goal of religion, has
been traveling through the communities of the country of Aṅga and has
[now] reached the bank of Queen Gaggarā’s lotus pond in the city of
Campā. Gautama’s good name is renowned and [his accomplishment]
has been proclaimed everywhere, in all lands under the sky, as worthy of
the ten supreme titles, namely, One Perfected in Practice (Tathāgata), One
Liberated from Attachment (Arhat), Perfectly Enlightened One (Samyaksaṃbuddha), and so on. Among all the gods and humans, as well as all
the evil ones and their lord, and the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas too, he
alone has directly experienced the realization of enlightenment. When he
expounds on religion his words are good in the beginning, good in the
middle, and good in the end. All the words he utters are invariably endowed
with true meanings and real essences, and they are in accord with his pure
and genuine practice of austerity.”

94c

The brāhmaṇas and wealthy householders all wish to see the śramaṇa
Gautama and pay him their respects. The crowds are nothing other than the
procession of those who wish to go see the śramaṇa Gautama, sir.
The brāhmaṇa then instructed his attendants: “Go quickly and carry my

34

Sutra 22

message to the people. Tell them: ‘Gentlemen, please wait for a moment
while I come to join you. Let us all go together to Gautama’s resting place.’”
One of the attendants immediately went out and said to the people: “Good
people, please wait for a moment for [the brāhmaṇa Soṇadaṇḍa] to join you.
He wishes to accompany you to Gautama’s resting place.”
The townspeople responded to the attendant: “Please return quickly to
the brāhmaṇa and tell him: ‘The most auspicious moment is at hand. Let us
[now] go together.’”
The attendant returned and reported: “The people are waiting, sir. They
say, ‘The most auspicious moment is at hand. Let us [now] go together.’”
The brāhmaṇa Soṇadaṇḍa right away descended from the high tower and
went to the middle gate. It so happened that his ﬁve hundred students had
gathered at the gate, attending to a minor matter. Seeing their [teacher] brāhmaṇa Soṇadaṇḍa approaching, they stood up in unison and greeted him, “O
great brāhmaṇa, where are you going, sir?”
Soṇadaṇḍa replied:

The śramaṇa Gautama, son of the Śākya clan, is here. Having renounced
domestic life and realized the ultimate goal of religion, he has been traveling through the communities of the country of Aṅga and has [now]
reached the bank of Queen Gaggarā’s lotus pond in the city of Campā.
Gautama’s good name is renowned and [his accomplishment] has been
proclaimed everywhere, in all lands under the sky, as worthy of the ten
supreme titles, namely, One Perfected in Practice (Tathāgata), One Liberated from Attachment (Arhat), Perfectly Enlightened One (Samyaksaṃbuddha), and so on. Among all the gods and humans, as well as all
the evil ones and their lord, and the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas too, he
alone has directly experienced the realization of enlightenment. When he
expounds on religion his words are good in the beginning, good in the
middle, and good in the end. All the words he utters are invariably endowed
with true meanings and real essences, and they are in accord with his pure
and genuine practice of asuterity. Everyone should go to see this sage,
and I too wish to visit the śramaṇa Gautama and pay my respects.

The ﬁve hundred student disciples then spoke to Soṇadaṇḍa, advising
him:

35

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

May you not be so bold as to visit him. Why? Sir, he will come here
instead, and so Your Reverence need not go to him.
A great brāhmaṇa like Your Reverence, who comes from a line of pure
parentage of seven generations, should never be slighted by anyone in
society. If you uphold [the prestige of] your pure family line, [the śramaṇa
Gautama] will [eventually] come to see you, sir. Therefore, Your Reverence
should not go to him.
Moreover, your greatness as a brāhmaṇa is well established: you are
thoroughly versed in the three ancient collections of hymns (Vedas) and
have detailed knowledge of the various brāhmaṇa scriptures, as well as
a comprehensive command of the subtleties of secular literature. Your
Reverence is also well trained in reading the physiognomy of magnanimous
personalities, in divining good and bad omens, and in conducting ceremonial proceedings and sacriﬁcial rites. If you uphold [the preeminence
of] one who possesses such [extraordinary] abilities, [the śramaṇa Gautama] will [eventually] come to see you, sir. Hence, Your Reverence should
not go to him.
Again, your greatness as a brāhmaṇa is reﬂected in your handsome
countenance, which bears the likeness and coloring of the god Brahmā.
If you uphold [the prestige of] this [extraordinary] likeness, [the śramaṇa
Gautama] will [eventually] come to see you, sir. Hence, Your Reverence
should not go to him.
Again, your greatness as a brāhmaṇa is proven by the ﬁne moral quality
of your ever-increasing virtues and store of acquired wisdom. If you maintain [the dignity inherent in] this [extraordinary] achievement, [the śramaṇa
Gautama] will [eventually] come to see you, sir. Hence, Your Reverence
should not go to him.
Again, your greatness as a brāhmaṇa is apparent in your gentle manner
of speech and you are endowed with the highest rhetorical skill, as every
word is imbued with pure and genuine meanings and essences. If you rest
in [the propriety ﬂowing from] this [extraordinary] ability, [the śramaṇa
Gautama] will [eventually] come to see you, sir. Hence, Your Reverence
should not go to him.
Again, your greatness as a brāhmaṇa is evidenced in your position as a
great master with many disciple followers. If you afﬁrm this [extraordinary]

36

Sutra 22

attainment, [the śramaṇa Gautama] will [eventually] come to see you,
sir. Hence, Your Reverence should not go to him.
Again, your greatness as a brāhmaṇa is shown in your ability to teach
ﬁve hundred students at all times. If you afﬁrm this [extraordinary] quality,
[the śramaṇa Gautama] will [eventually] come to see you, sir. Hence,
Your Reverence should not go to him.
Again, your greatness as a brāhmaṇa is reﬂected in your capacity to
give consultation to scholars seeking it from all quarters of the continent,
and to provide them with clear, detailed answers to questions about sacriﬁcial rites and proceedings. If you afﬁrm this [extraordinary] quality,
[the śramaṇa Gautama] will [eventually] come to see you, sir. Hence,
Your Reverence should not go to him.
Again, your greatness as a brāhmaṇa is reﬂected in the respect and
recognition accorded you by both King Prasenajit (of Kauśala) and King
Bimbisāra (of Magadha). If you uphold [the status conveyed by] these
[extraordinary] honors, [the śramaṇa Gautama] will [eventually] come
to see you, sir. Hence, Your Reverence should not go to him.
Again, your greatness as a brāhmaṇa is conﬁrmed by your wealth and
your storehouses ﬁlled with treasure. If you maintain [the standing of]
one so [extraordinarily] endowed with wealth, [the śramaṇa Gautama]
will [eventually] come to see you, sir. Hence, Your Reverence should not
go to him.
Again, your greatness as a brāhmaṇa is revealed in your intelligence;
you possess complete understanding and command the power of universally beneﬁcial speech that is totally free from inconsistency. If you rest
on [the preeminence given by] this [extraordinary] quality, [the śramaṇa
Gautama] will [eventually] come to see you, sir. Hence, Your Reverence
should not go to him.
Soṇadaṇḍa then replied:

Yes, it is as you have said. What you have just said is indeed correct. I do
possess the qualities you have enumerated; I do not deny it. Listen to me,
however. [You should know that] the śramaṇa Gautama is replete with
every [excellent] meritorious virtue, and also that I should go to him; he
will not come to see us here.

37

95a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

The śramaṇa Gautama was born into a line of pure parentage of seven
generations, which must not be slighted by anyone in society. Since he is
from such a pure family, I should go to him; he will not come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama was born into a kṣatriya family and has
a handsome appearance. As he is marked by this excellence, I should go
to him; he will not come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama was born into a noble family, but having
renounced his worldly fortune he has realized the ultimate goal of religion.
Since he has realized this goal, I should go to him; he will not come to
see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama, born from a pure family line and
endowed with a fair, bright complexion, has renounced domestic life and
engaged in religious practice. Since he has decisively taken up the path
of religion, I should go to him; he will not come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama was born into a wealthy and privileged
family, yet despite the strength of that position, he has renounced domestic
life and realized the goal of religious practice. Since he has realized this
goal, I should go to him; he will not come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama is endowed with all [moral and spiritual]
precepts (śīlavant ārya-śīlin kuśala-śilena samannāgata) and has attained
the perfection of transcendental insight. Since he has realized this excellence, I should go to him; he will not come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama is skilled in the use of appropriate language
and [his manner] is gentle, harmonious, and reﬁned. Since he has realized
this excellence, I should go to him; he will not come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama is a teacher of teachers and has a multitude
of disciples (bahūnām ācārya-prācarya). Since he has realized this excellence, we should go to him; he will not come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama has [thoroughly] terminated all desires
and passions with no inconstancy whatsoever (kṣīṇa-kāma-rāga-vigatacāpalya). Having eradicated all anxiety and fear, his bearing is neither stiff
nor artiﬁcial but pleasingly harmonious and delightful. He praises the goodness in others, teaches the principle of moral retribution (karma-vādin kriyāvādin), and honors [the practice of] non-harm (Pāli apāpa-purekkhāra).

38

Sutra 22

Since he has realized this excellence, I should go to him; he will not come
to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama is respected, adored, given offerings,
and shown tender concern by King Prasenajit and King Bimbisāra. Since
he has been accorded this status, I should go to him; he will not come to
see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama is respected, adored, given offerings,
and shown tender concern by the brāhmaṇa Puṣkarasvādi (Pokkharasādi),
and also by brāhmaṇas such as Brahmā, Tārukkha, Kūṭadanta, and Sukamāṇavatodeyya. Since he has attained this eminence, I should go to him;
he will not come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama is revered, respected, adored, given offerings, and shown tender concern not only by the saintly disciples (śrāvakaantevāsika) but also by the gods and other legions of spirits, and is followed
with devotion by clanspeople from the Śākya, Kaulya, Uttarakā, Vṛji,
Malla, and Somanā clans. Since he has attained this eminence, we should
go to him; he will not come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama convinced both King Prasenajit and King
Bimbisāra to receive lay ordination by taking refuge in the Three Treasures
(Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha) and adhering to the ﬁve moral precepts.
Since he has attained this distinction, I should go to him; he will not come
to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama convinced the brāhmaṇa Puṣkarasvādi
and others to receive lay ordination by taking refuge in the Three Treasures
and adhering to the ﬁve moral precepts. Since he has attained this distinction, I should go to him; he will not come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama not only granted his disciples the higher
ordination that consists of taking refuge in the Three Treasures and adhering
to the ﬁve precepts, but also offered the invariable refuge of the Three
Treasures and the ﬁve precepts to the gods, to the Śākya and Kaulya clanspeople, and so on. Since he has attained this distinction, I should go to
him; he will not come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama, whenever and wherever he is traveling
through our communities, has always been respected, given offerings,

39

95b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

and shown tender concern by all the people. Since he has attained this
distinction, I should go to him; he will not come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama, in whatever town or village he happens
to visit, is always respected, given offerings, and shown tender concern
by the townspeople and villagers. Since he has attained this distinction,
I should go to him; he will not come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama, wherever he travels, has never been disturbed by nonhuman spirits. Since he is constantly accompanied by this
miracle, I should go to him; he will not come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama, wherever he happens to be, empowers
the people of that locality to perceive a heavenly radiance and hear celestial
music. Since he is always accompanied by this miracle, I should go to
him; he will not come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama, wherever he sojourns on his travels,
invariably endears himself to the people so that when he departs they
weep when parting from him, wishing that he would stay longer. Since
he has always endeared himself to everyone, I should go to him; he will
not come to see us here.
Again, when the śramaṇa Gautama ﬁrst renounced domestic life, his
loving father and mother were brought to tears and they grieved bitterly at
his departure and yearned for him to return. Because he has attained the
goal of his renunciation, I should go to him; he will not come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama, on renouncing domestic life, cast away
all his jewelry, elephants, horses, chariots, and every object of gratiﬁcation
for the ﬁve senses even though he was in the youthful prime of life. Since
he has fulﬁlled the path of renunciation, I should go to him; he will not
come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama abandoned the throne of universal kingship
(cakravartin) to enter religious practice. Had he pursued the life of a householder he would have reigned over the four quarters of the earth as the
sovereign of all people and all worldly things, and we all would have been
his subjects. Since he has fulﬁlled the path of religion [instead of that other
path of glory,] I should go to him; he will not come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama thoroughly understands the reforming
principle of excommunication ( fanfa; brahmādaṇḍa) as practiced in

40

Sutra 22

Brahmā Heaven; he communicates with Brahmā and commends the efﬁcacy of this principle to others. Since he has attained this distinction, I
should go to him; he will not come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama is endowed with the thirty-two eminent
marks of a great person without exception. Since he is endowed with all
these excellent marks, I should go to him; he will not come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama possesses the penetrating intelligence
of complete understanding and is totally free from any mental unsteadiness.
Since he is endowed with this distinction, I should go to him; he will not
come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama has just now arrived on the bank of Queen
Gaggarā’s lotus pond. He is the Honored One for me and a cherished guest
[of this region]. I should go to him to form a close association.
The ﬁve hundred students then said to Soṇadaṇḍa:

This is truly marvelous—indeed, truly marvelous, sir! Can [the śramaṇa
Gautama] possess all of the meritorious virtues? If he possessed just one
of them, he could not be expected to come to us. How much less could
he be expected to come to us when he is so fully endowed with every distinction! Will Your Reverence allow us to accompany you to greet the
Tathāgata?

Soṇadaṇḍa replied, “If you wish, now is the time to come along with me.”
The brāhmaṇa’s carriage was prepared and, surrounded by his ﬁve hundred
students and the brāhmaṇas and householders of the city of Campā, he journeyed to Queen Gaggarā’s [lotus] pond.
Not far from the pond, Soṇadaṇḍa thought to himself:

If I ask Gautama something, I could be admonished if my question is
inappropriate and counter to the way he thinks. He may say, “You should
ask me that question in this way, and not like that.” Those who are in
attendance on this occasion will then surely think of me as ignorant and
my reputation will be damaged. If the śramaṇa Gautama asks me a question
about the meaning of my doctrines and my answer does not appear to
conform to his thinking, he may say, “You should reply in this manner,
and not like that.” Those who are in attendance on this occasion will then

41

95c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

surely think of me as ignorant and my reputation will be damaged. Yet if
I return from this occasion without exchanging any words with Gautama,
those who have accompanied me may say, “The [brāhmaṇa Soṇadaṇḍa]
has little knowledge. He did not dare to exchange words with the śramaṇa
Gautama.” My reputation will thus be damaged. If, however, the śramaṇa
Gautama should ask me about the meritorious virtues that brāhmaṇas are
obliged to fulﬁll, then I can answer in a way that I hope will be in accord
with his line of inquiry.”

Having run through these thoughts while approaching Queen Gaggarā’s
[lotus] pond, the brāhmaṇa dismounted from his carriage and went on foot
to the resting place of the World-honored One, where he bowed and took a
seat to one side. The brāhmaṇas and householders of Campā also sat down,
some of them venerating the Buddha before doing so. Some greeted him
with a bow, while others called out their names or simply joined their palms
together to pay their respects, quietly without a word.
When they had all settled in their seats, the Buddha at once knew the mind
of the brāhmaṇa Soṇadaṇḍa and said to him, “What you have thought is in
accordance with your wish.”
The Buddha then asked Soṇadaṇḍa:
O brāhmaṇa, how many meritorious virtues must you, as a brāhmaṇa,
be endowed with so that whatever a brāhmaṇa such as yourself may say
is said with utmost sincerity, involving no falsehood?

At that moment, Soṇadaṇḍa thought to himself:

Quite marvelous—indeed, marvelous! The śramaṇa Gautama evidently
has the great supernormal power of reading the minds of others as easily
as I know my own thoughts: he has put a question about exactly what I
wish to be asked about!

96a

[Soṇadaṇḍa] then assumed a correct posture and, looking out over the
audience with a smile, replied to the Buddha:
As a brāhmaṇa I have fulﬁlled the ﬁve meritorious virtues, so whatever
I say is spoken with utmost sincerity, involving no falsehood, sir. What
are these ﬁve virtues? First, a brāhmaṇa must be from a pure family line

42

Sutra 22

of seven generations, and must not be slighted by anyone in society. Second, he should be thoroughly versed in the three ancient collections of
hymns (Vedas) and have detailed knowledge of the various brāhmaṇa
scriptures as well as a comprehensive command of the subtleties of secular
literature; moreover, he should be well trained in reading the physiognomy
of magnanimous personalities, in divining good and bad omens, and in
conducting ceremonial proceedings and sacriﬁcial rites. Third, he should
be endowed with a handsome countenance [with a fair and bright complexion]. Fourth, he should uphold perfect adherence to the moral precepts.
Fifth, he should possess the wisdom of complete understanding. These
are the ﬁve meritorious virtues. O Gautama, a brāhmaṇa must be endowed
with these ﬁve meritorious virtues so that whatever he says is spoken with
utmost sincerity, involving no falsehood, sir.
The Buddha said to the brāhmaṇa:

Very good, O brāhmaṇa. [Now] of these ﬁve virtues, can someone who
has accomplished four of them while not fulﬁlling one still be called a
[true] brāhmaṇa, such that whatever he says is spoken with utmost sincerity, involving no falsehood?
The brāhmaṇa Soṇadaṇḍa replied:

Yes, sir. Why? O Gautama, a brāhmaṇa is not required to fulﬁll any condition
related to the lineage of his birth. One who fulﬁlls the remaining four [virtues]
can be called a [true] brāhmaṇa, and whatever he says is spoken with utmost
sincerity, involving no falsehood. [First,] such a brāhmaṇa must be thoroughly versed in the three ancient collections of hymns (Vedas) and possess
detailed knowledge of the various brāhmaṇa scriptures as well as a comprehensive command of the subtleties of secular literature; he must also be
well trained in reading the physiognomy of magnanimous personalities, in
divining good and bad omens, and in conducting ceremonial proceedings
and sacriﬁcial rites. [Second,] such a brāhmaṇa must be endowed with a
handsome countenance [with a fair and bright complexion]. [Third,] such
a brāhmaṇa must uphold perfect adherence to the moral precepts. [Fourth,]
such a brāhmaṇa must possess the wisdom of complete understanding.

43

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

The Buddha said to the brāhmaṇa Soṇadaṇḍa:

Very good. [Now] of those [remaining] four virtues, can one who has
accomplished three of them while not fulﬁlling one still be called a [true]
brāhmaṇa, such that whatever he says is spoken with utmost sincerity,
involving no falsehood?
The brāhmaṇa Soṇadaṇḍa replied:

Yes, sir. Why? O Gautama, just as a brāhmaṇa is not required to fulﬁll
any condition of lineage related to his birth, he also is not required to
fulﬁll any condition related to various forms of chanting. One who fulﬁlls
the remaining three [virtues] may be called a [true] brāhmaṇa, and whatever he says is spoken with utmost sincerity, involving no falsehood.
[First,] such a brāhmaṇa must be endowed with a handsome countenance,
[with a fair and bright complexion]. [Second,] such a brāhmaṇa must
uphold perfect adherence to the moral precepts. [Third,] such a brāhmaṇa
must possess the wisdom of complete understanding.
The Buddha continued:

Very good. [Now] of these three virtues, can one who has accomplished two
of them while not fulﬁlling one still be called a [true] brāhmaṇa, such that
whatever he says is spoken with utmost sincerity, involving no falsehood?

The brāhmaṇa replied:

Yes, sir. Why? O Gautama, just as a brāhmaṇa is not required to fulﬁll
any conditions related to his birth lineage or to various forms of chanting,
he also need not fulﬁll the condition requiring a handsome countenance
with a fair complexion.

At that moment, the ﬁve hundred brāhmaṇa students shouted out in protest
to Soṇadaṇḍa:

Why does Your Reverence cast aside fulﬁllment of the conditions of birth
[from pure lineage], of [proﬁciency in scriptural] chanting, and of possessing physical attractiveness [due to heredity]?
At once, the World-honored One said to them:

44

Sutra 22

If the brāhmaṇa Soṇadaṇḍa, your teacher, was unbecoming in his facial
features, if he came from a humble family background and was unable to
chant the scriptures, or speak intelligently and eloquently, and hence
unable to exchange words with me, then you could speak out [on his
behalf]. If, however, Soṇadaṇḍa does have a handsome countenance,
comes from an appropriate family background, and is not only proﬁcient
in chanting scriptures but also able to exchange arguments intelligently
and eloquently, and capable of engaging in debate with me, you should
remain silent and listen to what he says.

At that moment, the brāhmaṇa Soṇadaṇḍa said to the Buddha, “May I
request, O Gautama, that you not press [my disciples] for a moment. I shall
teach them myself.” Soṇadaṇḍa then asked the ﬁve hundred brāhmaṇas:
Aṅgamāṇava is among this multitude of students, like yourselves. He is
one of my nephews from my wife’s side. Do you all see how handsome
he is? With the singular exception of the World-honored One, [whose
noble appearance is beyond comparison,] there is no one in this assembly
whose attractiveness can match that of this young fellow Aṅgamāṇava.
Yet he is a moral degenerate—he commits murder, theft, and sexual abuse;
he is rude and engages in falsehood and deceit. He has committed evil by
transgressing norms and has murdered people by burning them with ﬁre.
O brāhmaṇas, this man Aṅgamāṇava concentrates within himself all evils.
So even though he is capable and proﬁcient in chanting scriptures, of what
use is that?

The ﬁve hundred brāhmaṇas remained silent, [raising no objections].
Soṇadaṇḍa then said to the Buddha:

Sir, with one who upholds perfect adherence to the moral precepts and
also possesses the wisdom of complete understanding, whatever he says
is spoken with utmost sincerity, involving no falsehood. Such a person
can be called a [true] brāhmaṇa, sir.
The Buddha said:

Very good. How do you reply [now], O Soṇadaṇḍa? If one of the two
virtues is not fulﬁlled but the other is perfected, and if whatever is said

45

96b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

is spoken with utmost sincerity, involving no falsehood, can such a person
be called a [true] brāhmaṇa?
Soṇadaṇḍa replied:

No, sir. Why? Perfect moral discipline is wisdom, and wisdom means the
perfection of moral conduct. He who has perfected adherence to the moral
precepts is in possession of wisdom. As a result, whatever he says is
spoken with utmost sincerity, involving no falsehood. Thus I assert that
such a person is a [true] brāhmaṇa, sir.

The Buddha said:

Very good. It is exactly as you have said. One who is endowed with moral
perfection is endowed with wisdom; one who possesses wisdom is morally
perfect. Moral discipline can purify wisdom, and vice versa. O Soṇadaṇḍa,
just as all people use both hands when they wash their hands, so is it with
moral discipline and wisdom. With the left hand, one cleans the right
hand; with the right hand, one cleans the left hand. It is the same with
wisdom and moral discipline. One who possesses wisdom is also endowed
with moral discipline; one who is morally disciplined also possesses wisdom. Moral discipline can purify and perfect wisdom, and perfect wisdom
can purify and perfect moral discipline. O brāhmaṇa, one who possesses
both moral discipline and wisdom, I call that person a bhikṣu.

Soṇadaṇḍa then said to the Buddha, “What are the moral precepts [to
which you refer], sir?”
The Buddha said, “Listen carefully and keep in mind what I explain. I
shall explain each one analytically.”
Soṇadaṇḍa replied, “Yes, sir. This is what I have come to hear.”
The World-honored One then said to the brāhmaṇa:

When the Tathāgata appears in this world, he bears the [ten] epithets of
(1) One Liberated from Attachment, (2) Perfectly Enlightened One, (3)
One Harmoniously Endowed with Insight and Practice, (4) Well-gone
One (who will not be reborn into the cycles of rebirth), (5) Knower of the
World, (6) Unrivaled Leader, (7) Trainer of Human Devotion, (8) Teacher
of Gods and Humans, (9) Enlightened One, and (10) World-honored One.

46

Sutra 22

Among all the gods and humans, and the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas too,
he alone has directly experienced the realization of enlightenment and
teaches others [how to realize it]. [When he expounds on religion] his
words are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end.
All the words he utters are invariably endowed with true meanings and
real essences, and they are in accord with his pure and genuine practice
of austerity.
When householders and their offspring listen to the right Dharma, they
will be motivated to give rise to pure and genuine tranquil faith [in the
Tathāgata]. Having given rise to faith [in the Tathāgata], they will reﬂect
upon their lives:

The life of a householder is not easy, it is [like being bound in] a rack
of chains. Even as I wish to pursue the path of austerity, I cannot be
free [as long as I am bound to a householder’s life]. I should now shave
my hair and beard, don the three robes of a mendicant, and renounce
domestic life for religious practice.

Later, such a person may abandon his household and wealth, dissociate
himself from his family and relations, shave his hair and beard, and don
the three robes. Casting aside all ﬁnery, chanting the precepts and disciplines in the Vinaya texts, adhering to the rule of abstaining from taking
life, and so on, even up to the realization of the fourth meditative state
of absorption, he may thereby acquire supreme bliss. How is this so?
This realization is only possible through a sustained effort of concentration,
comprising constant mindfulness of enjoying practice as a recluse. O
brāhmaṇa, this is regarded as the endowment of the higher ordination
consisting of adherence to the Vinaya precepts and disciplines.

The brāhmaṇa then asked, “What is the wisdom [to which Your Reverence
refers], sir?”
The Buddha replied:

When a bhikṣu realizes a pure and genuine state of mental concentration
that is gentle, well controlled, able to abide in immovability, and so on,
it opens up three kinds of supernormal powers: knowledge of past lives,
knowledge of future destinies, and the eradication of deﬁlements. It thus

47

96c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

terminates the state of ignorance, causing insight to arise together with
the light of wisdom, the eradication of darkness, and the supreme illumination—all by going beyond the insight gained from the eradication of
deﬁlement. How is this so? This realization is only possible through a
sustained effort of concentration, comprising constant mindfulness of
one’s point of observation and the acquisition of a state of equanimity
accompanied by an increasingly subtle sense of bliss. O brāhmaṇa, this
is regarded as the endowment of perfect knowledge of the Vinaya precepts
and disciplines.

Thereupon, the brāhmaṇa Soṇadaṇḍa said to the Buddha:

Now I am resolved to take refuge in the Buddha, Dharma, and the holy
bhikṣus’ Sangha. I earnestly request to be permitted to become a lay
devotee in the right Dharma. From this moment until the dissolution of
the body and end of life, I will uphold the ﬁve precepts, refraining from
taking life, refraining from taking what is not given, refraining from
immoral sexual conduct, refraining from speaking falsehoods, and refraining from ingesting intoxicants.

Having heard the Buddha’s teaching, the brāhmaṇa Soṇadaṇḍa was
delighted to receive it and carried it out as taught by the Buddha.
[End of Sutra 22: One Who Cultivates Virtue]

48

Sutra 23

Brāhmaṇa Kūṭadanta

(Dīgha Nikāya 5: Kūṭadanta Suttanta)
Thus have I heard. Once, when the Buddha was visiting the communities in
the country of Kauśala, accompanied by one thousand two hundred and ﬁfty
disciples, he stopped overnight in a śiṃśapā tree forest to the north of a brāhmaṇa village called Khānumata. A brāhmaṇa named Kūṭadanta resided in
the village, which was well populated and verdant with groves of [shade]
trees and bathing ponds giving off a welcome coolness to any observer. King
Prasenajit had given this village to Kūṭadanta as a ﬁef, exempting it from
taxation. The brāhmaṇa was from a pure family line of seven generations
and had never been slighted by anyone in society. He was thoroughly versed
in the three ancient collections of hymns (Vedas), and had detailed knowledge
of the various brāhmaṇa scriptures as well as a comprehensive command of
the subtleties of secular literature. He was also well trained in reading the
physiognomy of magnanimous personalities, in divining good and bad omens,
and in conducting ceremonial proceedings and sacriﬁcial rites. He had ﬁve
hundred student disciples and never tired of teaching them. To conduct a
grand sacriﬁcial rite, he would obtain no fewer than ﬁve hundred bulls, ﬁve
hundred cows, ﬁve hundred male calves, ﬁve hundred female calves, ﬁve
hundred ewes, and ﬁve hundred rams.
On this occasion, many of the brāhmaṇas and wealthy householders of
the village were duly informed:

The śramaṇa Gautama, son of the Śākya clan, having renounced domestic
life and realized the ultimate goal of religion, has been visiting the communities of the country of Kauśala and has [now] arrived at the śiṃśapā tree
forest north of the village of Khānumata for an overnight stay. Gautama’s
good name is renowned, and [his accomplishment] has been proclaimed
everywhere, in all countries, as worthy of the ten supreme titles, namely,
One Perfected in Practice (Tathāgata), One Liberated from Attachment
49

97a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

(Arhat), Perfectly Enlightened One (Samyak-saṃbuddha), and so on.
Among all the gods and humans, as well as all the evil ones and their lord,
and the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas too, he alone has directly experienced
the realization of enlightenment and has been teaching others [how to
realize that goal]. When he expounds on religion his words are good in
the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end. All the words he
utters are invariably endowed with true meanings and real essences, and
they are in accord with his practice of pure and genuine austerity.

[Everyone who heard this had the same thought:] “I have heard that we
should visit this sage and pay our respects. I will go to see this man together
with the others.” Thereupon, all of the villagers, brāhmaṇas and wealthy
householders alike, immediately departed together, [resulting in a great exodus].
The brāhmaṇa Kūṭadanta, observing from atop his high tower the passage
of the villagers, asked his attendants, “Why have these people gathered and
where are they going?”
The attendants replied:
I have heard, sir: “The śramaṇa Gautama, son of the Śākya clan, having
renounced domestic life and realized the ultimate goal of religion, has
been visiting the communities of the country of Kauśala and has [now]
reached the śiṃśapā forest north of the village. Gautama’s good name is
renowned, and [his accomplishment] has been proclaimed everywhere,
in all countries, as worthy of the ten supreme titles, namely, One Perfected
in Practice, One Liberated from Attachment, Perfectly Enlightened One,
and so on. Among all the gods and humans, as well as all the evil ones
and their lord, and the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas too, he alone has directly
experienced the realization of enlightenment and has been teaching others
how to realize [that goal]. When he expounds on religion, his words are
good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end. All the
words he utters are invariably endowed with true meanings and real
essences, and they are in accord with his practice of pure and genuine
austerity.”
The brāhmaṇas and wealthy householders of the village all wish to visit
the śramaṇa Gautama and pay him their respects. The crowd is nothing
but the procession of those who wish to see the śramaṇa Gautama, sir.

50

Sutra 23

The brāhmaṇa then instructed his attendants, “Go quickly and carry my
message to the people. Tell them ‘Please wait for a moment while I come to
join you. Let us all go together to Gautama’s resting place.’”
One of the attendants immediately went out and said to the people, “Good
people, please wait for a moment [for the brāhmaṇa Kūṭadanta] to join you.
He wishes to accompany you to Gautama’s resting place.”
The townspeople responded to the attendant, “Please return quickly to
the brāhmaṇa and tell him ‘The most auspicious moment is at hand. Let us
[now] go together.’”
The attendant returned and reported: “The people are waiting, sir. They
say, ‘The most auspicious moment is at hand. Let us [now] go together.’”
The brāhmaṇa Kūṭadanta came down from the high tower immediately
and went to the middle gate. It so happened that his ﬁve hundred students
had gathered outside the gate to assist him in the preparations for a great sacriﬁcial rite. Seeing their [teacher] approaching, they stood up in unison and
greeted him, “O great brāhmaṇa, where are you going, sir.”
The brāhmaṇa replied:

I have heard about the śramaṇa Gautama, son of the Śākya clan. Having
renounced domestic life and realized the ultimate goal of religion, he has
been visiting the communities of the country of Kauśala and has [now]
reached the śiṃśapā forest to the north of this village. Gautama’s good
name is renowned, and [his accomplishment] has been proclaimed everywhere, in all countries, as worthy of the ten supreme titles, namely, One
Perfected in Practice, One Liberated from Attachment, Perfectly Enlightened One, and so on. Among all the gods and humans, as well as all the
evil ones and their lord, and the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas too, he alone
has directly experienced the realization of enlightenment and has been
teaching others [how to realize that goal]. When he expounds on religion,
his words are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the
end. All the words he utters are invariably endowed with true meanings
and real essences, and they are in accord with his practice of pure and
genuine austerity. Everyone should go to see this sage.
O brāhmaṇas, all of you, I have also heard that Gautama is knowledgeable concerning the threefold sacriﬁcial rite [as to cattle, calves, and

51

97b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

sheep] as well as the sixteen sacriﬁcial requisites. Even my senior colleagues
and elders have little knowledge of these subjects. Now, it is my wish that
we [successfully] carry out the great sacriﬁcial rite that is approaching.
Since we have enough cattle and sheep, I will visit the śramaṇa Gautama
to inquire further about the threefold sacriﬁcial rite and the sixteen requisites.
By fulﬁlling what is required on that occasion, I will acquire new merit
and my name will be renowned even to the farthest distances.

The ﬁve hundred student disciples then spoke to Kūṭadanta, advising him:

May you not be so bold as to visit him. Why? Sir, he will come here
instead, and so Your Reverence need not go to him.
A great brāhmaṇa like Your Reverence, who comes from a pure line
of seven generations, should never be slighted by anyone in society. If
you uphold [the prestige of ] your pure family line, he will [eventually]
come to see you, sir. Therefore, Your Reverence should not go to him.
Moreover, your greatness as a brāhmaṇa is well known. You are thoroughly versed in the three ancient collections of hymns (Vedas) and have
detailed knowledge of the various brāhmaṇa scriptures as well as a comprehensive command of the subtleties of secular literature. Your reverence
is also well trained in reading the physiognomy of magnanimous personalities, in divining good and bad omen, and in conducting ceremonial proceedings and sacriﬁcial rites. If you uphold [the preeminence of] one who
possesses this [extraordinary] knowledge, he will [eventually] come to
see you, sir. Hence, Your Reverence should not go to him.
Again, your greatness as a brāhmaṇa is reﬂected in your handsome
countenance, which bears the likeness and coloring of the god Brahmā.
If you uphold [the prestige of] this [extraordinary] likeness, he will [eventually] come to see you, sir. Hence, Your Reverence should not go to him.
Again, your greatness as a brāhmaṇa is proven by the ﬁne moral quality
of your ever-increasing virtues and store of acquired wisdom. If you maintain
[the dignity inherent in] this [extraordinary] achievement, he will [eventually]
come to see you, sir. Hence, Your Reverence should not go to him.
Again, your greatness as a brāhmaṇa is apparent in your gentle manner
of speech and you are endowed with the highest rhetorical skill, as every
word is imbued with pure and genuine meanings and essences. If you rest

52

Sutra 23

in [the propriety inherent in] this [extraordinary] ability, he will [eventually]
come to see you, sir. Hence, Your Reverence should not go to him.
Again, your greatness as a brāhmaṇa is evidenced in your position as
a great teacher of teachers (ācarya-prācārya). If you maintain [the dignity
associated with] this [extraordinary] standing, he will [eventually] come
to see you, sir. Hence, Your Reverence should not go to him.
Again, your greatness as a brāhmaṇa is shown in your ability to teach
ﬁve hundred students at all times. If you afﬁrm this [extraordinary] quality,
he will [eventually] come to see you, sir. Hence, Your Reverence should
not go to him.
Again, your greatness as a brāhmaṇa is reﬂected in your capacity to
give consultation to scholars seeking it from all quarters of the continent,
and to give them clear detailed answers to questions about sacriﬁcial rites
and proceedings. If you afﬁrm this [extraordinary] quality, he will [eventually] come to see you, sir. Hence, Your Reverence should not go to him.
Again, your greatness as a brāhmaṇa is reﬂected in the respect and
recognition accorded you by King Bimbisāra (of Magadha) and King
Prasenajit (of Kauśala). If you uphold [the status conveyed by] these
[extraordinary] honors, he will [eventually] come to see you, sir. Hence,
Your Reverence should not go to him.
Again, your greatness as a brāhmaṇa is conﬁrmed by your wealth and
your storehouses ﬁlled with treasure. If you maintain [the standing of]
one so [extraordinary] endowed with wealth, he will [eventually] come
to see you, sir. Hence, Your Reverence should not go to him.
Again, your greatness as a brāhmaṇa is revealed in your intelligence;
you possess complete understanding and command the power of universally beneﬁcial speech that is totally free from inconsistency. If you rest
in [the preeminence given by] this [extraordinary] quality, he will [eventually] come to see you, sir. Hence, Your Reverence should not go to him.
O great teacher, since you are endowed with all eleven of these meritorious
virtues, he will come to see you, and Your Reverence should not go to him.
Kūṭadanta then replied:

Yes, it is as you have said. What you have just said is indeed correct. I do
possess the qualities you have enumerated; I do not deny it. Listen to me,

53

97c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

however. [If you know] the kinds of meritorious virtues the śramaṇa Gautama is endowed with, together with what he has accomplished, you will
also know that I should go to him; he will not come to see us here.
The śramaṇa Gautama was born into a pure line of seven generations,
which must not be slighted by anyone in society. Since he is from such a
pure family, I should go to him; he will not come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama was born into a kṣatriya family and has
a handsome appearance. As he is marked by this excellence, I should go
to him; he will not come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama was born into a noble family, but having
renounced his worldly fortune he has realized the ultimate goal of religion.
Since he has realized this goal, I should go to him; he will not come to
see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama, born from a pure family line and
endowed with a fair, bright complexion, has renounced domestic life and
engaged in religious practice. Since he has decisively taken up the path
of religion, I should go to him; he will not come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama was born into a wealthy and privileged
family, yet despite the strength of that position, he has renounced domestic
life and has realized the goal of religious practice. Since he has realized
this goal, I should go to him; he will not come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama is endowed with all [moral and spiritual]
precepts (śīlavant ārya-śīlin kuśala-śilena samannāgata) and has attained
the perfectionof transcendental insight. Since he has realized this excellence, I should go to him; he will not come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama is skilled in the use of appropriate language
and [his manner] is gentle, harmonious, and reﬁned. Since he has realized
this excellence, I should go to him; he will not come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama is a teacher of teachers and has a multitude
of disciples (bahūnām ācārya-prācarya). Since he has realized this excellence, we should go to him; he will not come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama has [thoroughly] terminated all desires
and passions with no inconstancy whatsoever. Having eradicated all anxiety
and fear, his bearing is neither stiff nor artiﬁcial but pleasingly harmonious
and delightful. He praises the goodness in others, teaches the principle of

54

Sutra 23

moral retribution, and honors [the practice of] non-harm. Since he has realized this excellence, I should go to him; he will not come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama is respected, adored, given offerings, and
shown tender concern by King Bimbisāra and King Prasenajit. Since he has
been accorded this status, I should go to him; he will not come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama is respected, adored, given offerings, and
shown tender concern by the brāhmaṇa Puṣkarasvādi, and also by brāhmaṇas such as Brahmā, Tārukkha, and Sukamāṇavatodeyya. Since he has
attained this eminence, I should go to him; he will not come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama is revered, respected, adored, given offerings, and shown tender concern not only by the saintly disciples but also
by the gods and other legions of spirits, and is followed with devotion by
clanspeople from the Śākya, Kaulya, Uttarakā, Vṛji, Malla, and Somanā
clans. Since he has attained this eminence, we should go to him; he will
not come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama convinced both King Bimbisāra and
King Prasenajit to receive lay ordination by taking refuge in the Three
Treasures and adhering to the ﬁve moral precepts. Since he has attained
this distinction, I should go to him; he will not come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama convinced the brāhmaṇa Puṣkarasvādi
and others to receive lay ordination by taking refuge in the Three Treasures
and adhering to the ﬁve moral precepts. Since he has attained this distinction, I should go to him; he will not come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama not only granted his disciples the higher
ordination that consists of taking refuge in the Three Treasures and adhering
to the ﬁve precepts, but also offered the refuge of the Three Treasures and
the ﬁve precepts to the gods, to the Śākya and Kaulya clanspeople, and
so on. Since he has attained this distinction, I should go to him; he will
not come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama, whenever and wherever he is visiting
in our communities, has always been respected, given offerings, and shown
tender concern by all the people. Since he has attained this distinction, I
should go to him; he will not come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama, in whatever town or village he happens
to visit, is always respected, given offerings, and shown tender concern

55

98a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

by the townspeople and villagers. Since he has attained this distinction,
I should go to him; he will not come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama, wherever he travels, has never been disturbed by nonhuman spirits. Since he is constantly accompanied by this
miracle, I should go to him; he will not come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama, wherever he happens to be, empowers
the people of that locality to perceive a heavenly radiance and hear celestial
music. Since he is always accompanied by this miracle, I should go to
him; he will not come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama, wherever he sojourns on his travels,
invariably endears himself to the people so that when he departs they
weep when parting from him, wishing that he would stay longer. Since
he has always endeared himself to everyone, I should go to him; he will
not come to see us here.
Again, when the śramaṇa Gautama ﬁrst renounced domestic life, his
loving father and mother were brought to tears and they grieved bitterly at
his departure and yearned for him to return. Because he has attained the
goal of his renunciation, I should go to him; he will not come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama, on renouncing domestic life, cast away
all his jewelry, elephants, horses, chariots, and every object of gratiﬁcation
for the ﬁve senses even though he was in the youthful prime of life. Since
he has fulﬁlled the path of renunciation, I should go to him; he will not
come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama abandoned the throne of universal kingship
(cakravartin) to enter religious practice. Had he pursued the life of a householder he would have reigned over the four quarters of the earth as the
sovereign of all people and all worldly things, and we all would have been
his subjects. Since he has fulﬁlled the path of religion [instead of that other
path of glory,] I should go to him; he will not come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama thoroughly understands the reforming
principle of excommunication ( fanfa; brahmādaṇḍa) as practiced in
Brahmā Heaven; he converses with Brahmā and commends the efﬁcacy
of this principle to others. Since he has attained this distinction, I should
go to him; he will not come to see us here.

56

Sutra 23

Again, the śramaṇa Gautama is knowledgeable concerning the threefold
sacriﬁcial rite and the sixteen requisites; all my senior colleagues and
elders lack this knowledge. Since he has attained this distinction, I should
go to him; he will not come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama is endowed with the thirty-two eminent
marks of a great person without exception. Since he is endowed with all
these excellent marks, I should go to him; he will not come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama possesses the penetrating intelligence
of complete understanding and is totally free from any mental unsteadiness.
Since he is endowed with this distinction, I should go to him; he will not
come to see us here.
Again, the śramaṇa Gautama has just now arrived at the śiṃśapā forest
north of this village. He is the Honored One for me and a cherished guest
[of this region]. I should go to him and form a close association.
The ﬁve hundred students then said to Kūṭadanta:

This is truly marvelous—indeed, truly marvelous, sir! Can [the śramaṇa
Gautama] possess all of the meritorious virtues? If he possessed just one
of them he could not be expected to come to us. How much less could he
be expected to come to us when he is so fully endowed with every distinction! Will Your Reverence allow us to go with you to greet the Tathāgata?

Kūṭadanta replied, “If that is your wish, now is the time to come along
with me.” The brāhmaṇa’s carriage was made ready, and surrounded by his
ﬁve hundred students and the brāhmaṇas and householders of the village of
Khānumata, he journeyed to the śiṃśapā forest. Upon his arrival, he dismounted from his carriage and went on foot to the resting place of the Worldhonored One, whom he greeted with a bow before taking a seat to one side.
The brāhmaṇas and householders of the village also sat down, some of
them venerating the Buddha before doing so. Some greeted him with a bow,
while others called out their names or simply joined their palms together to
pay their respects, quietly without a word.
When they had all settled into their seats, the brāhmaṇa Kūṭadanta said
to the Buddha, “I have a question, sir. If Your Reverence will permit me, I
would like to ask it.”

57

98b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

The Buddha replied, “O brāhmaṇa, you may ask your question, as you
please.”
Thereupon, the brāhmaṇa said to the Buddha:

I have been informed that Gautama is knowledgeable concerning the three
kinds of sacriﬁcial rites and the sixteen sacriﬁcial requisites. Sir, of these
matters, neither myself nor my senior colleagues and elders are well
informed. In order to fulﬁll a [longstanding] wish to conduct the great
sacriﬁcial rite, I have so far obtained ﬁve hundred bulls, ﬁve hundred
cows, ﬁve hundred male calves, ﬁve hundred female calves, ﬁve hundred
ewes, and ﬁve hundred rams. Today I have come to ask Your Reverence
how the three kinds of sacriﬁcial rite are to be conducted and the nature
of the sixteen sacriﬁcial requisites. If fortune is with me and I can complete
a great sacriﬁcial rite, I will gain great merit and my name will be renowned
far and wide, and will even be respected by the heavenly gods, sir.

At once, the World-honored One said to the brāhmaṇa Kūṭadanta, “Listen
carefully and keep in mind what I explain. I shall answer your question.”
The brāhmaṇa replied, “Yes, sir. This is what I have come to hear.”
Thereupon, the Buddha said to Kūṭadanta:

In the immemorial past, there was once a kṣatriya king, [properly] anointed
for his throne. As he wished to conduct a great sacriﬁcial rite, he assembled
his brāhmaṇa ministers and said to them: “I have amassed great wealth
and treasure. However, while enjoying all the faculties of the ﬁve senses,
I have also been growing old. My soldiers are strong and valiant without
any cowardice, and my storehouses are ﬁlled with treasure. It is now a
good time for me to conduct a universal sacriﬁcial rite. Please explain
how we may proceed. What will be required?”
The ministers replied, “It is true, O great king. As Your Majesty has
said, our country’s wealth has increased, along with the might of its army.
But, sire, much of that wealth is squandered and constantly being misappropriated by those who harbor ill intent. If a great sacriﬁce should now
be conducted, we cannot expect the intended result to occur. It would be
like sending a band of robbers to chase away another band of robbers; it
will not serve, sire. O great king, do not think that you can rely on your

98c

58

Sutra 23

subjects to apprehend the robbers in order to stop and punish them, or
even have them executed. Instead, you must try to provide the faithful
who serve Your Majesty’s interest with all the things they need: see to it
that those who aspire to conduct trade and business are supplied with sufﬁcient capital, give those who farm the ﬁelds and cultivate the land both
seeds to plant and breeding cattle, and let all of them manage their affairs
by themselves. O Your Majesty, if one refrains from oppressing the people
with taxes and regulations, they will feel safe and secure and be able to
raise their offspring and enjoy their lives.”

The Buddha continued:

Listening to his ministers’ advice, the king made sure to provide his closest
subjects with regular supplies of food and clothing, furnished capital from
the royal coffers to those who aspired to operate various businesses, and
gave seeds and cattle to those who wished to cultivate the land. Thereafter,
the citizens ceased to interfere with each other through criminal acts; they
managed their own affairs, raised their children, and enjoyed their lives.
The Buddha went on:

The king once again called his ministers and said, “My country is prosperous, my army is strong, and my storehouses are ﬁlled with treasure. I
have provided the citizens with whatever they needed and enabled them
to feel free from any kind of deprivation. They are raising their families
and enjoying their own lives. Therefore, I now wish to conduct a great sacriﬁcial rite. Please explain how we should proceed. What will be required?”
The ministers replied, “It is exactly as Your Majesty has said. The
country is prosperous, the army is strong, and the treasury is full. Your
majesty has provided the people with whatever they needed and freed them
from any kind of deprivation. They are raising their families and enjoying
their own lives. O great king, if Your Majesty wishes to conduct a great
sacriﬁcial rite, this may be announced in the queens’ palace quarters.”
Following the ministers’ advice, the king announced his intent before
his queens and their palace ladies, “My country is prosperous, my army
is strong, and my storehouses are ﬁlled with treasure. I plan to conduct a
great sacriﬁcial rite.”

59

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

The queens responded, “Yes, sire. As Your Majesty has said, the country
is prosperous, the army is strong, and the storehouses are ﬁlled with money
and treasure. If Your Majesty wishes to conduct a great sacriﬁcial rite,
this is now the right time.”
Returning from the queens’ palace, the king reported to his ministers,
“My country has been prosperous, my army continues to be strong, and my
storehouses are replete with treasure. I have provided the citizens with whatever they needed and enabled them to feel free from any kind of deprivation.
They are raising their families and enjoying their own lives. As I now wish
to conduct a great sacriﬁcial rite, I have announced my intent to my queens
in their quarters. Please explain how we can proceed. What will be required?”
The ministers replied, “It is exactly as Your Majesty has said. Wishing
to conduct a great sacriﬁcial rite, Your Majesty has announced the matter
in the queens’ palace quarters. Sire, it must still be announced before the
crown prince and princes, the ministerial ofﬁcials, and your generals and
their ofﬁcers. May it please Your Majesty to make the announcement
before them.”
Listening to the advice of his ministers, the king said to the crown
prince and princes, the ministerial ofﬁcials, and the generals and their
ofﬁcers, “My country is prosperous, my army is strong, and my storehouses
are ﬁlled with treasure. I plan to conduct a great sacriﬁcial rite.”
The crown prince and princes, the ofﬁcials, and the generals and ofﬁcers
responded, “Yes, sire. It is exactly as Your Majesty has said. The country
is prosperous, the army is strong, and the storehouses are ﬁlled with treasure. If Your Majesty wishes to conduct a great sacriﬁcial rite, this should
now be the right time.”
Once again, the king said to the ministers, “My country is prosperous,
my army is strong, and my storehouses are ﬁlled with treasure. I wish to
conduct a great sacriﬁcial rite. I have announced the matter to my queens
in their quarters, to the crown prince and princes, and so on, including to
my generals and their ofﬁcers. It is now the right time to conduct a great
sacriﬁcial rite. What will be required?”
The ministers replied, “It is exactly as Your Majesty has said. If Your
Majesty wishes to conduct a great sacriﬁcial rite, this must now be the
right time.”

99a

60

Sutra 23

Having received the king’s decree, the ministers at once constructed a
new pavilion in the eastern part of the capital. The king entered the new
pavilion covered in deer hide, his body rubbed with scented butter oil; on
his head he wore a cap with deer’s antlers, and he sat on the ground where
cow dung had been plastered. The ﬁrst queen and a brāhmaṇa minister
selected a yellow cow. A portion of its milk became the king’s food, a second
portion the queen’s food, a third portion the minister’s food, and a fourth
portion was offered to the multitude, with the remainder given to its calf.
The king was then to fulﬁll eight norms, while the minister had to qualify with four norms. What were the eight norms the king was obliged to
fulﬁll? A king of the kṣatriya class had to be from a pure family line of
seven generations, and could not be slighted by anyone in society. This
fulﬁlled the ﬁrst norm. The king had to have a handsome appearance as
beﬁts the kṣatriya class. This fulﬁlled the second norm. The king had to
be endowed with ever-increasing wisdom and virtue. This fulﬁlled the
third norm. The king had to be trained in martial arts such as elephant
riding and driving a horse-drawn chariot, and he had to be skilled in using
the sword, spear, bow and arrow, and other methods of combat, in detail
without exception. This fulﬁlled the fourth norm. The king had to possess
a regal presence so as to command the allegiance of subject kings. This
fulﬁlled the ﬁfth norm. The king had to be skilled in speech, gentle and
patient in his manner of persuasion, and use words endowed with true
meanings and real essences. This fulﬁlled the sixth norm. The king had to
possess great wealth and storehouses ﬁlled with treasure. This fulﬁlled the
seventh norm. The king had to be valiant and decisive, endowed with strategic brilliance and wisdom, and without inﬁrmities at all. This fulﬁlled the
eighth norm. Indeed, the kṣatriya king was well qualiﬁed in all eight norms.
What were the four norms required of the brāhmaṇa minister? The brāhmaṇa minister had to be from a pure family line of seven generations and
could not be slighted by anyone in society. That was the ﬁrst norm. The
minister had to be thoroughly versed in the three ancient collections of
hymns (Vedas) and have detailed knowledge of the various brāhmaṇa scriptures as well as a comprehensive command of the subtleties of secular literature. He also had to be well trained in reading the physiognomy of magnanimous personalities, in divining good and bad omens, and in conducting

61

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

ceremonial proceedings and sacriﬁcial rites. That was the second norm.
The minister had to be skilled in the use of language, gentle and patient
in his manner of persuasion, and use words endowed with true meanings
and real essences. That was the third norm. The minister had to be valiant
and decisive, endowed with strategic brilliance and wisdom, and without
inﬁrmities at all. Insofar as the sacriﬁcial rite was concerned, his knowledge
had to be comprehensive. That was the fourth norm.
Thus, the king proved to be well qualiﬁed in all eight norms, and the
minister in four norms. In addition, the king was required to be in command
of the four assistances, the threefold sacriﬁcial rite, and the sixteen sacriﬁcial requisites. The brāhmaṇa minister had to understand the king’s
frame of mind and eradicate the king’s doubt in respect of the sixteen requisites. What are the sixteen requisites?
(1) Suppose the minister said to the king: “If someone says, ‘Now the
king of the kṣatriya class wishes to conduct a great sacriﬁcial rite, but he
was not born into a pure family line of seven generations and is always
slighted by others’—even if there were such a rumor, that cannot disgrace
the king. Why? Sire, it is because the king truly was born into a pure
family line of seven generations and is never slighted by others.
(2) “Again, someone might say, ‘Now the king of the kṣatriya class
may wish to conduct a great sacriﬁcial rite, but his countenance is unattractive since he is not of the kṣatriya class.’ Even if there were such a
rumor, that cannot disgrace the king. Why? Sire, it is because the king’s
countenance is handsome as beﬁts the kṣatriya class.
(3) “Again, someone might say, ‘Now the king of the kṣatriya class
may wish to conduct a great sacriﬁcial rite, but he is not endowed with
ever-increasing virtue or wisdom.’ Even if there were such a rumor, that
cannot disgrace the king. Why? Sire, it is because the king’s virtues are
ever increasing, as is his wisdom.
(4) “Again, someone might say, ‘Now the king of the kṣatriya class
may wish to conduct a great sacriﬁcial rite, but he is not well trained in
the martial arts, is incapable of riding an elephant or driving a horse-drawn
chariot, and cannot understand various military strategies.’ Even if there
were such a rumor, that cannot disgrace the king. Why? Sire, it is because

99b

62

Sutra 23

the king is skilled in various martial arts, and there is nothing he does not
know about military and battleground strategy.
(5) “Again, someone might say, ‘Now the king of the kṣatriya class
may wish to conduct a great sacriﬁcial rite, but despite his great authority,
he is unable to command the allegiance of lesser kings.’ Even if there were
such a rumor, that cannot disgrace the king. Why? Sire, it is because the
king commands great authority and the allegiance of those subject kings.
(6) “Again, someone might say, ‘Now the king of the kṣatriya class
may wish to conduct a great sacriﬁcial rite, but he is not skilled in language,
is rough and impatient when trying to persuade, and uses words that are
not endowed with true meanings and real essences.’ Even if there were
such a rumor, that cannot disgrace the king. Why? Sire, it is because the
king is skilled in language, gentle and patient in his manner of persuasion,
and uses words endowed with true meanings and real essences.
(7) “Again, someone might say, ‘Now the king of the kṣatriya class
may wish to conduct a great sacriﬁcial rite, but he has little treasure.’ Even
if there were such a rumor, that cannot disgrace the king. Why? Sire, it is
because the king has a great deal of wealth and storehouses ﬁlled with
treasure.
(8) “Again, someone might say, ‘Now the king of the kṣatriya class
may wish to conduct a great sacriﬁcial rite, but he has little strategic brilliance or wisdom and is plagued by inﬁrmities regarding the goal of his
striving.’ Even if there were such a rumor, that cannot disgrace the king.
Why? Sire, it is because the king is valiant and decisive, endowed with
strategic brilliance and wisdom, and without any inﬁrmities whatsoever.
(9) [The following four are the four assistances:] “Again, someone
might say, ‘Now the king of the kṣatriya class may wish to conduct a great
sacriﬁcial rite, but he has not announced his intent in his queens’ quarters.’
Even if there were such a rumor, that cannot disgrace the king. Why? Sire,
it is because the king, wishing to conduct a great sacriﬁcial rite, has already
announced it in his queens’ quarters.
(10) “Again, someone might say, ‘Now the king of the kṣatriya class
may wish to conduct a great sacriﬁcial rite, but he has not announced his
intent before the crown prince and princes.’ Even if there were such a

63

99c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

rumor, that cannot disgrace the king. Why? Sire, it is because the king,
wishing to conduct a great sacriﬁcial rite, has already announced it before
the crown prince and princes.
(11) “Again, someone might say, ‘Now the king of the kṣatriya class
may wish to conduct a great sacriﬁcial rite, but he has not announced his
intent before his ofﬁcials.’ Even if there were such a rumor, that cannot
disgrace the king. Why? Sire, it is because the king, wishing to conduct
a great sacriﬁcial rite, has already announced it before his ofﬁcials.
(12) “Again, someone might say, ‘Now the king of the kṣatriya class
wishes to conduct a great sacriﬁcial rite, but he has not announced his
intent before his generals and their ofﬁcers.’ Even if there were such a
rumor, that cannot disgrace the king. Why? Sire, it is because the king,
wishing to conduct a great sacriﬁcial rite, has already announced it before
his generals and their ofﬁcers.
(13) “Again, someone might say, “Now the king of the kṣatriya class
may wish to conduct a great sacriﬁcial rite, but his brāhmaṇa minister is
not from a pure family line of seven generations and is always slighted
by others.’ Even if there were such a rumor, that cannot disgrace the king.
Why? Sire, it is because I was born into a pure family line of seven generations that has never been slighted by others.
(14) “Again, someone might say, ‘Now the king of the kṣatriya class
may wish to conduct a great sacriﬁcial rite, but his brāhmaṇa minister,
while thoroughly versed in the three ancient collections of hymns (Vedas),
does not understand them, nor can he distinguish the various brāhmaṇa
scriptures or say anything about the subtleties of secular literature. He is
not trained in reading the physiognomy of magnanimous personalities or
in divining good and bad omens, or in conducting ceremonial proceedings
and sacriﬁcial rites.’ Even if there were such a rumor, that cannot disgrace
the king. Why? Sire, it is because I am thoroughly versed in the three
ancient collections of hymns (Vedas) and have detailed knowledge of the
various brāhmaṇa scriptures as well as a comprehensive command of the
subtleties of secular literature. I am also well trained in reading the physiognomy of magnanimous personalities, in divining good and bad omens,
and in conducting ceremonial proceedings and sacriﬁcial rites.

64

Sutra 23

(15) “Again, someone might say, ‘Now the king of the kṣatriya class
may wish to conduct a great sacriﬁcial rite, but his brāhmaṇa minister is
not skilled in the use of language, is rough and impatient in his manner
of persuasion, and his words not endowed with any true meanings or real
essences.’ Even if there were such a rumor, that cannot disgrace the king.
Why? Sire, it is because I am skilled in the use of language, gentle and
patient in persuasion, and my words are endowed with true meanings and
real essences.
(16) “Again, someone might say, “Now the king of the kṣatriya class
may wish to conduct a great sacriﬁcial rite, but his brāhmaṇa minister is
not endowed with strategic brilliance or wisdom, he has no knowledge
of the sacriﬁcial rite, and is plagued by inﬁrmity.’ Even if there were such
a rumor, that cannot disgrace the king. Why? Sire, it is because I am valiant
and decisive, endowed with strategic brilliance and wisdom, and without
any inﬁrmities at all. Insofar as the sacriﬁcial rite is concerned, there is
no aspect of it that I do not know.”
The Buddha said to Kūṭadanta:

As you see, when the king experienced doubt concerning the foregoing
sixteen requisites, the brāhmaṇa minister resolved his doubt by conﬁrming
that the king was fully qualiﬁed to fulﬁll all the conditions for the success
of his sacriﬁcial rite.
The Buddha continued:

Then the minister encouraged and delighted the king further by describing
the ten norms of conduct. What are the ten norms of conduct? The minister
said, “When the king conducts a sacriﬁcial rite, his beneﬁcence should
be extended equally to all those who have come for the occasion, irrespective of whether they live by way of killing (i.e., hunting, ﬁshing, etc.)
or of non-killing (i.e., farming, trading, etc.). If the former sort come, generosity should be extended while educating them to reﬂect upon the wrongness of their lifestyle. If the latter sort come, benefactions should be given
to encourage them in the rightness of their livelihood. In this manner, the
king’s beneﬁcence should consist not only of material gifts but also of

65

100a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

moral ediﬁcation. If again some people should come to participate in the
sacriﬁcial rite while persisting in immoral conduct such as theft, sexual
misbehavior, false speech or double-talk, or speaking harshly, or using
ﬂattery, and thus conveying a covetous mind, or malicious intent, or attachment to wrong views, material gifts should still be given to them while
simultaneously encouraging reform in their way of life. On the other hand,
if some people should participate in the assembly while upholding proper
moral standards such as non-theft and so forth, so as to engender the right
view, material gifts should be given to them to commend their good conduct
and to support and encourage the awakening of their conscience.”

The Buddha went on, “By instructing the king about the ten norms of
beneﬁcence, the brāhmaṇa minister indeed encouraged, beneﬁted, and
delighted him.”
Again, the Buddha said to the brāhmaṇa Kūṭadanta:

The kṣatriya king was troubled by three kinds of regret during his stay in
the new pavilion [during the course of the sacriﬁcial rite], and it was the
minister’s task to resolve them. What were the three regrets that troubled
the king? At various moments, as the king thought to himself, “I will [soon]
conduct the rite,” “I am now conducting the sacriﬁcial rite,” and “I have
just completed the great sacriﬁcial rite,” [his awareness of the enormous
expenditure for the rite] caused each thought to be followed by a pang of
regret: “I will lose . . . ,” “I am losing . . . ,” “I have just lost a great portion
of my wealth and treasure because of this sacriﬁcial rite.” Each time the
king felt such a regret, the minister eradicated it from his mind by saying,
“Sire, do not regret the meritorious rite through which Your Majesty will
perform . . . , is now performing . . . , and has performed such a great benevolence. O great king, Your Majesty has just completed the great sacriﬁcial
rite.” Thus did the minister assist the king to resolve his three regrets.
The Buddha said to the brāhmaṇa:

On the ﬁfteenth night, under a full moon, the kṣatriya king came out of
the new pavilion properly anointed for his throne and built a great bonﬁre
in the open area before the building. He held a pitcher of oil in his hand
and poured it over the ﬁre and loudly announced: “Now is the time of

66

Sutra 23

beneﬁcence, it is the time for beneﬁcence!” Hearing this announcement,
the queens and palace ladies, carrying various articles from the palace in
their hands, appeared before the king and said, “Sire, may these riches and
treasures be of assistance in Your Majesty’s benevolent sacriﬁcial rite.”
O brāhmaṇa, the king replied to his queens and palace ladies, “Please
go no further. Your assistance has already been provided in the mere offer.
I possess enough wealth and treasure for this benevolent rite.” But the queens
and palace ladies thought to themselves: “We must not take these treasures
back to our quarters. When the king conducts another rite in the eastern
region, his majesty will be able to use our assistance in his benevolence.”
O brāhmaṇa, when the king came to conduct another rite in the eastern
region, his queens and palace ladies did indeed assist his rite with their
treasures.
[Again,] on the ﬁfteenth night, under a full moon, the king came out
of a new pavilion and built a great bonﬁre in the open area before the
building. He poured oil over the ﬁre from a pitcher in his hand and loudly
proclaimed: “Now is the time of beneﬁcence, it is the time for beneﬁcence!”
Hearing the king’s announcement, the crown prince and princes, carrying
their riches and treasures, appeared before the king and said, “Sire, let
these things provide assistance in Your Majesty’s benevolent rite.” The
king replied, “Please go no further. Your assistance has already been provided in the mere offer. I possess enough wealth and treasure for this
benevolent rite.” But the crown prince and princes thought to themselves,
“We must not take back these treasures. When the king conducts another
rite in the southern region, his majesty will be able to use our assistance
in his benevolence.”
In a similar manner, the ministers [and ofﬁcials] assisted the king when
he later conducted a sacriﬁcial rite in the western region, and so did the
generals and their ofﬁcers when the king conducted another rite in the
northern region.
The Buddha said to the brāhmaṇa:

At the time of the great sacriﬁcial rite the king did not slaughter cattle
and sheep or any other living beings; he only used butter and milk, hemp
oil, honey, black raw sugar, and molasses to perform the rite.

67

100b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

The Buddha continued:

When the king conducted the great sacriﬁcial rite there was delight at the
beginning, there was delight in the middle, and there was delight at the
end of the rite. This became the standard method of preparing and performing the sacriﬁcial rite.
The Buddha went on:

The kṣatriya king, having completed the sacriﬁcial rite, shaved his head
and beard, put on the three robes of a mendicant, abdicated his throne to
pursue the path of religion, and engaged in the practice of the four immeasurables of the mind (catur-apramāṇas); when he died, he was reborn in
the highest realm of Brahmā Heaven. The brāhmaṇa minister too, having
assisted the king in performing sacriﬁcial rites in the four regions, conducted a sacriﬁcial rite on his own and then shaved his head and beard,
put on the three robes of the mendicant, renounced domestic life to practice
the four kinds of austerity, and when he died, he was reborn in the highest
realm of Brahmā Heaven.
The Buddha then said to the brāhmaṇa:

The king performed the great sacriﬁcial rite by following the practices of
the threefold sacriﬁcial rite and observing the sixteen requisites. Now,
what do you think about these matters that I have explained?

Kūṭadanta had listened to what the Buddha had explained, but he remained
silent and did not reply immediately. His ﬁve hundred student disciples said
to him, “The words of the śramaṇa Gautama are indeed subtle. Sir, why does
Your Reverence not reply to his words and only remain silent?”
Kūṭadanta then said to the Buddha:
What the śramaṇa Gautama has explained is truly subtle. I agree with the
other brāhmaṇas; I do not differ from them at all. I have only remained
silent because I have been deep in thought. The śramaṇa Gautama has
explained everything, but not in the way of one that has learned from
others through tradition. I have been wondering, “Could it be that the śramaṇa Gautama was himself that king of the kṣatriya class? Or was he the
brāhmaṇa minister?”

68

Sutra 23

Thereupon, the World-honored One said:

Good, very good, you have rightly perceived the Tathāgata in the most
appropriate terms. The kṣatriya king who conducted the great sacriﬁcial
rite was no one other, and in no way different, than myself. At that time,
a great deal of universal charity was produced [for all sentient beings].

Kūṭadanta said to the Buddha, “Is there any deed that can produce merit
superior to that of the threefold sacriﬁcial rite and sixteen requisites?”
The Buddha replied, “Yes, there is.”
The brāhmaṇa asked, “What is it, sir?”
The Buddha replied:
While performing the threefold sacriﬁcial rite with the sixteen requisites,
if one can continue to serve the bhikṣus’ sangha with offerings without
hiatus, the merit acquired would be superior to that of the sacriﬁcial rite.
The brāhmaṇa again asked:

Is there any deed that can produce merit superior to that of offerings and
continual service to the sangha combined with that of the sacriﬁcial rite
and sixteen requisites?

The Buddha replied, “Yes, there is.”
Again, he asked, “What is it, sir?”
The Buddha replied:

Even if one served the sangha through the sacriﬁcial rite and the sixteen
requisites without hiatus, it would be far more meritorious for a person to
build a monastery consisting of rooms, pavilions, and halls [with an open
door to bhikṣus coming from any region] for the sake of the universal
sangha. This contribution would be the best of all for acquiring merit.
Again, Kūṭadanta asked:

While performing the threefold sacriﬁcial rite with the sixteen requisites,
if one continues to serve the sangha with offerings without hiatus, and if
one also builds a monastery consisting of rooms, pavilions, and halls for
the sake of the universal sangha, one would thereby acquire the best and

69

100c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

highest merit, as I have understood. But is there another way to acquire
superior merit, sir?

The Buddha replied, “Yes, there is.”
Again, he asked, “What is it, sir?”
The Buddha replied:

Even while performing the threefold sacriﬁcial rite with the sixteen requisites, and continuing to serve the sangha with offerings without hiatus,
and building a monastery consisting of rooms, pavilions, and halls for the
sake of the universal sangha, it surely would be better if one could also
raise a thought of joy and delight and utter the words: “I take my refuge
in the Buddha, I take my refuge in the Dharma, and I take my refuge in
the Sangha.” The merit from that would be higher still.
Again, Kūṭadanta asked:

I understand that the threefold resolution combined with the sacriﬁcial
rite, and so on, would bring about a higher merit, but is there anything
superior to that, sir?

The Buddha replied, “Yes, there is.”
[Kūṭadanta] then asked, “What is it, sir?”
The Buddha replied:

If one upholds the ﬁve precepts—namely, refraining from taking life,
refraining from taking what is not given, refraining from indulging in
sexual pleasure, refraining from speaking falsehoods, and refraining from
ingesting intoxicants— until the dissolution of the body and end of life,
the merit acquired is higher.
Again, Kūṭadanta asked:

I understand that by combining the threefold sacriﬁcial rite, and so on,
up to adhering to the ﬁve precepts, one may acquire superior merit, but
is there another way to bring still higher superior merit, sir?

The Buddha replied, “Yes, there is.”
[Kūṭadanta] then asked, “What is it, sir?”

70

Sutra 23

The Buddha replied:

Extending one’s compassion universally toward all sentient beings, as if
one were pulling cow’s milk into a bucket and pouring it out to all the
sentient beings [in the world]—the merit from that is still higher.
Again, Kūṭadanta asked:

I understand that by combining the threefold sacriﬁcial rite and so on, up
to extending universal compassion, one may acquire even higher superior
merit, but is there another way to bring still higher superior merit, sir?

The Buddha replied, “Yes, there is.”
[Kūṭadanta] then asked, “What is it, sir?”
The Buddha replied:

When the Tathāgata, who is totally free from deﬁlement and perfectly
enlightened, appears in this world, those who renounce domestic life, enter
into practice of the Buddhist religion, become endowed with all the meritorious virtues without exception, and so on, up to being endowed with
three kinds of supernormal power (knowledge of past lives, knowledge of
future destinies, and total eradication of deﬁlements), can terminate all ignorance and delusion and acquire wisdom and illumination. Because they are
in a state of seclusion and transcendence, their merit is indeed the highest.
Again, Kūṭadanta said to the Buddha:

O Gautama, now I have put together all the requisites of the sacriﬁcial
rite. I shall forsake all my cattle and sheep, ﬁve hundred of each, and let
them each go in their own way to seek their grass and water. I shall take
my refuge in the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha. May Your Reverence permit me to become a lay devotee in the right Dharma. From this moment
until the dissolution of the body and end of life, I shall uphold the ﬁve
precepts, refraining from taking life, refraining from taking what is not
given, refraining from indulging in sexual pleasure, refraining from speaking falsehoods, and refraining from ingesting intoxicants. May I request
that Your Reverence and the members of the sangha accept my invitation
for almsfood [tomorrow].

71

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III
101a

The World-honored One remained silent, granting his wish. Seeing the
World-honored One remaining silent, the brāhmaṇa stood up, venerated the
Buddha, circumambulating him three times, and went away. Returning home,
he prepared many varieties of delicious food, and in the early morning when
everything was ready, he sent word to the Buddha and the sangha. Thereupon,
the World-honored One put on his outer robe, took up his almsbowl, and
proceeded to the brāhmaṇa’s residence accompanied by one thousand two
hundred and ﬁfty bhikṣus. There he took a seat where it had been prepared
and was served, along with the members of the sangha, with various foods
out of the brāhmaṇa’s own hand. At the conclusion of the meal, after the
serving vessels had been taken away, cleansing water was served.
[Thereupon], the Buddha recited these verses for the brāhmaṇa:
In the sacriﬁcial rite, ﬁre is of the highest rank,
In chanting, reading is of the highest rank,
Among humans, the king is of the highest rank,
Among rivers, the ocean is of the highest rank,
Among stars, the moon is of the highest rank,
Among all that shines bright, the sun is of the highest rank,
In all four directions, and above and below,
Among all sentient beings, and humans and gods,
The Buddha alone is of the highest rank.
If one wishes to acquire the greatest merit,
One should make offerings for the Three Treasures.

Kūṭadanta then brought out a small cushion and took his seat before the
Buddha. The World-honored One gradually began his teaching, and with it,
he encouraged, beneﬁted, and delighted the brāhmaṇa. He taught him the
doctrine pertaining to charity, the doctrine pertaining to morality, the doctrine
pertaining to rebirth in heaven, the doctrine that being bound to craving and
desire is the greatest danger, and that impure deﬁlements are the obstruction,
and that the right method of practice to transcend obstacles is of primary
importance. He detailed the varieties of practice, those that are pure and genuine, and explained them to satisfy the brāhmaṇa’s understanding.
Then the World-honored One, observing the brāhmaṇa’s mind becoming
receptive, the ﬁve kinds of obstacles becoming lighter to the point of vanishing

72

Sutra 23

in him, and his whole being turning ripe for conversion, followed the practice
of the buddhas by introducing [the Four Noble Truths]: (1) the doctrine of
the noble truth of suffering, explaining it in detail and opening it to his understanding. He then set forth the remaining three truths, each in turn, giving
appropriate commentary: (2) the noble truth of the cause of suffering, (3) the
noble truth of the cessation of suffering, and (4) the noble truth of the path
to the cessation of suffering. At that moment, the brāhmaṇa Kūṭadanta eradicated all deﬁlements and acquired genuine insight into the nature of the
Dharma, just as a white cloth can be dyed any color.
Exactly like that, the brāhmaṇa Kūṭadanta saw the Dharma, acquired the
Dharma, and abided there. Without need for any other assurance, he realized
the state of absolute conﬁdence, and then said to the Buddha:
May I once again repeat my vow: I take my refuge in the Buddha, Dharma,
and Sangha. May Your Reverence permit me to become a lay devotee in
the right Dharma, and from this moment until the dissolution of the body
at the end of life I shall uphold the ﬁve precepts, refraining from taking
life, refraining from taking what is not given, refraining from indulging
in sexual pleasure, refraining from speaking falsehoods, and refraining
from ingesting intoxicants.

Then he added, “May I also request Your Reverence and the members of
the sangha to accept my invitation for almsfood for the duration of seven days.”
The World-honored One remained silent, granting his wish.
For seven days the brāhmaṇa served the Buddha and the members of the
sangha with provisions out of his own hand, until the World-honored One
departed to visit other communities. Not long after the Buddha’s departure
the brāhmaṇa Kūṭadanta fell ill and passed away.
The members of the sangha soon heard that the brāhmaṇa Kūṭadanta,
who had served them with provisions for seven days, had fallen ill and passed
away. All of the bhikṣus wondered, “At the end of his life, where has that
brāhmaṇa gone for his rebirth?”
Some of the bhikṣus went to the World-honored One. After bowing their
heads to ground at his feet, they sat to one side and said, “The brāhmaṇa
Kūṭadanta has passed away. Sir, where would such a person be reborn?”
The Buddha replied:

73

101b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

That person, by practicing pure and genuine austerity, realized the truth
of the Dharma and can never again be subject to doubt. He terminated
the ﬁve kinds of deﬁlement that bind sentient beings to the lower realm
of desire16 and will enter ﬁnal nirvana ( parinirvāṇa) from the heaven
where he is reborn, not returning to this world.

Having heard the Buddha’s teaching, all the bhikṣus were delighted to
receive it, and they reverentially carried out what the Buddha taught.
[End of Sutra 23: Brāhmaṇa Kūṭadanta]

74

Sutra 24

Kevaddha

(Dīgha Nikāya 11: Kevaṭṭa Suttanta)
Thus have I heard. Once, when the Buddha sojourned in the Pāvārikamba forest
near the town of Nālandā, accompanied by one thousand two hundred and ﬁfty
bhikṣus, a son of a wealthy family, who was called Kevaddha, visited the
Buddha’s resting place. After bowing his head at the Buddha’s feet he took a
seat to one side. Then Kevaddha, the son of a wealthy family, said to the Buddha:
Very good, sir. O World-honored One, I beseech Your Reverence to command the venerable bhikṣus to manifest their superhuman faculties and
demonstrate their supernormal powers before the brāhmaṇas and sons of
wealthy families and householders who have come to visit you.
The Buddha replied:

[O Kevaddha,] I do not give my disciples any superhuman faculties or
supernormal powers so that they can demonstrate them before brāhmaṇas,
sons [or daughters] of wealthy families, or householders. I only teach
them how to contemplate the path in seclusion, and if they make progress
[in the path], to keep it to themselves, and if they should transgress while
on the path, to explicitly acknowledge it [in public].

Kevaddha, son of the wealthy man Changxiao, again said to the Buddha:

O World-honored One, I beseech Your Reverence to command the venerable bhikṣus to manifest their superhuman faculties and demonstrate
their supernormal powers before the brāhmaṇas, the sons [and daughters]
of wealthy families, and householders who have come to visit you, sir.
The Buddha again replied:

[O Kevaddha,] I do not give my disciples any superhuman faculties or
supernormal powers so that they can demonstrate them before brāhmaṇas,
75

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

the sons [and daughters] of wealthy families, or householders. I only teach
them how to contemplate the path in seclusion, and if they make progress
[in the path], to keep it to themselves, and if they should transgress while
on the path, to explicitly acknowledge it [in public].

101c

Kevaddha, son of the wealthy man Changxiao, said to the Buddha:

I have no doubt whatsoever about the superhuman faculties [that have been
attributed to Your Reverence and the venerable bhikṣus], sir. However, in
this town of Nālandā, which is prosperous and whose populace is large, I
thought it would be beneﬁcial to show your supernormal powers to the people, since the propagation of the Dharma can be accomplished [far more
quickly] when such demonstrations convince the people to convert, sir.
The Buddha again replied:

I do not give my disciples any superhuman faculties or supernormal powers
so that they can demonstrate them before brāhmaṇas, the sons [and daughters] of wealthy families, or householders. I only teach them how to contemplate the path in seclusion, and if they make progress [in the path], to
keep it to themselves, and if they transgress while on the path, to explicitly
acknowledge it [in public].
Why? Because there are three kinds of supernormal power (prātihārya):
namely, (1) magical performance (ṛddhi-pāda-prātihārya), (2) reading
others’ minds while preaching (ādeśanā-prātihārya), and (3) the miracle
of teaching (anuśāsanī-prātihārya, destroying the vices of the admonished).
What is magical performance? O son of the wealthy, some bhikṣus
acquire this supernormal power in order [to change their physical form
into other forms]. From their one body, they can generate multiple identical
bodies or collapse the many back to one. They can [instantaneously] cross
rivers and hills as freely as they wish, be it near or far, and go through
walls and rocks without obstruction, just like ﬂying through the air. They
can leap up and fold their legs to sit in the lotus posture in midair, like a
ﬂying bird. They can disappear into the ground or reappear out of it, as
if it were the surface of water. They can walk on water as if walking on
the ground, or emit ﬁery ﬂames from their body like a huge bonﬁre, or

76

Sutra 24

grasp the sun and moon by the hand and reach to the height of Brahmā
Heaven. To wealthy people or householders endowed with devotion and
good faith, such a bhikṣu could demonstrate the innumerable kinds of
supernormal power even to the point of reaching up to Brahmā Heaven.
He could inﬂuence a devotee to say to another householder, a nonbeliever,
“I have seen a bhikṣu demonstrate his supernormal power even to the
point of reaching up to Brahmā Heaven.” The nonbeliever, however, could
reply, “I have heard of a Gāndhārī magic that enables a person, as you
have witnessed, to show off innumerable magical transformations, even
to the point of reaching up to Brahmā Heaven.”

The Buddha continued, “Don’t you ﬁnd the words of the nonbeliever to
be derogatory in nature?”
Kevaddha replied, “Yes, I do indeed regard his words as derogatory, sir.”
The Buddha said:

For this very reason, I have not permitted the bhikṣus to reveal supernormal
capacities to anyone. I only teach them how to contemplate the path in
seclusion, and if they make progress [in the path], to keep it to themselves,
and if they should transgress on the path, to explicitly acknowledge it [in
public]. This is how it has been.
O son of a wealthy family, their [compliance with my teaching] is itself
a manifestation of their supernormal power.
What is the second supernormal power, that of reading others’ minds
while preaching (ādeśanā-ṛddhipāda)? Through this power, bhikṣus can
manifest innumerable ways to read the mind of others. They can know the
entire content of their thoughts, even their hidden, undisclosed deeds, without exception. To wealthy people or householders endowed with devotion
and good faith, such a bhikṣu could offer to demonstrate the innumerable
kinds of supernormal power by reading the minds of others. He could thus
inﬂuence a devotee to say to another householder, a nonbeliever, “I have
seen a bhikṣu demonstrate his supernormal power by reading the minds
of others.” The nonbeliever, however, could reply, “I have heard of a Gāndhārī magic that enables a person, as you have witnessed, to exhibit supernormal power by reading the minds of others, so that everything, even hidden, undisclosed deeds, is known without exception.”

77

102a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

What do you think, O son of a wealthy family? Don’t you ﬁnd these
words to be derogatory in nature?

Kevaddha replied, “Yes, I do indeed regard those words as derogatory, sir.”
The Buddha said:

For this very reason, I have not permitted the bhikṣus to reveal supernormal
capacities to anyone. I only teach them how to contemplate the path in
seclusion, and if they make progress [in the path], to keep it to themselves,
and if they should transgress while on the path, to explicitly acknowledge
it [in public]. This is how it has been. O son of the wealthy, their [compliance
with my teaching] is itself a manifestation of their supernormal power.
What is the miracle of teaching? O son of a wealthy family, suppose
that a Buddha who is recognized with the ten supreme titles, such as One
Perfected in Practice, One Liberated from Attachment, Perfectly Enlightened One, and so on, should appear in this world, and that among all the
gods and humans, and all the evil ones and their lord, and the śramaṇas
and brāhmaṇas too, he alone has directly experienced the realization of
enlightenment and has been teaching others [how to realize that goal].
When he expounds on religion, his words should be good in the beginning,
good in the middle, and also good in the end. All the words he utters
should invariably be endowed with true meanings and real essences, and
in accord with his practice of pure and genuine austerity. If anyone, whether
a wealthy person or a householder, is inspired to hold a serene conviction
in the Buddha’s words after listening to this teaching, and having acquired
that conviction, looks to the substance of his life and thinks, “I should not
remain a householder. If I continue in domestic life, I will always have
to deny my convictions and will never take up the practice of pure and
genuine austerity—no, I would rather shave my head, moustache, and
beard, put on the three robes of a mendicant, and leave the householder’s
life to follow the discipline of the path. I will strive to attain all the meritorious virtues, even up to realizing the three supernormal powers, so
that the state of darkness and ignorance can be annihilated to produce the
great wisdom and illumination. Why? Because this ﬁnal realization can
only be achieved through the mindfulness and concentration found in diligent
endeavor, practice in seclusion, and freedom from worldly mentality”—if

78

Sutra 24

one should think in this way, O son of a wealthy family, that is the miracle
of teaching as manifested by the bhikṣus.

Thereupon, Kevaddha, the son of a wealthy family, said to the Buddha,
“Sir, supposing that is the case, is every bhikṣu endowed with these three
supernormal powers?”
The Buddha replied:

I did not say that I have many bhikṣus and some of them have acquired
the three supernormal powers, O son of a wealthy family. Among the
members of the sangha there are some bhikṣus who think to themselves,
“How can the four material elements, namely, earth, water, wind, and ﬁre,
be brought to cessation?” One of the bhikṣus immediately set out for
heaven, and at the abode of the four guardian princes asked them the same
question, “How can the four material elements, namely, earth, water, wind,
and ﬁre, be brought to cessation?” O son of a wealthy family, the four
guardian princes replied, “We do not know how the four material elements
can be brought to cessation. There is another heaven above us, called
Trāyastriṃśa Heaven, whose resident gods are known for their subtle
intelligence and great wisdom. [We are certain] they would know how
the four material elements can be brought to cessation.”
After receiving this answer, the bhikṣu once again set off toward a
higher heaven. Upon reaching Trāyastriṃśa Heaven, he asked the resident
gods, “How can the four material elements of this body be brought to cessation?” The Trāyastriṃśa gods replied, “I do not know how the four
material elements can be brought to cessation. There is another heaven
above us, called Yama Heaven, where the resident gods are known to have
subtle intelligence and great wisdom. [We are certain] they would know
how the four material elements can be brought to cessation.”
At once, the bhikṣu went up higher [to Yama Heaven] and asked the
same question, only to receive the same reply: they did not know. In this
manner, he continued to travel upward, questioning the gods of Tuṣita
Heaven, Nirmāṇarati Heaven, and Paranirmitavaśavartin Heaven. All of
them made the same reply, including the last, “We do not know how the
four material elements can be brought to cessation. There is another heaven
above us, called Brahmakāyika Heaven, whose resident gods are known

79

102b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

to have subtle intelligence and great wisdom. They are called the Brahmakāyika gods, and [we are certain] they would know how the four material elements can be brought to [total] cessation once for all.”
The bhikṣu promptly set off again to reach Brahmā Heaven, and upon
his arrival he asked the same question to the residents of that heaven,
“How can the four material elements, namely, earth, water, wind, and ﬁre,
be brought to total cessation?” The resident gods replied, “We do not
know how the four material elements can be brought to cessation. But
the great Brahmā, who rules a thousand worlds and has no equal, who is
honorable, heroic, rich, and noble and has absolute freedom as the creator
of all things and the one ancestor of all sentient beings, [certainly] must
know how the four material elements can be brought to total cessation.”
So the bhikṣu asked, “Where is the great lord Brahmā?” And the resident
gods of Brahmā’s realm replied, “We do not know where he is right now.
We expect that he will appear before too long.”
In a moment, the great lord Brahmā suddenly appeared. O son of a
wealthy family, the bhikṣu approached Brahmā and asked the same question, “Sir, how can the four material elements of this body, namely, earth,
water, wind, and ﬁre, be brought to total cessation?”
Lord Brahmā replied, “I am Lord Brahmā, whom no one can surpass.
I rule a thousand worlds as the honorable, heroic, rich, and noble creator
of all things, who is endowed with absolute freedom and is the one ancestor
of all sentient beings.”
The bhikṣu said to Lord Brahmā, “That was not the answer to my question, sir. I asked, ‘How can the four material elements, namely, earth,
water, wind, and ﬁre, be brought to total cessation?’”
O son of a wealthy family, Lord Brahmā once again made the same
reply, “I am Lord Brahmā, whom no one can surpass. I rule a thousand
worlds as the honorable, heroic, rich, and noble creator of all things, who
is endowed with absolute freedom and is the one ancestor of all sentient
beings.”
The bhikṣu said again, “That was not the answer to my question, sir.
What I asked was, ‘How can the four material elements, namely, earth,
water, wind, and ﬁre, be brought to total cessation?’”

80

Sutra 24

O son of a wealthy family, even on the third exchange, Lord Brahmā
could not tell the bhikṣu how the four material elements could be brought
to total cessation.
The great lord Brahmā then took the bhikṣu by his right hand and led
him to a secluded place, where he said, “O bhikṣu, since the residents of
this Brahmā Heaven all say in unison that I have supreme wisdom and
there is nothing I do not know, I cannot tell you in public that I do not
know how the four material elements can be brought to total cessation,
nor can I say in public that I cannot tell you that.”
Again, he continued, “You are foolish to have left the Tathāgata behind
while coming to pose this question to the heavenly gods. You should return
to the Tathāgata and ask him your question. Whatever the Buddha may
say in reply you must keep it in mind.
Again, he went on, “The Buddha is now at rest in Anāthapiṇḍika
Monastery in Prince Jeta’s Grove near the city of Śrāvastī. You should go
there and ask him your question.”
O son of a wealthy family, that bhikṣu immediately disappeared from
Brahmā Heaven and in an instant, as swiftly as a wrestler can bend his
arm and straighten it, returned to Anāthapiṇḍika Monastery in Prince
Jeta’s Grove near the city of Śrāvastī. He came to me, and after bowing
his head to my feet, he took a seat to one side and asked, “O World-honored
One, how can those four material elements, namely, earth, water, wind,
and ﬁre, be brought to total cessation?”
I replied, “O bhikṣu, you have acted like a merchant who carries a
falcon perched on his elbow and to practice falconry he takesa boat out
to sea and releases it from the middle of the ocean. When the bird is
released it will ﬂy to the east, west, north, and south, and once it ﬁnds
land it will stop; if there is no land, it will return to the boat. O bhikṣu,
you are just like that—you went higher and higher to pose an inquiry to
Brahmā, yet you were unable to obtain the right answer and now you have
come back to me. I shall let you come to rest with your question.”
I then composed a verse for the bhikṣu:
How can the four material elements,
Earth, water, wind, and ﬁre, be brought to total cessation?

81

102c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

How can anything that is neither rough nor ﬁne,
Neither long nor short, neither beautiful nor ugly,
Be brought to total cessation?
How can anything that is neither sentient nor material
Be brought to total cessation, without remainder?
The answer should be given:
Consciousness has no form and is immeasurable and self-luminous.
When consciousness ceases to be,
The four material elements also cease, and
So do rough and ﬁne, beautiful and ugly, equally cease to be.
Here both sentient principle and material elements cease to be.
When consciousness ceases to be, the rest also ceases to be.

Kevaddha, the son of a wealthy family, said to the Buddha, “O Worldhonored One, what is that bhikṣu’s name? Under what title should I keep this
sutra, sir?”
The Buddha replied, “That bhikṣu is called Ashiyi, and under that name
you should keep this sutra in mind.”
Then, having heard the Buddha’s teaching, Kevaddha, the son of a wealthy
family, was delighted to receive it, and he reverentially carried out what the
Buddha taught.
[End of Sutra 24: Kevaddha]

82

Sutra 25

A Naked Brāhmaṇa Ascetic

(Dīgha Nikāya 8: Kassapa-sīhanāda Suttanta)
Thus have I heard. Once, when the Buddha was staying in the Deer Forest
near Kaṇṇakaṭṭha in the country of Ujuññā, accompanied by one thousand
two hundred and ﬁfty bhikṣus, a naked brāhmaṇa ascetic whose family name
was Kāśyapa (Pāli Kassapa) came to visit the World-honored One. He bowed
cordially and took a seat to one side. Then he said:
Sir, I have heard the following: “The śramaṇa Gautama rejects any and
all kinds of sacriﬁcial rites and disparages those engaged in ascetic practice
as vulgar and impure.” O Gautama, when someone says, “The śramaṇa
Gautama rejects any and all kinds of sacriﬁcial rites and disparages those
engaged in ascetic practice as vulgar and impure,” is he really speaking
the truth and demonstrating the truth of the Dharma, or is he slandering
the śramaṇa Gautama?

The Buddha replied:

O Kāśyapa, if anyone says, “The śramaṇa Gautama rejects any and all kinds
of sacriﬁcial rites and disparages those engaged in ascetic practice as vulgar
and impure,” he is neither speaking truth nor demonstrating the truth of the
Dharma and is entirely intent on slandering me. It is not true. Why? O
Kāśyapa, when I observe those engaged in ascetic practice, I know that
some will fall into a hell after the dissolution of the body at the end of life,
while others who have a good destiny will be reborn in a heaven. I also see
that even though some might enjoy their ascetic practice, after the dissolution
of the body at the end of life, they are still destined for a hell, while others
who enjoy their ascetic life and have a good destiny will be reborn in one
of the heavens after the dissolution of the body at the end of life.
O Kāśyapa, I have observed and comprehended those born with two
opposing destinies as their reward for life on earth. How could I criticize
83

103a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

those ascetics as vulgar and impure? When I assert correctly that something
is right, someone may say that it is not right, and if I assert correctly that
something is not right, he will say that it is right.
O Kāśyapa, in speaking of the truth of religion, śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas have something in common, yet there is a difference between their
religious truths.
O Kāśyapa, I have not spoken about the difference between their two
truths because śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas do not see that aspect of the truth
in the same way.
Those who are learned may think to themselves, “As to the elements
[of the mind] that the śramaṇa Gautama and teachers of other schools
agree are evil (akuśala), ignoble, corrupt, and unﬁt for the wise and saintly,
which of them (i.e., the Buddha or the teachers of other schools) can really
terminate those evils?”
O Kāśyapa, when people of intelligence examine the problem in this
manner and arrive at a conclusion ( jian; dṛṣṭi), they say, “The śramaṇa
Gautama alone can terminate those evils.” O Kāśyapa, when people of
intelligence observe the problem, make deductions, and arrive at their
conclusion in this manner, my name is praised.
Again, O Kāśyapa, those who are learned may think to themselves,
“As to the elements [of the mind] that the disciples of the śramaṇa Gautama
and the disciples of teachers of other schools agree are evil, ignoble, corrupt, and unﬁt for the wise and saintly, which group of disciples can really
terminate those evils?”
O Kāśyapa, when people of intelligence examine the problem in this
manner and arrive at a conclusion, they say, “Only the disciples of the
śramaṇa Gautama can terminate those evils.” O Kāśyapa, when people
of intelligence observe the problem, make deductions, and arrive at their
conclusion in this manner, it is my disciples whose names are praised.
Then, O Kāśyapa, those who are learned may think to themselves, “As
to the elements [of the mind] that the śramaṇa Gautama and teachers of
other schools agree are clean, genuine, subtle, and ﬁt for the wise and
saintly, which of them (i.e., the Buddha or the teachers of other schools)
can really promote the good [elements] in the disciplines they practice?”

103b

84

Sutra 25

O Kāśyapa, when people of intelligence examine the problem in this
manner and arrive at a conclusion, they say, “The śramaṇa Gautama alone
can promote those good [elements].” O Kāśyapa, when people of intelligence observe the problem, make deductions, and arrive at their conclusion in this manner, my name is praised.
Again, O Kāśyapa, those who are learned may think to themselves, “As
to the elements [of the mind] that the disciples of the śramaṇa Gautama
and the disciples of teachers of other schools agree are clean, genuine,
subtle, and ﬁt for the wise and saintly, which of the two [groups of disciples]
can really promote the good [elements] in the displines they practice?”
O Kāśyapa, when people of intelligence examine the problem in this
manner and arrive at a conclusion, they say, “Only the disciples of the śramaṇa Gautama can promote the good [elements].” O Kāśyapa, when people
of intelligence observe the problem, make deductions, and arrive at their
conclusion in this manner, it is my disciples whose names are praised.
O Kāśyapa, when there is a path, there are corresponding methods of
practice. When a bhikṣu follows the [prescribed] methods of practice on
the path, he will know and see for himself that the śramaṇa Gautama is
“one who speaks the truth,” “one who speaks at the proper time,” “one
who speaks with useful words,” “one who speaks in accord with the doctrine,” and “one who speaks in accord with the rules of conduct.”
However, there are impure forms of ascetic practice through which some
obtain the title of brāhmaṇa or śramaṇa. What are the impure forms of
ascetic practice through which some obtain the title of brāhmaṇa or śramaṇa?
O Gautama, some of them go about naked, cover the front of their bodies
with both hands, and accept neither evening food nor leftover food, or food
placed within a threshold, or between two people, two canes, or two plates
(a mortar and pestle?), or from a family who have eaten together, or from
any house with a pregnant woman inside, or a dog in front, or where ﬂies
are swarming; they will not take food to which they have been invited or
from a family that is acquainted with any other ascetic, and they will not
accept ﬁsh, meat, intoxicants, or anything placed on two plates.
They will accept a meal and a drink, and so on, up to the seventh (i.e., to
swallow), and then they stop. When they accept almsfood or other helpings,

85

103c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

they do not go beyond the seventh (i.e., swallowing the food). They may
partake of one meal a day or a single meal every two or three or four or
ﬁve or six or seven days. In addition to berries, they may partake of
potherbs, rice scum, sesame seeds (or hemp grain), wild rice, cow dung,
or antelope dung. From plants, they may partake of roots, leaves, and
branches, and hanging fruit or windfall.
They will wear any clothing of poor quality, including those made
from sha grass (kuśa grass?) ﬁbers; they will wear bark garments, cover
the body with grass, or put on an antelope hide; they will let their hair
grow until it covers the body, or wear discarded clothing from a corpse.
Some will keep their arms raised at all times, and never sit on a couch or
chair, squatting instead; some will retain both moustache and beard even
when their head is shaved, or lie down on a bed of thorns or a ﬂoor strewn
with plant shells, or lie naked on cow dung, or bathe three times a day or
three times in a night. Thus do they torture their bodies with extreme physical pain and suffering. O Gautama, these are the ascetic practices that
are vulgar and impure, on account of which some obtain the title of śramaṇa or even that of brāhmaṇa.
The Buddha said:

O Kāśyapa, those naked ascetics who wear no clothing torture their bodies
with innumerable practices. In their way of life no one is endowed with
moral virtue or credited with doctrinal insight. In their way of life they
are unable to exercise the mind of endeavor, nor can they propagate that
way of life universally.

Kāśyapa said to the Buddha:

Sir, what is the [true] state of the śramaṇa and brāhmaṇa endowed with
moral virtue and doctrinal insight who seem to surpass all ascetic practices
and to abide in the utmost subtlety?

The Buddha said to Kāśyapa, “Listen attentively to what I say and examine
it carefully. I will explain them.”
Kāśyapa replied, “Yes, O Gautama. It is an opportune time.”
The Buddha said:

86

Sutra 25

When the Tathāgata, One Who is Free From Deﬁlement (Arhat), appears
in this world, he directly experiences the subtle bliss that is present throughout the four meditative states of absorption. Why? Through his own efort
he maintains concentrated mindfulness, enjoying the transcendence within
his mind without slackening in his discipline. O Kāśyapa, this is the state
of being endowed with moral virtue and doctrinal insight, and it is of the
utmost subtlety, far surpassing all ascetic practices.
Kāśyapa said to the Buddha:

O Gautama, even though a bhikṣu endowed with moral virtue and doctrinal
insight may surpass all ascetic practices, which discipline is more difﬁcult,
that which we have spoken of or that of the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas,
which itself is reputed to be very difﬁcult?
The Buddha replied:

O Kāśyapa, the truths of this world are incommensurate with the Dharma
of the Tathāgata. The so-called disciplines of the śramaṇa and brāhmaṇa
appear to be difﬁcult, and ascetic practices are obviously difﬁcult, as even
a laywoman can know, since the naked ascetics live without clothing and
so on, torturing their bodies in every possible way. But what ordinary
people cannot know is whether the minds of those ascetics are free of
anger or deﬁled by it whether from hatred or malice. If they should come
to know the minds of the ascetics they would not call them śramaṇas or
brāhmaṇas. Instead, they simply assume that ascetic practices are difﬁcult
to do, and because they do not know the minds of the practitioners, they
accept that the way of life of the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas must also be
difﬁcult.
Thereupon, Kāśyapa said:

Then, sir, please tell me about the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas who are
endowed with moral virtue and doctrinal insight and regarded as superior
beings of the utmost subtlety.

Then the Buddha said to Kāśyapa, “Listen attentively and consider what
I say carefully. I shall explain it to you.”

87

104a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

Kāśyapa replied, “Sir, I am ready to hear it.”
The Buddha said:

O Kāśyapa, with a concentrated mind and so on, a bhikṣu comes to realize
three kinds of supernormal knowledge; and with the eradication of various
forms of ignorance and delusion comes the acquisition of insight, bringing
with it the awareness of the total eradication of deﬁlements. How so?
Because in the solitary quiescence of a concentrated mind, when discipline
and effort do not slacken, this is the result. O Kāśyapa, this is called the
acquisition of moral virtue and doctrinal insight by a śramaṇa or brāhmaṇa,
and it is of the highest and utmost subtlety.

Kāśyapa said:

O Gautama, although this is why the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas who acquire
moral virtue and doctrinal insight as you have explained are said to be
superior to the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas who follow ascetic practice, the
latter’s discipline is extremely difﬁcult, so much so that a śramaṇa or
brāhmaṇa can hardly tell how difﬁcult it is.
The Buddha replied:

Some lay devotees also practice asceticism. They say, “I shall wear no
clothing from this day forward, and so on, and subject this body of mine
to all kinds of torture.” Someone who subjects his body to austerities,
however, cannot be called a śramaṇa or brāhmaṇa just on that basis. If,
because of his ascetic practice, he can be called a śramaṇa or brāhmaṇa,
then it cannot be said that the way of life of a śramaṇa or brāhmaṇa is
very difﬁcult at all. Instead, it is because no one can be called a śramaṇa
or brāhmaṇa on account of their ascetic practice that the way of life of a
śramaṇa and brāhmaṇa is said to be difﬁcult.
The Buddha continued:

Once, long ago, I was in the city of Rājagṛha. In the Saptaparvata cave
on the high hill, I taught the brāhmaṇa ascetic Nyagrodha the practice of
pure and genuine austerity. He was delighted and knew the serenity of
genuine faith. He served me offerings with tender care and praised me,
and his praise was the primary offering.
88

Sutra 25

Kāśyapa said:

O Gautama, who would not be delighted, have genuine faith, and praise
and serve Gautama with offerings? I too am enraptured and wholeheartedly
savor this genuine faith in Gautama. With offerings and praise I will take
my refuge in Gautama!
The Buddha said:

Know that there is no moral virtue of any kind or in any human world
that can match this most efﬁcacious moral virtue, let alone surpass it.
There is no realization of mental concentration, perfect knowledge, apprehension of deliverance, and culminating insight that can be compared to
the mental concentration, perfect knowledge, apprehension of deliverance,
and culminating insight that is imbued with the most efﬁcacious moral
virtue, let alone surpass it.
O Kāśyapa, the lion is a metaphor for the Tathāgata, who has eradicated
all deﬁlements and is perfectly enlightened. The Tathāgata is called a lion
because when he teaches the Dharma to the assembly of bhikṣus he is
totally free of self-regard and free from any fear whatsoever.
What do you think, O Kāśyapa? Do you say it is not valiant when the
Tathāgata expresses the lion’s roar in teaching the Dharma? Do not dare
to think so. For the [lion’s] roar of the Tathāgata when he teaches is valiant
and totally without fear.
O Kāśyapa, do you say that when the Tathāgata valiantly expresses
the lion’s roar he does not stand within the assembly? Do not dare to think
so. For the Tathāgata valiantly expresses the lion’s roar from within the
assembly of bhikṣus.
O Kāśyapa, do you say that the Tathāgata cannot valiantly express the
lion’s roar to teach the Dharma from within the assembly of bhikṣus? Do
not dare to think so. For the Tathāgata can valiantly express the lion’s roar
very well to teach the Dharma from within the assembly of bhikṣus.
What do you think, O Kāśyapa? Do you say that when the Tathāgata
valiantly and fearlessly expresses the lion’s roar to teach the Dharma very
well to the assembly of bhikṣus, the audience has no uniﬁed mind? Do not
dare to think so. Why? Because when the Tathāgata valiantly and fearlessly
expresses the lion’s roar to teach the Dharma very well to the assembly of
89

104b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

bhikṣus, the minds of those who have come to the assembly have listened
to the teaching as with one uniﬁed mind.
What do you think, O Kāśyapa? Do you say that when the Tathāgata
valiantly and fearlessly expresses the lion’s roar to teach the Dharma very
well to the assembly of bhikṣus, the minds of those who have come to the
assembly and listened to the teaching with one uniﬁed mind are neither
enraptured nor capable of receiving the teaching and faithfully putting it
into practice? Do not dare to think so. Why? Because when the Tathāgata
valiantly and fearlessly expresses the lion’s roar to teach the Dharma very
well to the assembly of bhikṣus, the minds of those who have come to the
assembly and listened to the teaching with one uniﬁed mind are [thoroughly] enraptured to receive the teaching and faithfully put it into practice.
O Kāśyapa, do you say that when the Tathāgata valiantly and fearlessly
expresses the lion’s roar to teach the Dharma very well to the assembly
of bhikṣus, those who have come to the assembly and been enraptured to
faithfully receive the teaching do not then serve the Tathāgata with offerings? Do not dare to think so. For when the Tathāgata valiantly and fearlessly expresses the lion’s roar and so forth, [those who have come to the
assembly] and been enraptured to faithfully receive the teaching do establish an occasion to make offerings.
O Kāśyapa, do you say that when the Tathāgata valiantly and fearlessly
expresses the lion’s roar and so forth, [those who have come to the assembly] and faithfully received the teaching and established an occasion to
make offerings do not then shave their hair and beards, or don the three
robes of a mendicant, or renounce domestic life for the path of religion?
Do not dare to think so. Why? Because when the Tathāgata valiantly and
fearlessly expresses the lion’s roar and so forth, [those who have come
to the assembly] shave their hair and beards, don the three robes of a mendicant, and renounce domestic life for the path of religion.
O Kāśyapa, do you say that when the Tathāgata valiantly and fearlessly
expresses the lion’s roar and so forth, [those who have come to the assembly] and renounced domestic life for the path of religion neither perfect
the practice of austerity to reach the ultimate abode of peace and safety,
nor realize ﬁnal nirvana? Do not dare to think so. Why? Because when
the Tathāgata valiantly and fearlessly expresses the lion’s roar and so

104c

90

Sutra 25

forth, [those who have come to the assembly] and renounced domestic
life for the path of religion perfect the practice of austerity to reach the
ultimate abode of peace and safety, where they realize ﬁnal nirvana.

Thereupon, Kāśyapa said to the Buddha:

What does Your Reverence think, O Gautama? May I renounce domestic
life to live in accord with this teaching (i.e., the Dharma), and may I
receive higher ordination?

The Buddha replied:

When a follower of a different religious order comes to my sangha and
wishes to renounce domestic life to pursue the path in accordance with my
teaching, he must remain a probationer for a period of four months, observing [how to conduct the life of the sangha] and must receive the appraisal
of its members. After that, he may be allowed to renounce domestic life
and receive higher ordination. O Kāśyapa, this is the regular proceeding,
and it is simply for the sake of examining the character of a new convert.
Kāśyapa said:

[I understand that] when a follower of a different religious order comes
to the sangha of the Buddha and wishes to renounce domestic life to pursue
the practice of austerity in accordance with his teaching, he must remain
a probationer for a period of four months, observing [how to conduct the
life of the sangha] and receive the appraisal of its members. After that,
he may be allowed to renounce domestic life and receive higher ordination.
Now I am willing to take four years to observe [how to conduct the life
of the sangha] and receive the appraisal of its members, and only after
that will I forsake domestic life and accept higher ordination.

The Buddha said to Kāśyapa, “I have already said that it [this process] is
only to appraise the character of a new convert.”
At the right time, Kāśyapa renounced his former way of life and received
higher ordination. Not long after he began his matchless practice of austerity,
which he pursued with a pure and faithful mind, he directly experienced the
termination of the cause of birth and death in the present life; his practice of

91

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

austerity was complete; that which must be done [for religious salvation]
was accomplished; and, having realized the ultimate state of arhatship, there
was for him no more [re]birth.
Then, having heard the Buddha’s teaching, Kāśyapa was delighted to
receive it, and he reverentially carried out what the Buddha taught.
[End of Sutra 25: A Naked Brāhmaṇa Ascetic]

92

Sutra 26

Knowledge of the
Three Vedas

(Dīgha Nikāya 13: Tevijja Suttanta)
Thus have I heard. Once, when the Buddha was visiting the communities of
the country of Kauśala, accompanied by one thousand two hundred and ﬁfty
bhikṣus, he stopped overnight in a brāhmaṇa village called Icchānaṅkala.
There was a brāhmaṇa called Puṣkarasvādi in that village. It happened that
a fellow brāhmaṇa called Tārukkha was visiting Icchānaṅkala at that time
to take care of some business. Puṣkarasvādi had been born into a pure family
line of seven generations and had never been slighted by anyone. He was
thoroughly versed in the three ancient collections of hymns (Vedas) and had
detailed knowledge of the various brāhmaṇa scriptures as well as a comprehensive command of the subtleties of secular literature. He was also well
trained in reading the physiognomy of magnanimous personalities, in divining
good and bad omens, and in conducting ceremonial proceedings and sacriﬁcial
rites. He had ﬁve hundred student disciples and never tired of teaching them.
His most able student, called Vāseṭṭha, had also been born into a pure
family line of seven generations and was never slighted by anyone. He too
was thoroughly versed in the three ancient collections of hymns (Vedas),
well trained in reading the physiognomy of magnanimous personalities and
in conducting ceremonial proceedings and sacrificial rites, and [like his
teacher] he also had five hundred student disciples and never tired of teaching them.
The brāhmaṇa Tārukkha too was from a pure family line of seven generations and was not slighted by anyone in society. He was thoroughly versed
in the three ancient collections of hymns (Vedas) and had detailed knowledge
of the various brāhmaṇa scriptures as well as a comprehensive command of
the subtleties of secular literature. He was also well trained in reading the
physiognomy of magnanimous personalities, in divining good and bad omens,

93

105a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

and in conducting ceremonial proceedings and sacriﬁcial rites. He had ﬁve
hundred student disciples and never tired of teaching them.
His most able student, called Bhāradvāja, was also from a pure family
line of seven generations and was never slighted by anyone. He too was thoroughly versed in the three ancient collections of hymns (Vedas), well trained
in reading the physiognomy of magnanimous personalities and in conducting
ceremonial proceedings and sacriﬁcial rites, and [like his teacher] he also
had ﬁve hundred student disciples and never tired of teaching them.
One morning, the two students Vāseṭṭha and Bhāradvāja got together in a
[nearby] grove and engaged in argument, mutually criticizing each other as to
whose doctrine was right and whose was wrong. Vāseṭṭha said to Bhāradvāja:
The path I follow must be right because it will enable us, when we leave
this world, to reach Brahmā Heaven. That is the doctrine [my great teacher]
Puṣkarasvādi teaches.

Bhāradvāja said:

The path I follow must be right because it will enable us, when we leave
this world, to reach Brahmā Heaven. That is the doctrine my great teacher
Tārukkha teaches.

Vāseṭṭha resolutely maintained the absolute truth of his path, while
Bhāradvāja too resolutely maintained the absolute truth of his path. Arguing
in this manner, they could not determine who was right and who was wrong.
Vāseṭṭha then said to Bhāradvāja:

The śramaṇa Gautama, son of the Śākya clan, having renounced domestic
life and realized the ultimate goal of religion, has been visiting the communities of Kauśala and is staying over in the forest outside the village.
Gautama is renowned and [his accomplishment] has been proclaimed
everywhere, in all lands under the sky, as worthy of the ten supreme titles,
namely, One Perfected in Practice (Tathāgata), One Liberated from Attachment (Arhat), Perfectly Enlightened One (Samyak-saṃbuddha), and so
on. Among all the gods and humans, as well as all the evil ones and their
lord, and the śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas too, he alone has directly experienced the realization of enlightenment. When he expounds on religion,

94

Sutra 26

his words are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the
end. All the words he utters are invariably endowed with true meanings
and real essences, and they are in accord with his practice of pure and
genuine austerity. We should visit this sage and pay him our respects. I
have also heard that the śramaṇa Gautama knows the path that leads to
Brahmā Heaven and can teach it to others, since he is always conversing
with Lord Brahmā. Why don’t we visit him to settle our dispute? Whatever
the śramaṇa Gautama tells us, we will accept it with due respect and carry
it out.

After walking out to the forest together, Vāseṭṭha and Bhāradvāja reached
the World-honored One and greeted him with a bow, then sat to one side.
The World-honored One immediately knew the thoughts in their minds and
said to Vāseṭṭha:

You two have been in the grove since early this morning engaging in argument and criticizing each other as to who is right and who is wrong. When
one of you asserted, “The path I follow must be right, because it will
enable us, when we leave this world, to reach Brahmā Heaven. That is
the doctrine [my great teacher] Puṣkarasvādi teaches,” the other also
asserted, “The path I follow must be right, because it will enable us, when
we leave this world, to reach Brahmā Heaven. That is the doctrine my
great teacher Tārukkha teaches.” In this manner, both of you have repeatedly criticized each other as to whose path represents the absolute truth.
Is this not so?

Hearing these words of the Buddha, Vāseṭṭha and Bhāradvāja were frightened, and every hair on their bodies stood on end. They thought to themselves,
“The śramaṇa Gautama has supernormal powers and knows the minds of
others. He has already stated the subject of our dispute.”
Then Vāseṭṭha said to the Buddha:

The path that I follow and the path that [my colleague] follows each claim
to be absolutely true, giving us the ability to reach Brahmā Heaven when
we leave this world. Sir, should the doctrine that Puṣkarasvādi teaches be
regarded as absolutely true, or should the doctrine that the brāhmaṇa
Tārukkha teaches be regarded as absolutely true?

95

105b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

The Buddha replied:

O Vāseṭṭha, since it is you who asks if this path and the other path each
claim to be absolutely true, enabling anyone who leaves this world to
reach Brahmā Heaven, why did you two have to go off into a grove from
early this morning to engage in repeated argument as to whose path is
true and whose is false?
Vāseṭṭha replied:

The brāhmaṇas who are well versed in the three Vedas teach different
paths, such as the path willed by the omnipotent Īśvara (chizaiyudao), or
the path of self-will (chizuodao), or the path of Brahmā, and these paths
are regarded as equally leading to Brahmā Heaven. O Gautama, the different paths are like roads maintained by different villages, yet they all
eventually reach the capital.

The Buddha said, “Are you sure that the different paths are really depicted
as equally reaching Brahmā Heaven?”
Vāseṭṭha replied, “Yes, all of them [eventually] reach Brahmā Heaven, sir.”
The Buddha repeated the question, “Do the different paths really lead to
Brahmā Heaven without exception?”
Vāseṭṭha replied, “Yes, sir.”
After verifying his answer, the Buddha said to Vāseṭṭha, “Among the
brāhmaṇas who are well versed in the three Vedas, is there anyone who has
really seen Brahmā?”
Vāseṭṭha replied, “No, no one has seen that god, sir.”
The Buddha continued, “What do you think, O Vāseṭṭha? Did anyone
who preceded the experts who are well versed in the three Vedas see Brahmā?”
Again he replied, “No, none of them has seen Brahmā, sir.”
The Buddha said:

What do you think, O Vāseṭṭha? Did any of the ancient brāhmaṇas who
excelled in chanting the Vedic hymns or teaching the hymns, songs, and
verses really witness Brahmā [with their own eyes]? For instance, did the
sages Aṣṭaka, Vāmaka, Vāmadeva, Vaiśyamitra, Aṅgirasa, Yamataggi
(Pāli), Boboxi, and Kāśyapa, Aruṇa, Gautama, Shouzhi, and Poluosuntuo
themselves all see Brahmā?

96

Sutra 26

Vāseṭṭha replied, “No, they did not, sir.”
The Buddha continued:

If none of the brāhmaṇas who were well versed in the three Vedas saw
Brahmā, nor any of their teachers, or any of the ancient sages such as
Aṣṭaka and so on, then you should realize that the doctrines they teach
must all be considered unreal.
The Buddha continued:

It is just like a philanderer bragging about his conquest of some imaginary
beauty by praising her sexual prowess. When others ask, “How do you
know her? Is she in the east, west, north, or south?” he replies, “I don’t
know.” Again, when others ask, “Where can she be found—in what town,
district, or village?” he replies, “I don’t know.” When they ask, “What is
her family? Is she from a kṣatriya family, or from a brāhmaṇa, vaiśya, or
śūdra family?” he again replies, “I don’t know.” And when they ask, “How
does she look? Is she tall or short, stout or delicate, dark or light? Is she
beautiful or ugly?” he again replies, “I don’t know.”
O Vāseṭṭha, could the woman about whom the man is bragging really
be regarded as real?

Vāseṭṭha replied, “No, she cannot be regarded as real, sir.”
The Buddha said, “Exactly, O Vāseṭṭha. In [just the same way,] the god
Brahmā whom the brāhmaṇa experts in the three Vedas praise cannot be
considered real.”
[The Buddha continued:]

What do you think, O Vāseṭṭha? Suppose the brāhmaṇa experts in the
three Vedas watch the sun and moon as they rise and set, and pay their
respects to those heavenly bodies with both palms joined and with offerings, and then assert their doctrine that one can leave this world and reach
the abode of the sun and moon by following practices similar to theirs,
do you agree that their path is absolutely true and will enable you to leave
this world to reach the abode of those heavenly bodies?
[Vāseṭṭha] replied:

97

105c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

Sir, the brāhmaṇa experts in the three Vedas, despite watching the sun
and moon as they rise and set and paying respects to the heavenly bodies
with both palms joined and with offerings, cannot claim that their path is
absolutely true and will enable us to leave this world and reach the abode
of those heavenly bodies.

[The Buddha continued:]

Exactly, O Vāseṭṭha. The brāhmaṇa experts in the three Vedas watch the
sun and moon as they rise and set, pay their respects to these heavenly
bodies with both palms joined and with offerings, and assert the doctrine
that one can leave this world and reach the abode of the sun and moon
by following practices similar to theirs. However, they cannot claim that
their path is absolutely true and will enable their followers to leave this
world and reach the abode of those heavenly bodies. Yet wouldn’t there
be something specious in continuing to follow the same practice of paying
respects [to the heavenly bodies as they rise and set] by joining palms
and making offerings?
[Vāseṭṭha] replied, “Exactly, O Gautama. It would be specious, sir.”
The Buddha went on:

Taking another example: Suppose a man sets up a ladder in an empty spot.
Others ask, “What are you doing setting up a ladder in an empty spot?”
The man replies, “I wish to ascend to the next ﬂoor of the building.” The
others ask, “What building? Is it in the east, west, north, or south?” He
replies, “I do not know.” What do you think, O Vāseṭṭha? Wouldn’t it be
fanciful to set up a ladder in an empty spot and try to climb to the next
ﬂoor of an imaginary building?’

[Vāseṭṭha] replied, “Exactly, sir. Such behavior is fanciful.”
The Buddha said:

It is the same as with the brāhmaṇa experts in the three Vedas. What they
teach is fanciful and unreal.
O Vāseṭṭha, the ﬁve kinds of desirable sense objects are [fundamentally]
undeﬁled and can be enjoyed [in ordinary life]. What are the ﬁve? The visual
faculty in the eyes perceives its object and the sense of sight is gratiﬁed. In

98

Sutra 26

a similar manner, the [sense] faculties of the ear, nose, tongue, and physical
body come into contact with their respective objects, and the senses of
sound, smell, taste, and touch are gratiﬁed. The subjective agent or “self,”
however, brings about attachment, bondage, and entrapment. Those brāhmaṇa experts in the three Vedas are deﬁled by the ﬁve kinds of sensual
desire; they are strongly attached [to the sense objects] but cannot see this
fault, nor do they know the means of transcendence, and thus they are
bound by the ﬁve kinds of sensual desire. While they may conduct their
ceremonial rites correctly in reference to the sun and moon, water and
ﬁre, and chant, “May you come to me and take me to be born in Brahmā
Heaven,” it would be impossible.
O Vāseṭṭha, it is like crossing the Aciravatī River. When the water is
placid even ravens on its bank and other birds can drink from it. Suppose,
however, that a person who is heavily chained on one side of the river
calls out to the yonder shore, “Come, come to me. I want to cross over to
the other bank.” How could that yonder shore come any nearer? Could
that person really cross the river in that way?

[Vāseṭṭha] replied, “It would be impossible, sir.”
The Buddha continued:

O Vāseṭṭha, the ﬁve kinds of desirable sense objects are [fundamentally]
undeﬁled and can gratify the senses. From the standpoint of rules for the
wise and saintly, however, the objects of the senses can be forms of bondage.
The brāhmaṇa experts in the three Vedas are entrapped by them. Thoroughly
bound, they do not see their fault or know how to transcend it. While they
may conduct their ceremonial rites correctly in reference to the sun and
moon, water and ﬁre, and chant, “May you come to me and take me to be
born in Brahmā Heaven,” that, after all, would be impossible.
O Vāseṭṭha, it is like crossing the Aciravatī River. When the water is
placid even ravens on its bank and and other birds can drink from it. Suppose,
however, that someone wishes to cross the river; could he ever do so if he
will neither use his own hands [to swim], nor rely on a boat or raft?

[Vāseṭṭha] replied, “He cannot do so, sir.”
[The Buddha continued:]

99

106a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

It is just the same with the brāhmaṇa experts in the three Vedas, because
without following the path of pure and genuine austerity of the śramaṇas,
they wish instead to reach Brahmā Heaven by relying on defective practices
that are neither pure nor genuine, and it is impossible.
O Vāseṭṭha, it is like when the river ﬂoods because of a sudden torrent
in the mountains, which can sweep people away if there is neither a boat,
a raft, or a bridge available. Now suppose a traveler wishes to cross the
river, but he sees the river ﬂooding because of the sudden torrent in the
mountains and people being swept away for lack of a boat, raft, or bridge.
He thinks to himself, “I can build a raft by gathering wood and grass and
tying it together tightly, and then by using my own strength I should be able
to cross the river.” He immediately ﬁnds the materials, ties them together
very tightly, and applies his own strength to cross the river safely.
O Vāseṭṭha, it is the same with the case in question. If a bhikṣu abandons
practices that are neither suitable for a śramaṇa nor pure and genuine,
and adopts the pure and genuine practice that is suitable for a śramaṇa,
it is then possible for him to be born in Brahmā Heaven.

[The Buddha continued,] “What do you think, O Vāseṭṭha? Is there anger
in Brahmā?”
Vāseṭṭha replied, “No, sir.”
[The Buddha] again asked, “Is there anger in those brāhmaṇa experts in
the three Vedas?”
Vāseṭṭha replied, “Yes, sir.”
[The Buddha continued:]
106b

O Vāseṭṭha, Brahmā has no anger whereas those [brāhmaṇas invariably]
have anger. Those who have no anger and those who have anger cannot
be mixed together, nor can they realize deliverance together, nor can they
share the same destiny. Because of these differences, the god Brahmā and
those brāhmaṇas cannot abide in the same place.

[The Buddha continued,] “What do you think, O Vāseṭṭha? Is there hatred
in Brahmā?”
Vāseṭṭha replied, “No, sir.”
“Is there hatred in those brāhmaṇa experts in the three Vedas?”

100

Sutra 26

Vāseṭṭha replied, “Yes, sir.”
[The Buddha continued:]

O Vāseṭṭha, Brahmā has no hatred, whereas those [brāhmaṇas invariably]
have anger. Those who have no hatred and those who have hatred cannot
be mixed together, nor can they realize deliverance together, nor can they
share the same destiny. Because of these differences, the god Brahmā and
those brāhmaṇas cannot abide in the same place.

[The Buddha continued,] “What do you think, O Vāseṭṭha? Is there resentment in Brahmā?”
Vāseṭṭha replied, “No, sir.”
[The Buddha] again asked, “Is there resentment in those brāhmaṇa experts
in the three Vedas?”
Vāseṭṭha replied, “Yes, sir.”
[The Buddha continued:]

O Vāseṭṭha, Brahmā has no resentment whereas those [brāhmaṇas invariably] have resentment. Those who have no resentment and those who
have resentment cannot be mixed together, nor can they realize deliverance
together, nor can they share the same destiny. Because of these differences,
the god Brahmā and those brāhmaṇas cannot abide in the same place.

[The Buddha continued,] “What do you think, O Vāseṭṭha? Does Brahmā
enjoy family and wealth?”
Vāseṭṭha replied, “No, sir.”
[The Buddha] again asked, “Do those brāhmaṇa experts in the three Vedas
enjoy family and wealth?”
Vāseṭṭha replied, “Yes, sir.”
[The Buddha continued:]

O Vāseṭṭha, Brahmā has neither family nor wealth, whereas those [brāhmaṇas invariably] have both. Those who have neither family nor wealth
and those who have family and wealth cannot be mixed together, they
cannot realize deliverance together, and they cannot share the same destiny.
Because of these differences, the god Brahmā and those brāhmaṇas cannot
abide in the same place.

101

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

[The Buddha continued,] “What do you think, O Vāseṭṭha? Does Brahmā
have total freedom?”
Vāseṭṭha replied, “Yes, sir.”
[The Buddha] again asked, “Do those brāhmaṇa experts in the three Vedas
have total freedom?”
Vāseṭṭha replied, “No, sir.”
[The Buddha continued:]

O Vāseṭṭha, Lord Brahmā has total freedom whereas those brāhmaṇa experts
in the three Vedas have no freedom. Those who have total freedom and those
who have no freedom cannot be mixed together, they cannot realize deliverance together, and they cannot share the same destiny. Because of these
differences, the god Brahmā and those brāhmaṇas cannot abide in the same
place. Those brāhmaṇa experts in the three Vedas might not be able to reply
in detail when others pose questions on something profound. Is that not so?
Vāseṭṭha replied, “Yes, that is correct, sir.”
Vāseṭṭha and Bhāradvāja then spoke in unison:

Setting these matters aside for a moment, we have heard that the śramaṇa
Gautama knows the path that leads to Brahmā Heaven and can teach it
to others, since he is always conversing with Lord Brahmā. O śramaṇa
Gautama, we earnestly request that Your Reverence reveal to us the path
to Brahmā Heaven and explain it in detail on our behalf.

The Buddha said to Vāseṭṭha, “Now I shall ask you, and you must answer.
What do you think, O Vāseṭṭha? Is the country of Manasākaṭa near or far
from here?”
[Vāseṭṭha] replied, “It is rather near, sir.”
[The Buddha continued:]
106c

If a person has grown up in that country and others ask him about the
roads there, what do you think, Vāseṭṭha? When the person who has grown
up in that country answers a question about the roads there, should anyone
doubt his answer?

[Vāseṭṭha] replied, “No, there should be no doubt whatsoever. Why is
this? Because that person grew up in that country, sir.”

102

Sutra 26

The Buddha said:

Even if the person had really grown up in that country, others might still
raise some doubt about his answer. But when someone comes to ask me
about the path to Brahmā Heaven, there should be no doubt whatsoever.
Why? Precisely because I am always teaching the path to Brahmā Heaven.
Vāseṭṭha and Bhāradvāja then said in unison:

Setting these matters aside for a moment, we have heard that the śramaṇa
Gautama knows the path that leads to Brahmā Heaven and can teach it to
others, since he is always conversing with Lord Brahmā. O śramaṇa Gautama, we earnestly request that Your Reverence, with compassion, reveal
to us the path to Brahmā Heaven and explain it in detail on our behalf.

The Buddha said, “Listen attentively, and carefully consider what I will
explain.”
They replied, “Sir, it is an opportune time.”
The Buddha continued:

When the Tathāgata, who is totally free from deﬁlement and perfectly
enlightened, appears in this world he directly experiences subtle bliss that
is present throughout the four meditative states of absorption. Why? Through
his own effort he maintains concentrated mindfulness, enjoying the transcendence within his mind without any slackening of discipline. Through
contemplation, he practices the four kinds of immeasurable mind (brahmavihāras), ﬁrst by permeating friendly love (maitrī) inﬁnitely in one direction, and then likewise in the remaining three directions. Thus he extends
his immeasurable mind of benevolence universally in all directions, neither
[divided] nor bound to limitation. Casting away various feelings of hatred,
leaving no ill-will (vyāpāda) in his mind, the Tathāgata enjoys the state of
tranquility and silence. He also completes the remaining three practices,
namely, the immeasurable mind of compassion (karuṇā), the immeasurable
mind of sympathetic joy (muditā), and the immeasurable mind of equanimity
(upekṣā), ﬁrst permeating inﬁnitely in one direction, and then likewise in
the remaining three directions. Thus he extends his immeasurable mind of
benevolence, joy, and equanimity universally in all directions, neither
[divided] nor bound to limitation. Casting away various feelings of hatred,
103

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

leaving no ill-will in his mind, the Tathāgata enjoys the state of tranquility
and silence. What do you think, O Vāseṭṭha? Is there anger in Brahmā?

[Vāseṭṭha] replied, “There is no feeling of anger in Lord Brahmā, sir.”
Again [the Buddha] asked, “Is there anger in the bhikṣu who permeates
a mind of friendly love?”
[Vāseṭṭha] replied, “No, sir.”
The Buddha said:

Neither Brahmā nor the bhikṣu who permeates a mind of friendly love
has any feeling of anger. Since both have no anger, Brahmā and the bhikṣu
share the same destiny (gati) and the same deliverance. Because of this,
Brahmā and the bhikṣu can act together anywhere. What do you think, O
Vāseṭṭha? Is there hatred in Brahmā?”

[Vāseṭṭha] replied, “There is no hatred in Lord Brahmā, sir.”
Again [the Buddha] said, “Is there hatred in the bhikṣu who permeates a
mind of friendly love?
[Vāseṭṭha] replied, “No, sir.”
The Buddha said:

Neither Brahmā nor the bhikṣu who permeates a mind of friendly love
has any feeling of hatred. Since both have no hatred, Brahmā and the
bhikṣu share the same destiny and the same deliverance. Because of this,
Brahmā and the bhikṣu can act together anywhere.”

The Buddha again asked, “What do you think, O Vāseṭṭha? Is there resentment in Brahmā?”
[Vāseṭṭha] replied, “There is no resentment in Lord Brahmā, sir.”
The Buddha asked again, “Is there resentment in the bhikṣu who permeates
a mind of friendly love?”
[Vāseṭṭha] replied, “No, sir.”
The Buddha said:

107a

Neither Brahmā nor the bhikṣu has any feeling of resentment. Since neither
have any resentment, Brahmā and the bhikṣu share the same destiny and
the same deliverance. Because of this, Brahmā and the bhikṣu can act
together anywhere.

104

Sutra 26

[The Buddha continued,] “What do you think, O Vāseṭṭha? Does Brahmā
enjoy family and wealth?”
Vāseṭṭha replied, “No, sir.”
[The Buddha] again asked: “Does the bhikṣu who permeates a mind of
friendly love enjoy family and wealth?”
[Vāseṭṭha] replied, “No, sir.”
The Buddha said:

Neither Brahmā nor the bhikṣu has family or wealth. Since neither have
any family or wealth, they share the same destiny and deliverance. Because
of this, Brahmā and the bhikṣu can act together anywhere.

[The Buddha continued,] “What do you think, O Vāseṭṭha? Does Brahmā
have total freedom?”
[Vāseṭṭha] replied, “Yes, sir.”
[The Buddha] again asked, “Does the bhikṣu who permeates a mind of
friendly love have total freedom?”
Vāseṭṭha replied, “Yes, sir.”
The Buddha said:

Both Brahmā and the bhikṣu have attained total freedom equally, and they
share the same destiny and deliverance. Because of this, Brahmā and the
bhikṣu can act together anywhere.
The Buddha said to Vāseṭṭha:

You should know that the bhikṣu who permeates a mind of friendly love
will be born in Brahmā Heaven on the dissolution of his body at the end
of life, as swiftly as an arrow striking its target.

When the Buddha completed this teaching, Vāseṭṭha and Bhāradvāja realized at that moment the termination of all deﬁlements, thereby acquiring
genuine insight into the nature of the Dharma. Having heard the Buddha’s
teaching, Vāseṭṭha and Bhāradvāja were delighted to receive it, and they reverentially carried out what the Buddha taught.
[End of Sutra 26: Knowledge
of the Three Vedas]

105

Sutra 27

The Rewards of the Life
of a Śramaṇa

(Dīgha Nikāya 2: Sāmañña-phala Suttanta)
Thus have I heard. Once, when the Buddha was visiting the city of Rājagṛha,
he stayed in a grove of mango trees belonging to the master of medicine
Prince Jīvaka, accompanied by one thousand two hundred and ﬁfty bhikṣus.
On that occasion, on the night of the full moon, King Ajātaśatru, the son of
the queen mother from Videha,17 summoned his principal queen and said,
“Tonight’s moon, on the ﬁfteenth of the month, is so clear and bright there
seems to be no difference between day and night. Tell me your wishes.”
The queen replied:
Yes, sire. Tonight’s moon, on the ﬁfteenth of the month, is so clear and
bright there seems to be no difference between day and night. My wish
is that Your Majesty’s hair be washed and that Your Majesty be bathed
and made immaculate, so that we may enjoy some entertainment together
with the palace ladies.

The king then summoned his eldest son, Crown Prince Udāyibhadra, and
said, “Tonight’s moon, on the ﬁfteenth of the month, is so clear and bright
there seems to be no difference between day and night. Tell me your wishes.”
The crown prince replied to the king:

Yes, sire. Tonight’s moon, on the ﬁfteenth of the month, is so clear and
bright there seems to be no difference between day and night. My wish
is that the four divisions of the army are called to assemble and the plan
[of an expedition] is laid out and discussed, so that we may punish the
rebels on the frontier and then return to enjoy [the victorious feast] together.

Again, King Ajātaśatru summoned his military commander, who had a
distinguished record of courage and valor, and said, “Tonight’s moon, on the

107

107b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

ﬁfteenth of the month, is so clear and bright there seems to be no difference
between day and night. Tell me your wishes.”
The general replied:

Yes, sire. Tonight’s moon, on the ﬁfteenth of the month, is so clear and
bright there seems to be no difference between day and night. My wish
is that the four divisions of the army assemble and intelligence is gathered
on the disturbances along the frontier, so that we may declare throughout
the land [the results of] rebellion and of obedience, respectively.
Again, the king summoned his prime minister, Varṣakāra, and said:

Tonight’s moon, on the ﬁfteenth of the month, is so clear and bright there
seems to be no difference between day and night. Among the śramaṇas and
brāhmaṇas, whom should I visit in order to have my mind enlightened?
The prime minister replied:

Sire, tonight’s moon, on the ﬁfteenth of the month, is so clear and bright
there seems to be no difference between day and night. There is a master
called Purāṇa Kāśyapa, who guides his school of disciples. He is an erudite
man and renowned in even the most distant regions. Just as a great ocean
receives everything that ﬂows into it, he is shown the respect of a great
many offerings from a multitude of people. O great king, may Your Majesty
pay your respects by visiting this master. When you see him there might
be an opportunity for Your Majesty to be enlightened (pasīdeyya).

Again, King Ajātaśatru summoned Varṣakāra’s brother, Suniddha, and
said:

Tonight’s moon, on the ﬁfteenth of the month, is so clear and bright there
seems to be no difference between day and night. Among the śramaṇas
and brāhmaṇas, whom should I visit in order to have my mind enlightened?
Suniddha replied:

Sire, tonight’s moon, on the ﬁfteenth of the month, is so clear and bright
there seems to be no difference between day and night. There is a master
called Maskarin Gośālīputra18 who guides his school of disciples. He is

108

Sutra 27

an erudite man and renowned in even the most distant regions. Just as a
great ocean receives everything that ﬂows into it, he receives the respect
of offerings from a multitude of people. O great king, may Your Majesty
pay your respects by visiting this master. When you see him there might be
an opportunity for Your Majesty to be enlightened.

Again, the king summoned his minister of religious rites (dianzuo; purohita) and said:

Tonight’s moon, on the ﬁfteenth of the month, is so clear and bright there
seems to be no difference between day and night. Among the śramaṇas
and brāhmaṇas, whom should I visit in order to have my mind enlightened?

The minister of religious rites replied:

Sire, tonight’s moon, on the ﬁfteenth of the month, is so clear and bright
there seems to be no difference between day and night. There is a master
called Ajita-keśakambalin, who guides his school of disciples. He is an
erudite man and renowned in even the most distant regions. Just as a great
ocean receives everything that ﬂow into it, he receives the respect of offerings from a multitude of people. O great king, may Your Majesty pay your
respects by visiting this master. When you see him there might be an
opportunity for Your Majesty to be enlightened.

Again, King Ajātaśatru summoned the ofﬁcer in charge of the palace gate
and said:
Tonight’s moon, on the ﬁfteenth of the month, is so clear and bright there
seems to be no difference between day and night. Among the śramaṇas
and brāhmaṇas, whom should I visit in order to have my mind enlightened?

The ofﬁcer in charge of the palace gate replied:

Sire, tonight’s moon, on the ﬁfteenth of the month, is so clear and bright
there seems to be no difference between day and night. There is a master
called Kakuda-katyāyana, who guides his school of disciples. He is an
erudite man and renowned in even the most distant regions. Just as a great
ocean receives everything that ﬂows into it, he receives the respect of
offerings from a multitude of people. O great king, may Your Majesty

109

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

107c

pay your respects by visiting this master. When you see him there might
be an opportunity for Your Majesty to be enlightened.
Again, King Ajātaśatru summoned Udāyin, the son of Maṇḍikā, and said:

Tonight’s moon, on the ﬁfteenth of the month, is so clear and bright there
seems to be no difference between day and night. Among the śramaṇas and
brāhmaṇas, whom should I visit in order to have my mind enlightened?
Udāyin replied:

Sire, tonight’s moon, on the ﬁfteenth of the month, is so clear and bright
there seems to be no difference between day and night. There is a master
called Sañjayī Vairaṭṭiputra, who guides his school of disciples. He is an
erudite man and renowned in even the most distant regions. Just as a great
ocean receives everything that ﬂows into it, he receives the respect of
offerings from a multitude of people. O great king, may Your Majesty
pay your respects by visiting this master. When you see him there might
be an opportunity for Your Majesty to be enlightened.
Again, the king summoned his [step]brother, Prince Abhaya, and said:

Tonight’s moon, on the ﬁfteenth of the month, is so clear and bright there
seems to be no difference between day and night. Among the śramaṇas and
brāhmaṇas, whom should I visit in order to have my mind enlightened?
Prince Abhaya, the king’s brother, replied:

Sire, tonight’s moon, on the ﬁfteenth of the month, is so clear and bright
there seems to be no difference between day and night. There is a master
called Nirgrantha Jñātiputra, who guides his school of disciples. He is an
erudite man and renowned in even the most distant regions. Just as a great
ocean receives everything that ﬂow into it, he receives the respect of offerings from a multitude of people. O great king, may Your Majesty pay your
respects by visiting this master. When you see him there might be an
opportunity for Your Majesty to be enlightened.
Again, the king summoned his master of medicine, Prince Jīvaka, and said:

Tonight’s moon, on the ﬁfteenth of the month, is so clear and bright there

110

Sutra 27

seems to be no difference between day and night. Among the śramaṇas and
brāhmaṇas, whom should I visit in order to have my mind enlightened?
Prince Jīvaka replied:

Sire, tonight’s moon, on the ﬁfteenth of the month, is so clear and bright
there seems to be no difference between day and night. There is a master
called the Buddha. Your Majesty should pay your respects by visiting
him. When you see him there will surely be an opportunity for Your
Majesty to be enlightened.

The king commanded his master of medicine, “Please make my elephant
and another ﬁve hundred white elephants ready.”
Jīvaka had the royal elephant and ﬁve hundred white elephants made
ready at once, and then reported to the king, “The carriages are ready, sire.
Please let us know the time for departure.”
King Ajātaśatru rode on the royal elephant and his ﬁve hundred queens
rode on the ﬁve hundred female elephants. All carried torches to demonstrate
the regal authority of the procession and they went out of the city of Rājagṛha.
On the way to the Buddha’s resting place the king [halted the procession
and] said to Jīvaka, “Are you not betraying me into the hands of my adversaries and joining their side to take the members of this procession prisoner?”
Jīvaka replied:
O great king, I would not dare betray Your Majesty, nor would I dare to
plot your demise, nor wish to join with Your Majesty’s adversaries to lead
this royal procession astray. Please proceed and you will surely ﬁnd an
occasion for happiness.

The king continued for a while, but again said to Jīvaka, “Are you not betraying me now into the hands of my adversaries and joining their side to lead the
members of this procession astray?” This was repeated a third time.
Why was the king so suspicious? Because there was no sound whatsoever
in the entire area, despite there being one thousand two hundred and ﬁfty
bhikṣus attending the Buddha. The complete silence made the king suspect
a plot.
Again, Jīvaka repeated:

111

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

108a

O great king, I would not dare betray Your Majesty, nor would I dare to
plot your demise, nor wish to join with Your Majesty’s adversaries to lead
this royal procession astray. Please proceed and Your Majesty will surely
ﬁnd an occasion for happiness. Why? Because śramaṇas prefer quiet and
remain always in seclusion. Because of this, there are no sounds of conversation, sire. May Your Majesty please proceed, for we are in sight of
the mango grove, sire.

Reaching the entrance to the grove, King Ajātaśatru dismounted from his
elephant and then disarmed, leaving his sword, his parasol, and the ﬁve symbols of his kingship at the gate. He entered the grove on foot and said to
Jīvaka, “Now, where is the Buddha, the World-honored One?”
Jīvaka replied, “O great king, the Buddha is in the lecture hall. There is
a light outside the building. The World-honored One is seated in the lion
throne, facing south, sire.”
The king proceeded and saw the World-honored One sitting by himself.
Seeing this, King Ajātaśatru washed his feet outside the building and stepped
into the hall. Looking around, he was delighted and thought to himself:

Now, see how the śramaṇas absorbed in silent meditation permeate [the
place with] such calmness and introspection. It is my wish that Crown
Prince Udāyibhadra should become equally endowed with a calm and
introspective mind.
At that moment, the World-honored One said to King Ajātaśatru:

Thinking of your son, you have said that you wish Crown Prince Udāyibhadra would become equally endowed with a calm and introspective
mind. Please come and take a seat before me.

King Ajātaśatru went forward, and after touching the ground at the
Buddha’s feet with his forehead, he took a seat to one side and said to the
Buddha, “I have a question, sir. If Your Reverence can spare me a moment,
I would like to ask my question.”
The Buddha replied, “O great king, if you have a question, feel free to
ask it.”
The king then said:

112

Sutra 27

O World-honored One, just as we ride on an elephant, horse, or chariot
and learn battle strategies as well as the use of a dagger, spear, sword,
bow and arrow, and ﬁghting cane, today every prince, strongman, great
wrestler, messenger, leathermaker, barber, clothmaker, carriage driver,
brickmaker, and bamboo or reed craftsman all earn their respective livelihoods by mastering their profession and using it attain happiness in life
as well as they can. In like manner, each father and mother, wife and husband, maid and servant, and errand boy too enjoys their own kind of happiness in life. In this way, everyone fulﬁlls their own life and enjoys the
fruit of their own happiness. Now, many śramaṇas, like the ones here,
are engaged in the practice of austerity. Do they acquire anything good
as a result of their practice of austerity, sir?

The Buddha said to the king, “Have you asked this question of any other
śramaṇa or brāhmaṇa before?”
King Ajātaśatru replied:

Yes, I have visited a number of śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas and asked them
this same question, sir. I recall that I once visited Purāṇa Kāśyapa and
said to him, “Just as we ride on an elephant, horse, or chariot and learn
battleﬁeld strategies and so on, other people carry on with the means of
their livelihood and enjoy the fruits of their own happiness. Now can your
followers, who are all engaged in the pursuit of your path, acquire any
results in this life like the satisfactions gained by other people?”
That teacher replied, “If Your Majesty acts or lets others act to inﬂict
agonies and torment people, whether by injuring, cutting, and dismembering [their bodies] or by burning, pulverizing, and destroying [their
homes], or to commit other transgressions such as lying, stealing, trespassing, plundering, destroying evidence, arson, murder, sexual abuse,
and so on—despite all of this, [understand that] no one is really doing
anything evil.
“O great king, if someone were to ﬂay human beings with a sharp knife,
creating a pile of ﬂesh and then scattering it all over the ground, this would
not constitute an evil, nor would such an action produce any moral retribution, good or bad. Irrespective of whether one chops up human bodies

113

108b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

on the southern bank of the Ganges River or promotes universal benevolence on the northern bank of the river, there is no difference whatsoever
between beneﬁting everyone on one bank and destroying everyone on the
other bank, nor are there any results therefrom.”

The king continued:

Suppose someone asks about a melon and the other person talks about a
plum, or when the former asks about a plum and the latter replies in terms
of a melon—that teacher’s reply was just like that. When I asked him if
those who practice his path realize a certain result in this life, that śramaṇa
replied that there is no such thing as reward or retribution regardless of
whether one’s actions are good or bad. I could not help thinking, “I am a
kṣatriya, properly anointed to kingship’s throne. Yet I [should refrain
from] exercising my power to arrest, exile, or execute any of these practitioners who have renounced domestic life. Nonetheless, I feel dissatisﬁed
with this teacher’s answer.” With those thoughts, I left his place for good.
King Ajātaśatru again said to the Buddha:

On another occasion, I visited the teacher Maskarin Gośālīputra’s place
and asked him the same question, “Just as we ride on an elephant, horse,
or chariot and learn battleﬁeld strategies and so on, other people carry on
with the means of their livelihood and enjoy the fruits of their own happiness. Now can your followers, who are all engaged in the pursuit of
your path, acquire any results in this life like the satisfactions gained by
other people?”
That teacher replied, “O great king, there is no meaning in charity,
none whatsoever in an act of giving, nor is there any meaning in any of
the sacriﬁcial rites; there are neither good act nor bad acts, nor is there
any moral retribution, good or bad, derived therefrom. There is neither
life here and now nor an afterlife, nor is there a father or mother, or a god,
a spirit, or a living being. Moreover, there is neither a śramaṇa nor a brāhmaṇa to proclaim the equality [of everything]. Nor is there anyone who,
in this world or the afterlife, directly experiences [any kind of realization],
or anyone who can teach it to others. Whoever speaks of anything as ‘existent’ is a liar, and the words he utters lack all reality.”

114

Sutra 27

O World-honored One, suppose someone asks about a melon and the
other person talks about a plum, or when the former asks about a plum
and the latter replies in terms of a melon—that teacher’s reply was just
like that. When I asked him if those who practice his path realize a certain
result in this life, he replied that the question was meaningless. Again I
thought to myself, “I am a kṣatriya, properly anointed to kingship’s throne.
Yet I [should refrain from] exercising my power to arrest, exile, or execute
any of these practitioners who have renounced domestic life. Nonetheless,
I feel dissatisﬁed with this teacher’s answer.” With those thoughts, I left
his place for good.
Again, the king said to the Buddha:

On another occasion, I visited Ajita-keśakambalin’s place and asked him
the same question, “O virtuous one, just as we ride on an elephant, horse,
or chariot, and learn battleﬁeld strategies and so on, other people carry
on with the means of their livelihood and enjoy the fruits of their own
happiness. Now can your followers, who are all engaged in the pursuit
of your path, acquire any results in this life like the satisfactions gained
by other people?”
That teacher replied, “For all who receive a body consisting of the four
elements, when life ends the earth element in the body returns to the earth,
the water element returns to water, the wind element returns to the wind,
and the ﬁre element returns to ﬁre. Thus every element of the body devolves
and every faculty therein dissolves and returns to nothingness. When people
die their bodies are placed on a funeral platform or left out among the cemetery mounds; when ﬁre consumes the skeleton it turns dull white or into
ashes. Whether one is wise or a fool, when their life ends everyone’s [body],
without exception, decomposes, manifesting the law of total annihilation.”
O World-honored One, suppose someone asks about a melon and the
other person talks about a plum, or when the former asks about a plum
and the latter replies in terms of a melon—that teacher’s reply was just
like that. When I asked him if those who practice his path realize a certain
result in this life, he replied that there was nothing but total annihilation.
Agian I thought to myself, “I am a kṣatriya, properly anointed to kingship’s
throne. Yet I [should refrain from] exercising my power to arrest, exile,

115

108c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

or execute any of these practitioners who have renounced domestic life.
Nonetheless, I feel dissatisﬁed with this teacher’s answer.” With those
thoughts, I left his place for good.
Again, King Ajātaśatru said to the Buddha:

On another occasion, I visited Kakuda-katyāyana’s place and asked him
the same question, “O virtuous one, just as we ride on an elephant, horse,
or chariot and learn battleﬁeld strategies and so on, other people carry on
with the means of their livelihood and enjoy the fruits of their own happiness. Now can your followers, who are all engaged in the pursuit of
your path, acquire any results in this life like the satisfactions gained by
other people?”
That teacher replied, “O great king, those who lack strength and virility
have little power for action as well as little concept of expediency. Some
people may become attached [to things] without due cause or conditions,
while others remain free from attachments, their pure and genuine [practice
also] coming about without due cause or conditions. Those sentient beings
who are endowed with life invariably lack the power that would enable
them to realize their own freedom. Hence, no harm or blame. For them,
constancy lies in the midst of numbers, undergoing the six kinds of life
cycles and experiencing both pleasure and pain.”
O World-honored One, suppose someone asks about a melon and the
other person talks about a plum, or when the former asks about a plum
and the latter replies in terms of a melon—that teacher’s reply was just
like that. When I asked him if those who practice his path realize a certain
result in this life, he replied that living beings lack the power [to gain their
own freedom]. Again I thought to myself, “I am a kṣatriya, properly
anointed to kingship’s throne. Yet I [should refrain from] exercising my
power to arrest, exile, or execute any of these practitioners who have
renounced domestic life. Nonetheless, I feel dissatisﬁed with this teacher’s
answer.” With those thoughts, I left his place for good.
Again, the king said to the Buddha:

On another occasion, I visited Sañjayī Vairaṭṭiputra’s place and asked him
the same question, “O virtuous one, just as we ride on an elephant, horse,

116

Sutra 27

or chariot and learn battleﬁeld strategies and so on, other people carry on
with the means of their livelihood and enjoy the fruits of their own happiness. Now can your followers, who are all engaged in the pursuit of
your path, acquire any results in this life like the satisfactions gained by
other people?’”
That teacher replied, “O great king, if Your Majesty asks, ‘Do śramaṇas
have some reward in this life?’, this may be answered in the following
manner: (1) This is identical (i.e., true; zishishi); (2) this is different
(zishiyi); (3) this is not different (zishifeiyi); (4) this is not not-different
(zishifeibuyi). This is the ﬁrst question-and-answer variation.
“On the other hand, if Your Majesty asks, ‘Do śramaṇas have no reward
in this life?’, this may be answered in the following manner: (1) This is
identical (true); (2) this is different; (3) this is not different; (4) this is not
not-different.
“If again Your Majesty asks, ‘Do śramaṇas have neither any reward,
nor no reward in this life?’, this may be answered in the following manner:
(1) This is identical (true); (2) this is different; (3) this is not different; (4)
this is not not-different.”
O World-honored One, suppose someone asks about a melon and the
other person talks about a plum, or when the former asks about a plum
and the latter replies in terms of a melon—that teacher’s reply was just
like that. When I asked him if those who practice his path realize a certain
goal in this present life, he again replied by speaking in terms of difference
(i.e., always in terms of something else). Again I thought to myself, “I
am a kṣatriya, properly anointed to kingship’s throne. Yet I [should refrain
from] exercising my power to arrest, exile, or execute any of these practitioners who have renounced domestic life. Nonetheless, I feel dissatisﬁed
with this teacher’s answer.” With those thoughts, I left his place for good.
Again, King Ajātaśatru said to the Buddha:

On another occasion, I visited Nirgrantha Jñātiputra’s place and asked
him the same question, “O virtuous one, just as we ride on an elephant,
horse, or chariot and learn battleﬁeld strategies and so on, other people
carry on with the means of their livelihood and enjoy the fruits of their
own happiness. Now can your followers, who are all engaged in the pursuit

117

109a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

of your path, acquire any results in this life like the satisfactions gained
by other people?”
That teacher replied, “O great king, I know all things, have insight into
all things, and I know all that is, without exception. Irrespective of whether
I am standing, sitting, or lying down, I am aware of all things without exception. All-inclusive (absolute) knowledge is present before me at all times.”
O World-honored One, suppose someone asks about a melon and the
other talks person about a plum, or when the former asks about a plum
and the latter replies in terms of a melon—that teacher’s reply was just
like that. When I asked him if those who practice his path acquire a certain
reward in this life, he answered by talking about his “all-inclusive knowledge.” Again I thought to myself, “I am a kṣatriya, properly anointed to
kingship’s throne. Yet I [should refrain from] exercising my power to
arrest, exile, or execute any of these practitioners who have renounced
domestic life. Nonetheless, I feel dissatisﬁed with this teacher’s answer.”
With those thoughts, I left his place for good.
O World-honored One, because of these experiences, I have come with
the intent to ask Your Reverence the same question, namely, “Just as we
ride on an elephant, horse, or chariot and learn battleﬁeld strategies and
so on, other people carry on with the means of their livelihood and enjoy
the fruits of their own happiness. Now do the śramaṇas (disciples of the
Buddha) who are engaged in the pursuit of your path acquire rewards in
this life like the satisfactions gained by other people, sir?”

The Buddha said to King Ajātaśatru:

I would now like to ask Your Majesty a question. You may answer as you
please. What do you think, O great king? Suppose that on the night of the
full moon some of the boys and other workers in the royal household
observe the king having his hair washed and his body bathed and then
enjoying some entertainment together with the palace ladies in the royal
pavilion. One of them thinks, “What irony! After that affair19 this is the
reward. Here is King Ajātaśatru, on the night of the full moon, having his
hair washed and his body bathed and gratifying all his senses with the
palace ladies in the pavilion. Who can ever know the reward that will fall
to one from his conduct?” Later on, that man shaves his hair, moustache,

118

Sutra 27

and beard, puts on the three robes of a mendicant, renounces domestic
life, and applies himself to the practice of equanimity (the principle of
equality).
Now, O great king, if you see this bhikṣu approaching, do you think
to yourself, “Well, isn’t this one of my former servants from the palace?”

The king replied, “No, O World-honored One. If I see a monk approaching,
I will stand to welcome him and ask him to take a seat alongside me.”
The Buddha said, “Indeed, is that not a real reward that a bhikṣu attains
in this present life?”
The king replied, “Exactly so, O World-honored One. That is a reward
that comes from being a śramaṇa.”
Again, the Buddha said:

O great king, some of the household guests who depend on the king’s
muniﬁcence may have observed on the night of the full moon the king
having his hair washed and his body bathed and then enjoying some entertainment together with the palace ladies in the royal pavilion. One of them
may have thought, “What irony! After those events this is the reward.
Who can ever know the reward that will fall to one from his conduct?”
Later on, that guest shaves his hair, moustache, and beard, puts on the
three robes of a mendicant, renounces domestic life, and applies himself
to the practice of equanimity. Now, O great king, what do you think? If
you see this bhikṣu approaching, do you think to yourself, “Well, isn’t
this one of my guests to whom I gave an allowance?”

King Ajātaśatru replied, “No, O World-honored One. If I see a monk
approaching, I will stand to welcome him with a bow and ask him to take a
seat alongside me.”
The Buddha said, “What does Your Majesty think? O great king, is that
indeed not a real reward that a bhikṣu attains in this present life?”
The king replied, “Exactly so, O World-honored One. That is a reward
that comes from being a śramaṇa.”
Again, the Buddha said:
O great king, the Tathāgata appears in this world as one who is totally
free from deﬁlement and perfectly enlightened. Those who enter his path

119

109b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

should be able to acquire three kinds of supernormal knowledge20 that
annihilates ignorance and allows the illumination of insight, eliminating
all forms of darkness and delusion to realize the total eradication of deﬁlements and reveal the great light of the Dharma. How is this so? Because
this fundamental realization can only be achieved through constant
endeavor without any slackening, through freedom from all worldly mentality, practice in seclusion, diligent mindfulness, and mental concentration.
What does Your Majesty think? O great king, is that indeed not a real
reward that a bhikṣu attains in this present life?

The king replied, “Exactly so, O World-honored One. That is a reward
that comes from being a śramaṇa.”
Thereupon, King Ajātaśatru stood up, bowed his forehead to the ground
at the Buddha’s feet, and said:

May I earnestly request that the World-honored One hear my repentance.
I was insane—stupid, ignorant, and without any awareness of decency.
My father, King Vidmisāra21 of Magadha, ruled the country according to
our laws and was always upright and impartial. But driven mad by the
desires of the [ﬁve] senses, I murdered my father, the king. May Your
Reverence, with compassion and pity, accept my earnest repentance.
The Buddha said:

Having been stupid, ignorant, and lacking any awareness of decency in
the past, you murdered your father, the king, but now you have repented
from the depth of your heart. According to the spiritual law of the wise
and saintly disciples, if you have now thoroughly repented for what you
have done, something beneﬁcial will come to you. Because I have compassion for you I will accept your repentance.

At that, King Ajātaśatru venerated [by bowing to] the Buddha’s feet. He
then withdrew to one side and took his seat. Thereupon, the Buddha gave
him a discourse on the Dharma, imparting instruction, beneﬁt, and delight.
After hearing the discourse, the king said to the Buddha:
Sir, I now take my refuge in the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha. May Your
Reverence accept me as a lay devotee in the right Dharma. From this

120

Sutra 27

moment until the dissolution of my body at the end of life I will refrain
from taking life, I will refrain from taking things that are not given, I will
refrain from indulging in sexual pleasure, I will refrain from speaking
falsehoods, and I will refrain from ingesting intoxicants.22 May I earnestly
request the World-honored One and the members of the sangha to unequivocally accept my vow.

The World-honored One remained silent for a moment, granting the king’s
request. Seeing this, the king stood up, venerated the Buddha, circumambulated him three times, and returned to the palace.
Not long after the king’s departure, the Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

King Ajātaśatru has atoned for his past transgressions and mitigated the
burden of his sins. If the king had not murdered his father he could have
acquired genuine insight (ārya-dharma-cakṣus-viśuddha) into the nature
of the Dharma. However, King Ajātaśatru has repented and has atoned
for his grievous transgression.

King Ajātaśatru, for his part, said to Prince Jīvaka on his way back to the
palace:

It was good that you have served me so well. It was you who ﬁrst told
me about the Tathāgata’s teaching and then took me to meet him, and my
mind has been opened. I am indebted to you and will not forget it.

When the king reached the palace he ordered the preparation of various
dishes of food and drink, and the next morning it was reported to the Buddha
that the meal was ready. Thereupon, the World-honored One donned his outer
robe and with almsbowl in hand visited the palace accompanied by one thousand two hundred and ﬁfty bhikṣus. Taking his seat in the place that had been
prepared for him, the Buddha, together with the members of the sangha, was
served by the king himself.
At the conclusion of the meal, the bowls were cleaned and rinsing water was
served. Then the king venerated the Buddha [by bowing to his] feet and said:
I have repented my past transgressions again and again, sir. I was insane—
stupid, ignorant, and without any awareness of decency. My father, King
Vidmisāra of Magadha, ruled the country according to our laws and was

121

109c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

always upright and impartial. But driven mad by the desires of the [ﬁve]
senses, I murdered my father, the king. May Your Reverence, with compassion and pity, accept my earnest repentance.

The Buddha replied:

Having been stupid, ignorant, and without any awareness of decency, you
murdered your father, the king, but now you have repented from the depth
of your heart. According to the spiritual law of the wise and saintly disciples, if you have now thoroughly repented for what you have done,
something beneﬁcial will come to you. Because I have compassion for
you I will accept your repentance.

At that, King Ajātaśatru venerated the Buddha [by bowing to his] feet.
Then he brought out a small cushion and seated himself before the Buddha.
Thereupon, the Buddha gave him a discourse on the Dharma, imparting
instruction, beneﬁt, and delight.
After hearing the discourse, the king again said to the Buddha:

Once again, I take my refuge in the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha. May
Your Reverence accept me as a lay devotee in the right Dharma. From
this moment until the dissolution of my body at the end of life I will refrain
from taking life, I will refrain from taking things not given, I will refrain
from indulging in sexual pleasure, I will refrain from speaking falsehoods,
and I will refrain from ingesting intoxicants.

After completing the teaching given for King Ajātaśatru, thus imparting
instruction, beneﬁt, and delight, the World-honored One stood up and left
the palace. Having heard the Buddha’s teaching, King Ajātaśatru and the
master of medicine, Prince Jīvaka, were delighted to receive it, and they reverentially carried out what the Buddha taught.
[End of Sutra 27: The Rewards of
the Life of a Śramaṇa]

122

Sutra 28

Poṭṭhapāda

(Dīgha Nikāya 9: Poṭṭhapāda Suttanta)
Thus have I heard. Once the Buddha was staying in Anāthapiṇḍika Monastery
in Prince Jeta’s Grove near the city of Śrāvastī, accompanied by one thousand
two hundred and ﬁfty bhikṣus. The World-honored One put on his outer robe
and with his almsbowl in hand went into the city of Śrāvastī in the early
morning. As he walked, the World-honored One thought:
It is still a bit early for the almsround. I will visit the brāhmaṇa ascetic
Poṭṭhapāda in the forest to see how he is doing. I can stay there until it is
time for the almsround.

The World-honored One went to the forest. The brāhmaṇa ascetic
Poṭṭhapāda had seen the Buddha approaching from a distance, and he stood
up at once to greet him, “Welcome, śramaṇa Gautama. I have not seen you
for some time. What has prompted Your Reverence to come this way? Please
take the seat in front.”
The World-honored One took the seat that was offered and said to
Poṭṭhapāda, “Now that I am here, tell me what you have been discussing.”
The brāhmaṇa ascetic replied:

O World-honored One, many brāhmaṇa ascetics, śramaṇas, and lay brāhmaṇas gathered in the Brahmā Hall yesterday and talked about a number
of things, arguing back and forth over their different views. O Gautama,
one brāhmaṇa ascetic proposed this theory: “Thoughts form in the mind
apart from any causes or conditions. Thoughts also perish from the mind
without cause or condition. Thoughts are known by their coming and
going. When they come, they arise in the mind, and when they go, they
perish from the mind.”
O Gautama, another brāhmaṇa ascetic argued for this idea: “The self
knows the presence of a thought through its arising, and also knows its
123

110a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

absence through its perishing. Each thought is known by its coming and
going. When it comes the thought arises, and when it goes the thought
perishes.”
O Gautama, a third brāhmaṇa ascetic presented the following notion:
“The foregoing two theories are impossible. Thoughts arise only through
the activity of a great spirit whose boundless power brings forth each
thought and also takes it away. When he produces it a thought arises, and
when he takes it away the thought perishes. My thoughts arise because
of the activity of that spirit.”
O Gautama, if one can grasp the meaning of those theories, one might
begin to discern how the cessation of thinking and knowing may take place.

The World-honored One said to the brāhmaṇa ascetic Poṭṭhapāda:

According to what you have said, all three theorists are culpable of committing an error. First, that thoughts form in the mind apart from any
causes or conditions, and also perish from the mind without cause or condition; thoughts are known by their coming and going, and when they
come they arise in the mind, and when they go they perish from the mind.
Second, that the self knows the presence of a thought through its arising,
and also knows its absence through its perishing; each thought is known
by its coming and going, and when it comes the thought arises, and when
it goes the thought perishes. Third, that thoughts only arise through the
activity of a great spirit whose boundless power brings forth each thought
as well as takes it away; when [the spirit] produces it a thought arises,
and when [the spirit] takes it away it perishes. Those who assert these
theories are necessarily culpable of committing an error. Why? Because
thoughts arise when there is a causal dependence for their creation, and
they perish when there is a causal dependence for their cessation.
When the Tathāgata appears in this world, he is endowed with ten
supreme titles, such as One Liberated from Attachment, Perfectly Enlightened One, and so on. If someone renounces domestic life in accord with
the Buddha’s path and applies himself to the practice of austerity, and so
on, he eradicates the ﬁve kinds of moral and spiritual hindrance, namely,
(1) sexual desire, (2) malice, (3) drowsiness and sloth, (4) worry and agitation, and (5) doubt. Having removed desires and unfavorable elements,

124

Sutra 28

he or she is still aware of an object and of the act of examining but the
cause of birth has been removed (i.e., reaching the supramundane realm)
and he enters the ﬁrst meditative state of absorption, giving rise to a sense
of joy and bliss. Here he eradicates all thought of desire, increasing the
sense of joy and bliss. O brāhmaṇa ascetic, because of this, he knows that
thoughts arise due to causal dependence and also cease due to causal
dependence.
[Now,] eliminating awareness of an object as well as awareness of the
subjective act of examining, he enters the second meditative state of
absorption with increasing tranquility and self-conﬁdence, and experiences
a predominant sense of joy and bliss in the emergent state of concentration.
O brāhmaṇa ascetic, he observed that thoughts ceased in the ﬁrst meditative
state of absorption and [now] a thought arises in the second meditative
state of absorption. Because of this, he knows that thoughts arise due to
causal dependence and also cease due to causal dependence.
[Next,] as the sense of joy fades, he enters the third meditative state
of absorption, mindful of the sense of equanimity, and is fully aware of
the subtler bliss in pure and genuine mindfulness and equanimity that the
wise and holy speak of as indispensable. O brāhmaṇa ascetic, he observed
that thoughts ceased in the second meditative state of absorption and [now]
a thought arises in the third meditative state of absorption. Because of
this, he knows that thoughts arise due to causal dependence and also cease
due to causal dependence.
[Next,] transcending both pleasure and pain and removing joy and sorrow, he enters the fourth meditative state of absorption, which is the equanimity that consolidates pure and genuine mindfulness. O brāhmaṇa ascetic, he observed that thoughts ceased in the third meditative state of
absorption and [now] a thought arises in the fourth meditative state of
absorption. Because of this, he knows that thoughts arise due to causal
dependence and also cease due to causal dependence.
[Next,] removing all thought of external forms, he terminates anger
without conjuring further thought and enters the [formless] realm of inﬁnite
space, which is the ﬁrst formless state of concentration. O brāhmaṇa ascetic, he observes all sense of form ending in this formless concentration,
and [now] an awareness of the realm of inﬁnite space arises. Because of

125

110b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

this, he knows that thoughts arise due to causal dependence and also cease
due to causal dependence.
[Next,] transcending the realm of inﬁnite space, he enters the [formless]
realm of inﬁnite consciousness, which is the second formless state of concentration. O brāhmaṇa ascetic, he observes the thought of the realm of
inﬁnite space ending as an awareness of the realm of inﬁnite consciousness
arises. Because of this, he knows that thoughts arise due to causal dependence and also cease due to causal dependence.
[Next,] transcending the realm of inﬁnite consciousness, he enters the
[formless] realm of nothingness or nonutility, which is the third formless
state of concentration. O brāhmaṇa ascetic, as the thought of the realm
of inﬁnite consciousness ends an awareness of the realm of nothingness
arises. Because of this, he knows that thoughts arise due to causal dependence and also cease due to causal dependence.
[Next,] transcending the realm of nothingness, he enters the [formless]
realm of neither thought nor nonthought, which is the fourth formless
state of concentration. O brāhmaṇa ascetic, as the thought of the realm
of nothingness ends an awareness of the realm of neither thought nor nonthought arises. Because of this, he knows that thoughts arise due to causal
dependence and also cease due to causal dependence.
[Next,] transcending the realm of neither thought nor nonthought, he
enters the ﬁnal state of cessation, beyond all thought and sensation. This
is the third saintly state, that of the nonreturner (anāgāmin). O brāhmaṇa
ascetic, when awareness of the [formless] realm of neither thought nor
nonthought ends he enters the state of concentration in which all thoughts
and sensations [totally] cease. Because of this, he knows that thoughts
arise due to causal dependence and also cease due to causal dependence.
Having acquired this insight, he may think: “It is not good to project
a thought or idea in the mind; moreover, it is good not to project a thought
or idea in the mind.” If he thinks in this way, a subtle form of thinking
remains (i.e., is not annihilated), causing gross forms to arise. Again, he
may think: “I should not engage in imagining anything, nor should I pursue
any thoughts.” By not imagining or pursuing thoughts, subtle thinking
comes to an end and no gross form arises. That is, when he does not engage
in imagining anything, his habitual pursuit of thought does not emerge.

126

Sutra 28

Accomplishing this, he enters the ﬁnal state of concentration in which all
thoughts and sensations completely cease.
What do you think? O brāhmaṇa ascetic, in your prior training, was
this kind of causality ever mentioned to explain the gradual cessation of
ideation?

The brāhmaṇa ascetic replied, “Sir, I have never before heard of this kind
of causality in the gradual cessation of ideation, but I believe my prior training
helps me understand it.”
Again, Poṭṭhapāda said to the Buddha:

Now, [as explained by the World-honored One,] when I produce a thought
[in my mind] it appears either as a thought of existence or as a thought
of nonexistence. But then another thought arises. When it too is gone, I
think to myself: “It is not good to project a thought or idea in the mind;
moreover, it is good not to project a thought or idea in the mind.” When
I come to this insight, however, I have not terminated the process of subtle
projection and this causes gross forms of thinking to arise. So I say to
myself: “I should not engage in imagining anything, nor should I pursue
any thoughts. By not imagining or pursuing thoughts, subtle projection
comes to an end and no gross forms arise. That is, when I neither imagine
anything nor pursue any thoughts, the process of subtle thought formation
ends, eliminating the cause of gross forms, and I enter the ﬁnal state of
concentration in which all thoughts and sensations are totally annihilated.”

The Buddha said, “Very good. This is called the state of concentration in
which one realizes the gradual cessation of ideation, as practiced by the wise
and saintly disciples.”
The brāhmaṇa ascetic asked, “Sir, of those ideas, which is the highest?”
The Buddha replied, “The idea of the realm of nothingness is the highest.”
The brāhmaṇa ascetic asked again, “Of those ideas, which is supreme?”
The Buddha replied:

In terms of the varieties of ideas of existence and of nonexistence, proceeding
gradually [by stages] and realizing the ﬁnal state of concentration in which
all thoughts and sensations completely cease is called the supreme idea.

127

110c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

The brāhmaṇa ascetic again asked, “Sir, is it a single supreme idea or
multiple?”
The Buddha replied, “It is a single idea, not multiple.”
[Poṭṭhapāda] again asked:

Does an idea arise ﬁrst, and then comes knowledge ( jñāna)? Or is it that
knowledge comes ﬁrst and then the idea is formed, or that knowledge and
the idea arise simultaneously?

The Buddha replied, “An idea arises ﬁrst, and then comes knowledge
( jñāna). When thinking occurs, knowledge follows.”
The brāhmaṇa ascetic again asked, “Sir, is a the selfhood of a person
(puruṣasya ātman) an idea?”
The Buddha replied, “In your view, what do you regard as the selfhood
of a person?”
The brāhmaṇa ascetic replied:

I do not say that the self is a person. I regard myself as consisting of a physical
body composed of four material elements (mahābhūtas) and six sense faculties
(āyatanas), all of which were inherited at birth from my mother and father
and nurtured through childhood. But it is nothing more than an embodiment
of impermanence, which will become worn out and [eventually] perish. As
the embodiment of impermanence, I say that such a person has a self.

The Buddha said:

O brāhmaṇa ascetic, what you refer to as your impermanent body composed of four material elements and six sense faculties that were inherited
from your mother and father and nurtured through childhood—do you
say that this is your self? O brāhmaṇa ascetic, you should discard the idea
of a self, [because] it is only the idea of a person that arises and perishes.

The brāhmaṇa ascetic said, “Sir, I do not say that the self is a person. It
is rather the person’s heavenly body [that belongs to] the realm of desire.”
The Buddha said:

You should discard the idea that the self is the person’s heavenly body
[that belongs to] the realm of desire, [because] it is only the idea of a
person that arises and perishes.

128

Sutra 28

The brāhmaṇa ascetic said:

I do not say that the self is a person. It is rather the person’s heavenly
body [that belongs to] the realm of form, [which is higher than the realm
of desire].
The Buddha said:

You should discard the idea that the self is the person’s heavenly body
[that belongs to] the realm of form, [because] it is only the idea of a person
that arises and perishes.
The brāhmaṇa ascetic said:

I do not say that the self is a person. It is rather the person’s heavenly
body [that belongs to] the formless realms (ārūpyadhātu), namely, the
realms of inﬁnite space, of inﬁnite consciousness, of nothingness, and of
neither thought nor nonthought.
The Buddha said:

You should discard the idea that the self is the person’s heavenly body
[that belongs to] the formless realms, namely, the realms of inﬁnite space,
of inﬁnite consciousness, of nothingness, and of neither thought nor nonthought, [because] it is only the idea of a person that arises and perishes.

The brāhmaṇa ascetic said to the Buddha, “What do you think, O Gautama? Will I be able to grasp why it is only the idea of a person that arises
and perishes?”
The Buddha replied:

Though you may wish to understand why it is only the idea of a person
that arises and perishes, it will be difﬁcult for you to grasp this, precisely
because you have been inﬂuenced by different views, a different teacher
and school, a different training [toward a different goal], a different tolerance, and a different attitude toward pleasure.
Poṭṭhapāda said:

Exactly, sir. O Gautama, I have been inﬂuenced by different views, a different teacher and school, a different training [toward a different goal], a
129

111a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

different tolerance, and a different attitude toward pleasure, and it is very
difﬁcult for me to grasp why only the idea of a person arises and perishes.
Why? Precisely because of the following views: (1) The self and the world
are permanent; this alone is true while the rest is false. (2) The self and the
world are impermanent; this alone is true while the rest is false. (3) The
self and the world are both permanent and impermanent; this alone is true
while the rest is false. (4) The self and the world are neither permanent
nor impermanent; this alone is true while the rest is false. (5) The self and
the world are limited [and have an end]; this alone is true while the rest is
false. (6) The self and the world are limitless [and have no end]; this alone
is true while the rest is false. (7) The self and the world are both limited
and limitless; this alone is true while the rest is false. (8) The self and the
world are neither limited nor limitless; this alone is true while the rest is
false. (9) This life principle is the body itself; this alone is true while the
rest is false. (10) If there is another life principle, there is another body;
this alone is true while the rest is false. (11) The life principle and the body
are neither different nor nondifferent; this alone is true while the rest is
false. (12) If there is no life principle, there is no [living] body; this alone
is true while the rest is false. (13) The Tathāgata has an end; this alone is
true while the rest is false. (14) The Tathāgata has no end; this alone is true
while the rest is false. (15) The Tathāgata has an end as well as no end;
this alone is true while the rest is false. (16) The Tathāgata has neither an
end nor no end; this alone is true while the rest is false.

The Buddha said to the brāhmaṇa ascetic, “I do not subscribe to any views
holding that ‘the self and the world are permanent’ and so on, up to ‘the
Tathāgata has neither end nor no end.’
Poṭṭhapāda said, “O Gautama, why don’t you subscribe to the view that
the self and the world are permanent, or to any of those other views?”
The Buddha replied:

Because they do not accord with true meanings, do not accord with the
doctrine, have nothing to do with the practice of austerity as the foundation,
and do not represent the eradication of desire, or the state of cessation, or
the state of quiescence, or the goal of perfect enlightenment (anuttara

130

Sutra 28

samyaksaṃbodhi), or the life of śramaṇas, or the state of nirvana. For
these reasons I do not subscribe to any of these views.
The brāhmaṇa ascetic again asked:

What are the views that accord with true meanings, accord with the doctrine, relate to the practice of austerity, represent the eradication of desire,
the state of cessation, the state of quiescence, the goal of perfect enlightenment, the life of śramaṇas, and the state of nirvana? And what does it
mean to “subscribe” to a view, sir?
The Buddha replied:

I subscribe to the doctrine of the truth of suffering, of [the truth of the]
causal aggregates [of suffering], of [the truth of the] cessation [of suffering],
and of the [truth of the] essential path to liberation [from suffering] (i.e.,
the Four Noble Truths). Why? Because this doctrine accords with true
meanings, accords with the teaching, has the practice of austerity as its
foundation, and represents the eradication of desire, the state of cessation,
the state of quiescence, the goal of perfect enlightenment, the life of śramaṇas, and the state of nirvana. Because of this, I subscribe [to the doctrine
of the Four Noble Truths].

Thereupon, the World-honored One gave Poṭṭhapāda a discourse on the
Dharma, imparting instruction, beneﬁt, and delight, and then stood up and
left his place.
Not long after the Buddha’s departure some of the other brāhmaṇa ascetics
criticized the brāhmaṇa Poṭṭhapāda:
How can you listen to the words of the śramaṇa Gautama and accept them
as right? When he says “I do not subscribe to any views holding that ‘the
self and the world are permanent’ and so on, up to ‘the Tathāgata has
neither an end nor no end,’ because they do not accord with true meanings,”
how can you accept such a statement? We do not consider these words to
be acceptable.

Poṭṭhapāda said to the brāhmaṇa ascetics:

131

111b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

The śramaṇa Gautama explained that he does not subscribe to views holding that the self and the world are permanent and so on, up to “the Tathāgata
has neither an end nor no end,” because they do not accord with true meanings. I do not necessarily accept that statement, [just as you do not,] but
[I know that] the śramaṇa Gautama has realized deliverance, abides in
the Dharma, and that all his statements are in accord with the Dharma.
On what grounds could I oppose these words that reﬂect his wisdom?
When the śramaṇa Gautama expresses truthful words with such subtlety,
you cannot oppose them just to be contradictory.

On another occasion, the brāhmaṇa ascetic Poṭṭhapāda visited the Worldhonored One in the company of Hastiśāriputra. The latter greeted the Buddha
with a bow and took a seat to one side. Then Poṭṭhapāda venerated the
Buddha and Hastiśāriputra and also took a seat to one side. Poṭṭhapāda said
to the Buddha:

O World-honored One, not long after Your Reverence left my place after
your last visit, some of the brāhmaṇa ascetics criticized me. They said,
“How can you listen to the words of the śramaṇa Gautama and accept
them as right? When he says, ‘I do not subscribe to any views holding
that the self and the world are permanent and so on, up to ‘the Tathāgata
has neither an end nor no end,’ because they do not accord with true meanings,’ how can you accept such a statement? We do not consider these
words to be acceptable.”
I told those brāhmaṇa ascetics, “The śramaṇa Gautama explained that
he does not subscribe to views holding that the self and the world are permanent and so on, up to ‘the Tathāgata has neither an end nor no end,’
because they do not accord with true meanings. I do not necessarily accept
that statement, [just as you do not,] but [I know that] the śramaṇa Gautama
has realized deliverance, abides in the Dharma, and that all his statements
are in accord with the Dharma. On what grounds could I oppose words that
reﬂect his wisdom? When the śramaṇa Gautama expresses truthful words
with such subtlety, you cannot oppose them just to be contradictory.”
The Buddha said:

The words of censure uttered by those brāhmaṇa ascetics against you,

132

Sutra 28

such as, “How can you listen to the words of the śramaṇa Gautama and
accept them as right,” are at fault. Why? Because in my teaching I distinguish between two types of truth: (1) absolutely determinate truth and
(2) indeterminate truth. What is indeterminate truth? The views that have
been repeated, namely, that the self and the world are permanent and so
on, up to “the Tathāgata has neither an end nor no end,” belong to the
indeterminate category. I too use these views when teaching doctrine, but
I use them only as indeterminate truths. The reason they are indeterminate
is that they do not accord with true meanings, do not accord with the doctrine, have nothing to do with the practice of austerity as the foundation,
and do not represent the eradication of desire, or the state of cessation, or
the state of quiescence, or the goal of perfect enlightenment, or the life
of śramaṇas, or the state of nirvana. For this reason, O brāhmaṇa ascetic,
even though I use these views when teaching doctrine, I do not regard
them as determinate truths. What views, then, are determinate? I consider
the truths of suffering, of causal aggregates, of cessation, and of the essential path of liberation [from suffering] as determinate truths. The reason
they are determinate is that they accord with true meanings, accord with
the doctrine, have the practice of austerity as their foundation, and represent
the eradication of desire, the state of cessation, the state of quiescence,
the goal of perfect enlightenment, the life of śramaṇas, and the state of
nirvana. Therefore, I teach the Four Noble Truths as determinate truths.
O brāhmaṇa ascetic, there are some śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas who
believe in attaining absolute happiness in a world in the afterlife. I asked
one of them, “Do you believe in attaining absolute happiness in a world
in the afterlife?” He replied, “Yes, I do, just as you have said.” I again
asked, “Have you ever known or seen this state of absolute happiness in
such a world?” He replied, “No, I have neither known nor seen it.” I again
asked, “The gods of that world enjoy the state of absolute happiness. Have
you ever seen them?” He replied, “No, I have neither known nor seen
them.” I again asked, “Do you meet with the gods of that world, and do
you converse with them or practice meditation together?” He replied, “No,
I don’t.” I again asked, “Has any one of the gods who enjoy absolute happiness in that world ever come to say to you: ‘Since your conduct has been
honest and direct, you will be reborn in the world of absolute happiness.

133

111c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

I was honest and direct and I was born there, and I have been enjoying
life there ever since. Let us enjoy life there together’?” He replied, “No,
no one has.” I again asked, “Have you been able to use the supernormal
power of your mind to create another body composed of the four material
elements and endowed with all the sense faculties and physical limbs
without exception?” He replied, “No, I have not.”
What do you think, O brāhmaṇa ascetic? Should the words of those
śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas be regarded as honest and truthful?

The brāhmaṇa ascetic Poṭṭhapāda replied, “Their words are neither honest
nor truthful, sir.”
The Buddha said:
It is just like a philanderer bragging about his conquest of some imaginary
beauty by praising her sexual prowess. When others ask, “How do you
know her? Is she from the east, west, north, or south?”, he replies, “I don’t
know.” Again, when others ask, “Where can she be found—in what town,
district, or village?”, he replies, “I don’t know.” When they ask, “What
about her family? Is she from a kṣatriya family, or from a brāhmaṇa,
vaiśya, or śūdra family?”, he again replies, “I don’t know.” And when
they ask, “What does she look like? Is she tall or short, stout or delicate,
dark or light? Is she beautiful or ugly?”, he again replies, “I don’t know.”
O brāhmaṇa ascetic, could the story [of the woman] told by that man be
regarded as honest and truthful?

The brāhmaṇa ascetic replied, “No, sir. It could not be regarded as honest
or true.”
[The Buddha continued:]

O brāhmaṇa ascetic, suppose a man sets up a ladder in an empty spot.
Someone asks, “Why are you setting up a ladder in an empty spot?” The
man replies, “I wish to ascend to the next ﬂoor of the building.” Others
ask, “What building? Is it in the east, west, north, or south?” He replies,
“I do not know.” What do you think, O brāhmaṇa ascetic? Wouldn’t it
be far-fetched to set up a ladder in an empty spot and try to ascend to the
next ﬂoor of an imaginary building?

134

Sutra 28

[The brāhmaṇa ascetic] replied, “Exactly, sir. Such behavior would be
far-fetched.”
The Buddha said, “It is the same with the beliefs of the śramaṇas and
brāhmaṇas. What they teach is fanciful and unreal.
The Buddha said to Poṭṭhapāda:

You said previously that your physical body is composed of four material
elements and six sense faculties that were inherited from your mother and
father and nurtured through childhood, and hence is nothing but an embodiment of impermanence, which wll become worn out and [eventually]
perish; and that it would be such a person that has a self. Now, I teach
that this corporeal body [in which you assumed the existence of a self] is
deﬁled, [yet] its purity and genuineness can be realized, together with
deliverance from suffering. In your thinking, perhaps you would assert
that deﬁlements cannot be annihilated and that no pure and genuine elements can arise [where there continue to be deﬁlements]. Do not ever fall
prey to this [pessimistic] thought when you are in the midst of suffering.
Why? Because deﬁlements can be annihilated, causing pure and genuine
elements to arise. When you experience delight and realize the state of
joy and bliss and abide therein, your knowledge will expand through genuine mindfulness and mental concentration.
O brāhmaṇa ascetic, I teach that deﬁlements are found not only in the
heavenly body belonging to the realms of desire and form, but also in the
heavenly body in the [formless] realms of inﬁnite space, of inﬁnite consciousness, of nothingness, and of neither thought nor nonthought. Yet I
also teach that the purity and genuineness of that heavenly body can be
realized, along with deliverance from suffering. In your thinking, perhaps
you would assert that the deﬁlements cannot be annihilated and that no
pure and genuine elements can arise [where there continue to be deﬁlements]. Do not ever fall prey to this [pessimistic] thought when you are
in the midst of suffering. Why? Because deﬁlements can be annihilated,
causing pure and genuine elements to arise. When you experience delight
and realize the state of joy and bliss and abide therein, your knowledge
will expand through genuine mindfulness and mental concentration.

135

112a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

Then Hastiśāriputra asked the Buddha:

O World-honored One, when a person’s physical body in the realm of
desire is composed of the four material elements and six sense faculties,
does that person simultaneously have a heavenly body in the realms of
desire and form, as well as in the formless realms of inﬁnite space, inﬁnite
consciousness, nothingness, and neither thought nor nonthought? O Worldhonored One, when a person’s heavenly body is in the realm of desire,
does the person simultaneously have a physical body composed of the four
material elements and six sense faculties in the realm of desire, and a heavenly body in the realm of form as well as in the formless realms of inﬁnite
space, inﬁnite consciousness, nothingness, and neither thought nor nonthought? O World-honored One, when a person’s heavenly body is in the
realm of form, does the person simultaneously have a physical body composed of the four material elements and six sense faculties in the realm of
desire, and a heavenly body in the realm of desire as well as in the formless
realms of inﬁnite space, inﬁnite consciousness, nothingness, and neither
thought nor nonthought? Continuing in this manner, when a person’s heavenly body belongs to the realm of neither thought nor nonthought, does
the person simultaneously have a physical body composed of the four
material elements and six sense faculties belonging to the realm of desire
and a heavenly body belonging to the realm of desire as well as to the
realms of form, inﬁnite space, inﬁnite consciousness, and nothingness?
The Buddha replied:

When there is a physical body composed of the four material elements
and six sense faculties belonging to the realm of desire, it is only the physical body composed of the four gross elements and six sense faculties
belonging to the realm of desire, and not a heavenly body belonging to
the realms of desire or form, or one belonging to the formless realms of
inﬁnite space, inﬁnite consciousness, nothingness, and neither thought
nor nonthought. Continuing in this manner, when a person’s heavenly
body belongs to the realm of neither thought nor nonthought, it is only
the heavenly body of that person that belongs to the realm of neither
thought nor nonthought, and not a physical body composed of the four

136

Sutra 28

material elements and six sense faculties belonging to the realm of desire,
or a heavenly body belonging to the realms of desire or form or to the
formless realms of inﬁnite space, inﬁnite consciousness, and nothingness.
O Hastiśāriputra, it is like the changing states that occur in milk. Milk
(kṣīra) changes to become cheese, then cheese changes to become fresh
butter, fresh butter changes to become butter, [and ﬁnally] butter changes
to become ghee (clariﬁed butter). Ghee is the best of all. O Hastiśāriputra,
when milk is in the state of milk, it is called milk and not called cheese,
butter, or ghee. Continuing in this manner, when there is clariﬁed butter
it is called ghee and not milk, cheese, or fresh butter.
O Hastiśāriputra, your question can be answered in precisely the same
way. When there is a physical body composed of the four material elements
and six sense faculties belonging to the realm of desire, it is not a heavenly
body belonging to the realm of desire or a heavenly body belonging to
the realm of form, and so on, up to the formless realm of neither thought
nor nonthought. Similarly, when there is a heavenly body in the realm of
neither thought nor nonthought, it is only a heavenly body and not a physical body composed of the four material elements and six sense faculties
in the realm of desire, or any heavenly body in the realm of desire, in the
realm of form, and so on, up to the realm of nothingness.
O Hastiśāriputra, how do you reply when others ask, “Is your body in the
past simultaneously your body in the present as well as your future body?”
Or “Is your future body simultaneously your past body as well as your body
in the present?” Or “Is your present body simultaneously your body in the
past as well as your future body?” What do you say to such questions?

Hastiśāriputra replied:

Sir, if I am plied with such questions, I reply as follows. The past body
belongs to the past and is neither the body in the present nor the future
body. Again, the future body belongs to the future and is neither the past
body nor the body in the present. Again, the present body belongs to the
present and is neither the past body nor the future body.

The Buddha said to Hastiśāriputra:

137

112b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

O Hastiśāriputra, your previous question can be answered in precisely
the same way. When there is a physical body composed of the four material
elements and six sense faculties belonging to the realm of desire, it is not
a heavenly body belonging to the realm of desire or a heavenly body
belonging to the realm of form, and so on, up to the formless realm of
neither thought nor nonthought. Similarly, when there is a heavenly body
in the realm of neither thought nor nonthought, it is only a heavenly body
and not a physical body composed of the four material elements and six
sense faculties in the realm of desire, or any heavenly body in the realm
of desire, and so on, up to the [formless] realm of nothingness.
Again, O Hastiśāriputra, if others ask, “Did you perish in the past, will
you come again in the future, and are you now in the present?”, what do
you say to them?
Hastiśāriputra replied:

If I am so questioned, I shall reply: “I once perished in the past, and I was
not nonexistent. I will come into existence in the future, and I will not be
nonexistent. I now exist in the present, and I am not nonexistent.”

The Buddha said:

112c

O Hastiśāriputra, your previous question can be answered in the same way.
When there is a physical body composed of the four material elements and
six sense faculties belonging to the realm of desire, it is not a heavenly
body belonging to the realm of desire and so on, or a heavenly body belonging to the formless realm of neither thought nor nonthought. Similarly,
when there is a heavenly body in the realm of neither thought nor nonthought, it is not a physical body composed of the four material elements
and six sense faculties in the realm of desire, or any heavenly body in the
realm of desire, and so on, up to the [formless] realm of nothingness.
Then Hastiśāriputra said to the Buddha:

O World-honored One, now I take my refuge in the Buddha, Dharma, and
Sangha. As I wish to become a lay devotee, may Your Reverence accept me
as a lay devotee in the right Dharma. From this moment until the dissolution

138

Sutra 28

of my body at the end of life, I will refrain from taking life, I will refrain
from taking what is not given, I will refrain from indulging in sexual
pleasure, I will refrain from speaking falsehoods, and I will refrain from
ingesting intoxicants.

Poṭṭhapāda then asked the Buddha, “Sir, is it possible for me to renounce
domestic life and receive higher ordination?”
The Buddha replied:

If someone who has followed a different religious order wishes to be
ordained in this Dharma, he must remain a probationer for a period of
four months, observing [how to go about the life of the sangha] and receiving appraisal of its members. After that, he may be allowed to renounce
domestic life and receive higher ordination. This is the regular proceeding,
and it is simply for the sake of examining the character of a new convert.
The brāhmaṇa ascetic said:

[Sir, I understand that] someone who has followed a different religious
order and wishes to renounce domestic life to receive higher ordination in
the Buddha’s religion must remain a probationer for a period of four months,
observing [how to go about the life of the sangha] and receiving the appraisal
of its members. After that, he may be allowed to renounce domestic life
and receive higher ordination. For my part, I would not mind remaining a
probationer for four years if I could take the vow of renunciation and
receive higher ordination after thoroughly observing how to go about the
life of the sangha and receiving the due approval of its members.
The Buddha said:

I spoke about the rule because there is such a rule, but it is only for evaluating the character of a new convert. [In your case, no probationary
period is needed.]

Poṭṭhapāda was allowed to immediately renounce domestic life and receive
higher ordination, and he carried out the practice of pure and genuine austerity
with ﬁrm determination. Before too long, he directly experienced the termination of the cause of birth and death in the present life; his practice of

139

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

austerity was complete; that which must be done [for religious salvation]
was accomplished; and, having realized the ultimate state of arhatship, for
him there was no more birth.
At that time, having heard the Buddha’s teaching, Poṭṭhapāda was delighted
to receive it and reverentially carried out what the Buddha taught.
[End of Sutra 28: Poṭṭhapāda]

140

Sutra 29

Lohitya

(Dīgha Nikāya 12: Lohicca Suttanta)
Thus have I heard. Once, when the Buddha was visiting the communities of
the country of Kauśala, accompanied by one thousand two hundred and ﬁfty
bhikṣus, he stopped overnight in a śiṃśapā forest north of a brāhmaṇa village
called Sālavatikā. A brāhmaṇa called Lohitya resided in a grove of śāla trees
in the village, which was well populated and prosperous because King Prasenajit had granted it to the brāhmaṇa as a ﬁef, exempting it from taxation.
Lohitya was from a pure family line of seven generations and was never
slighted by anyone in society. He was thoroughly versed in the three ancient
collections of hymns (Vedas) and had detailed knowledge of the various
brāhmaṇa scriptures, as well as a comprehensive command of the subtleties
of secular literature. He was also well trained in reading the physiognomy
of magnanimous personalities, in divining good and bad omens, and in conducting ceremonial proceedings and sacriﬁcial rites.
On that occasion, the brāhmaṇa was duly informed:

The śramaṇa Gautama, son of the Śākya clan, having renounced domestic
life and realized the ultimate spiritual goal, has been visiting the communities of the country of Kauśala and has [now] reached the śiṃśapā forest.
Gautama’s good name is renowned and [his accomplishment] has been
proclaimed everywhere, in all lands under the sky, as worthy of the ten
supreme titles, namely, One Perfected in Practice, One Liberated from
Attachment, Perfectly Enlightened One, and so on. Among all the gods
and humans, as well as all the evil ones and their lord, and the śramaṇas
and brāhmaṇas too, he alone has directly experienced the realization of
enlightenment and teaches others [how to realize it]. When he expounds
on the Dharma his words are good in the beginning, good in the middle,
and good in the end. All the words he utters are invariably endowed with

141

113a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

true meanings and real essences, and are in accord with his practice of
pure and genuine austerity.

“Everyone should visit this sage and pay him their respects,” the brāhmaṇa
said to himself. “I must now go and see him along with the others.”
With these thoughts, the brāhmaṇa left the village and soon arrived at the
śiṃśapā forest. After greeting the Buddha with a bow, he took a seat to one
side. Thereupon, the Buddha taught him the Dharma, imparting instruction,
beneﬁt, and delight.
Having heard the teaching, the brāhmaṇa said, “Sir, may I request that
the World-honored One and the members of the sangha accept my invitation
for almsfood tomorrow.”
The World-honored One remained silent, accepting the invitation. Observing the Buddha’s silence, the brāhmaṇa understood that his invitation had
been accepted. He arose from his seat, circumambulated the Buddha three
times, and then departed for home.
Shortly after leaving the Buddha’s resting place, Lohitya erroneously
thought to himself:
Many śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas acquire precious knowledge and receive
a lofty spiritual experience, but they should not try to teach others about
what they acquired or experienced. If they keep those realizations to themselves there is no need to teach others. It would be like destroying an old
prison only to build another one anew, which would be worthless and wrong.

The brāhmaṇa returned to the śāla grove and prepared various dishes of
food and drink throughout the night. When the meal was ready, he said to
his barber, “Take this message to the śiṃśapā forest and tell the śramaṇa
Gautama, ‘Everything is ready, sir.’”
The barber soon reached the resting place of the Buddha and, after venerating him, conveyed the message. The World-honored One put on his outer
robe, and with almsbowl in hand walked to the śāla grove accompanied by
one thousand two hundred and ﬁfty bhikṣus. On the way, the barber, who
had stayed in close attendance to the Buddha, rearranged his outer clothing
to bare his right elbow and respectfully joined his palms together. Then he
kneeled with his left knee on the ground and said to the Buddha:

142

Sutra 29

Not long after leaving the Buddha’s resting place, the brāhmaṇa Lohitya
had the misconception that śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas who acquire precious
knowledge and receive a lofty spiritual experience should not try to teach
others about what they acquired or experienced. If they keep those realizations to themselves there is no need to teach others. It would be like
destroying an old prison only to build another one anew, which would be
worthless and wrong. May I request that the World-honored One relieve
[the brāhmaṇa Lohitya] of this wrong view.

The Buddha replied, “That is a minor offense that can be removed very
easily.”
With that, the World-honored One arrived at the brāhmaṇa’s house and
took his seat at the place that had been made ready. Then the brāhmaṇa
served the Buddha and the members of the sangha various dishes from his
own hands. When the meal was ﬁnished, the bowls were cleaned and rinsing
water was served. The brāhmaṇa brought out a small cushion and sat down
before the Buddha. The Buddha said to Lohitya:

Not long after you left my place last night, you had the misconception
that śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas who acquire precious knowledge and receive
a lofty spiritual experience should not try to teach others about what they
acquired or experienced. If they keep those realizations to themselves
there is no need to teach others, as the attempt would be worthless and
wrong. Now is this really what you thought?

Lohitya replied, “Yes, it is, sir.”
The Buddha said:

You should not entertain such a mistaken view. Why? Because what you
thought applies only to three kinds of [faulty] teaching. You may ﬁnd
some guidance in these examples.
What are the three kinds of [faulty] teaching? Those who shave their
hair and beard, put on the three robes [of a mendicant], renounce domestic
life, and apply themselves to the practice of austerity should eradicate all
deﬁlements in this life and advance on the path to realizing the insight
that transcends ordinary existence. The ﬁrst example of [faulty] teaching
is by those who neither eradicate deﬁlements in this life nor acquire the

143

113b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

insight that transcends ordinary existence, yet they presume to teach students without having completed their own realization. Students will not
respect such a teacher, nor will they offer him due service. Because of
this, this type of teacher and his students should merely reside together
and rely on someone else’s guidance.
O Lohitya, those students may say, “O teacher, since you have shaved
your hair and beard, donned the three robes, renounced domestic life, and
applied yourself to the practice of austerity, you should have eradicated
all deﬁlements and realized the insight that transcends ordinary existence.
However, you have not been able to do so, and you have been teaching
us without having completed your own realization.”
Thus, those students will not respect [that teacher], nor will they offer
him due service as their teacher, and both teacher and students will merely
be residing together.
The Buddha said:

O Lohitya, this is like destroying an old prison only to build another one
anew. It is a corrupt way to proceed and one should take caution, because
it bears on how the rules of the Vinaya discipline and the precepts of the
wise and saintly disciples are observed in both timing and deportment.

Again, the Buddha said to Lohitya:

The second type of [faulty] teaching is by those who have shaved their
hair and beards, put on the three robes of a mendicant, renounced domestic
life, and applied themselves to the practice of austerity, but they have not
yet been able to eradicate all deﬁlements even though they have managed
to gain some degree of understanding regarding the insight that transcends
ordinary existence. They still teach students without having completed
their own realization. Again, a teacher and students in such a situation
should merely reside together and rely on someone else’s guidance.
O Lohitya, these students may say, “Our teacher has shaved his hair
and beard, donned the three robes, renounced domestic life, and applied
himself to the practice of austerity. He should have eradicated deﬁlements
and realized the insight that transcends ordinary existence, but he has not
been able to eradicate all deﬁlements. Although he has gained some degree

144

Sutra 29

of understanding regarding the insight that transcends ordinary existence,
he has been teaching us without having eradicated all deﬁlements, and
this has caused us to not respect him or offer him due service, and we are
all merely residing together.”

The Buddha said:

This is like walking behind another person and rubbing that person’s
back with your hand. It is a corrupt way to proceed and one should take
caution, because it bears on how the rules of the Vinaya discipline and
the precepts of the wise and saintly disciples are observed in both timing
and deportment.
Again, the Buddha said:

The third type of [faulty] teaching is by those who have shaved their hair
and beards, put on the three robes of a mendicant, renounced domestic
life, and applied themselves to the practice of austerity, but they have not
yet been able to eradicate all deﬁlements even though they have managed
to gain some degree of understanding regarding the insight that transcends
ordinary existence. Still they teach students without having completed
their own realization. The students, however, respect the teacher and offer
him due service, and teacher and students reside together.
O Lohitya, those students may say, “Our teacher has shaved his hair
and beard, donned the three robes, renounced domestic life, and applied
himself to the practice of austerity, and he should have eradicated deﬁlements and realized the insight that transcends ordinary existence, but he
has not been able to eradicate all deﬁlements. Even though he has gained
some degree of understanding regarding the insight that transcends ordinary
existence, he has been teaching us without having eradicated all deﬁlements. However, we still respect him and offer him due service as our
teacher, and thus we reside together.”
The Buddha said:

O Lohitya, this is like neglecting the ﬁeld where one should be sowing
seeds and going off to weed another ﬁeld. It is a corrupt way to proceed
and one should take caution, because it bears on how the rules of the

145

113c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

Vinaya discipline and the precepts of the wise and saintly disciples are
observed in both timing and deportment.
O Lohitya, there is just one supreme World-honored One in this world,
[and not two.] Before his appearance in the world there can be no upheaval.
Why is the World-honored One exceptional and supreme? The Tathāgata
appears in this world as one who is totally free from deﬁlement and perfectly enlightened, and so on. He has acquired the three kinds of supernormal knowledge that annihilates ignorance and allows the illumination
of insight, eliminating all forms of darkness and delusion to realize the
total eradication of deﬁlements and reveal the great light of the Dharma.
Why? Because this fundamental realization can only be achieved through
constant endeavor without any slackening, and through freedom from all
worldly mentality, practice in seclusion, diligent mindfulness, and mental
concentration. O Lohitya, the truth is that there can be no upheaveal in
this world without the appearance of the supreme World-honored One.
O Lohitya, there are four results (phala) in the life of a śramaṇa. What
are the four? They are the saintly states of the stream-enterer (srotaāppana), once-returner (sakṛdāgāmin), nonreturner (anāgāmin), and arhat.
What do you think, O Lohitya? Suppose that one could realize the fruits
of the four saintly states by listening to a discourse on the Dharma; and
suppose also that someone interrupts the discourse, saying “Stop this talk
about the Dharma,” and the teacher obeys and stops teaching. Would anyone listening to the discourse attain the intended result?

Lohitya answered, “No, sir.”
[The Buddha] asked again, “Without attaining the result, can one attain
rebirth in heaven?”
Lohitya answered, “No, sir.”
[The Buddha] asked again:

So the person who stops the teacher’s discourse on the Dharma cannot
attain the result, and his [or her] rebirth in heaven becomes impossible.
Would such a mind be considered good or evil?

Lohitya answered “Sir, it is an evil mind.”
The Buddha asked again, “When someone with a mind that is not good
is reborn, is it into a good destiny or an evil one?”
146

Sutra 29

Lohitya answered, “He will be born into an evil course of life, sir.”
[The Buddha continued:]

O Lohitya, it it as if someone were to say to King Prasenajit, “The king
should alone enjoy all the wealth of the lands and states that he rules, and
should not share any of it with others.” What do you think, O Lohitya?
If the king agreed with this advice he would cut off all the grants he has
made to others, wouldn’t he?

Lohitya answered, “Yes, sir. He would do that.”
[The Buddha asked again,] “Would a mind that would terminate all grants
and gifts to others be regarded as a good mind or an evil one?”
Lohitya answered, “It is a mind that is up to no good, sir.”
[The Buddha] asked again, “With a mind that is not good, would one be
born into a good destiny or an evil one?”
Lohitya answered, “They will be born into an evil course of life, sir.”
The Buddha said to Lohitya:

It is just the same with someone who stops his teacher’s discourse on the
Dharma, especially when those who are listening to the teaching are
intended to realize the four results of the life of a śramaṇa. Now, if someone
obstructs a teacher’s discourse by saying “Stop this talk about the Dharma,”
and the teacher obeys and stops teaching, does anyone listening to the
discourse attain the intended result?

Lohitya answered, “No, sir.”
[The Buddha] asked again, “Without attaining the result, can one attain
rebirth in heaven?”
Lohitya answered, “No, sir.”
[The Buddha] asked again:
So the person who stops the teacher’s discourse on the Dharma cannot
attain the result and his rebirth in heaven becomes impossible. Would
such a mind be considered good or evil?

Lohitya answered, “Sir, it is an evil mind.”
The Buddha asked again, “When someone with a mind that is not good
is reborn, is it into a good destiny or an evil one?”

147

114a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

Lohitya answered, “He will be born into an evil course of life, sir.”
[The Buddha continued:]

O Lohitya, if someone says to you, “The property that belongs to the
village of Sālavatikā is your ﬁef [granted by the king]. You alone should
enjoy it, as it is only for your own use and not for others. What good does
it do to give anything to others?” What do you think, O Lohitya? If you
were to follow this advice you would stop all gifts and payments to others,
wouldn’t you?

[Lohitya] replied, “Yes, I would.”
[The Buddha] asked again, “When someone advises another person to
terminate all gifts and payments to others, is that a good or evil mind?”
[Lohitya] replied, “It is an evil mind, sir.”
[The Buddha] asked again, “With a mind that is not good, would one be
born into a good destiny or an evil one?”
Lohitya answered, “They will be born into an evil course of life, sir.”
[The Buddha continued:]
It is just the same with anyone who stops the discourse of a Dharma
teacher, especially when there are others listening to the discourse in order
to attain the fruit of the four saintly states. If the teacher allows the disruption [and stops the discourse], will the listeners reach the goal of the
four saintly states?

[Lohitya] replied, “No, sir.”
[The Buddha] asked again, “If the listeners cannot attain the fruit of the
saintly states, will they be reborn in heaven?”
[Lohitya] replied, “No, sir.”
[The Buddha] asked again, “When someone stops a Dharma discourse
and prevents others from attaining the fruit of the saintly states, and thus
from rebirth in heaven, is that a good or evil mind?”
[Lohitya] replied, “An evil mind, sir.”
[The Buddha] asked again, “With a mind that is not good, would one be
born into a good destiny or an evil one?”
Lohitya answered, “He will be born into an evil course of life, sir.”

148

Sutra 29

At that moment, the brāhmaṇa said to the Buddha:

O World-honored One, I take my refuge in the Buddha, Dharma, and
Sangha. As I wish to become a lay devotee, may Your Reverence accept
me as a lay devotee in the right Dharma. From this moment until the dissolution of the body at the end of life, I will refrain from taking life, I will
refrain from taking what is not given, I will refrain from indulging in
sexual pleasure, I will refrain from speaking falsehoods, and I will refrain
from ingesting intoxicants.

The Buddha completed his discourse on the Dharma. The brāhmaṇa
Lohitya, having heard the Buddha’s teaching, was delighted to receive it and
reverentially carried out what the Buddha taught.
[End of Sutra 29: Lohitya]

149

114b

Sutra 30

A Buddhist Cosmology

(No Parallel in Dīgha Nikāya)
Article 1: The Land of
Jambudvīpa

Thus have I heard. Once, when the Buddha was visiting the city of Śrāvastī,
accompanied by one thousand two hundred and ﬁfty bhikṣus, he stayed at
the Kareri-kuṭikā cloister of Anāthapiṇḍika Monastery in Prince Jeta’s Grove.
After the morning almsround a few of the bhikṣus met in the lecture hall to
talk, saying:

Venerables, it is beyond our imagining how and why this world could be
slated for destruction and then reconstruction. What will become of the
myriad homes of sentient beings?”

The World-honored One was meditating in seclusion but through his supernormal power of crystal-clear hearing he overheard the discussion among
the bhikṣus gathered in the lecture hall. He immediately got up from his seat
in the Kareri-kuṭikā cloister, went to the lecture hall, and took his place.
Though he already knew [what they had been talking about], the World-honored One asked, “O bhikṣus, what have you been discussing?”
The bhikṣus recounted their discussion to the Buddha:

Sir, we were meeting after the day’s meal and someone asked, “Venerables,
it is beyond our imagining how this world could be slated for destruction
and then recreation. What will become of the myriad homes of sentient
beings?”
At that, the World-honored One said:

Very good, very good. Those who renounce domestic life take up two
kinds of practice: ﬁrst, silent introspection as practiced by the wise and

151

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

saintly disciples, and second, analysis of religious doctrine. As you have
met in this hall, you must not only follow the meditation practice of the
wise and saintly disciples but also discuss and debate doctrinal issues. O
bhikṣus, would you like to hear the Tathāgata’s recollection of the creation
and destruction of this world and the fate of the lands and communities
where sentient beings reside?

The bhikṣus replied, “Yes, O World-honored One. We are eager to hear
your account. Anything you reveal will be gratefully received and we shall
observe it carefully.”
The Buddha said, “Listen attentively, you must retain what I say and keep
it in mind. I will give you the very core of the matter.”
With that, the Buddha began his discourse:

114c

The sun and moon regularly pass over the four continents and illuminate
them, [as we have always experienced]. Yet there are a thousand worlds
just like this [in the universe]. In these worlds there are a thousand suns
and moons passing over a thousand lofty Mount Sumerus, as well as four
thousand smaller lands and four thousand larger lands, four thousand
oceans and four thousand greater oceans, four thousand nāgas (dragons)
and four thousand greater nāgas, four thousand garuḍas (mythological
bird) and four thousand greater garuḍas, four thousand evil paths and
four thousand greater evil paths, four thousand kings and four thousand
greater kings, and seven thousand great trees, eight thousand great hells,
ten thousand great mountains, a thousand lords of Yama, a thousand appearances of the four guardian gods, a thousand occurrences of the Heaven of
the Thirty-three Gods (Trāyastriṃśa), a thousand Yama Heavens, a thousand
Tuṣita Heavens, a thousand Nirmāṇarati Heavens, where the residents
enjoy pleasures of their own creation, a thousand Paranirmitavaśavartin
Heavens, where the inhabitants enjoy pleasures created by others, and a
thousand Brahmā Heavens. Together, all these make up the small universe,
which consists of a thousand such worlds.
[Now,] there is also a larger universe, consisting of a thousand of these
small universes, called the middle universe. [In addition,] there is a great
universe that consists of a thousand middle universes. This is called the
triple thousand–great universe (sanqian taqian shijie). All of the great

152

Sutra 30

universe [that comprises many thousands of middle and small universes]
undergoes the cycle of creation and destruction, and each locality where
sentient beings reside is called a buddha land (buddha-kṣetra).

The Buddha continued:

The depth of this great earth is one hundred and sixty-eight thousand
yojanas23 and its circumference is beyond measure. The earth rests on a
layer of water three thousand and thirty yojanas deep, whose circumference
is immeasurable. The water rides over a layer of airy wind that is six thousand and forty yojanas deep with an immeasurable circumference. O
bhikṣus, the depth of the great ocean is eighty-four thousand yojanas and
its circumference is immeasurable. The part of Mount Sumeru that is submerged in the ocean is eighty-four thousand yojanas deep, and the part
that rises above the ocean’s surface into the atmosphere is eighty-four
thousand yojanas high. The base of the mountain adheres to a foundation
of very hard earth. On the mountain’s summit no rough or uneven terrain
can be found and many varieties of trees grow, emitting exquisite fragrance
that permeates the forest. A number of wise and saintly hermits live in
this forest, which is [also] the abode of the great god Yama. A layer of
pure gold sand runs through the foundation of the mountain, and on its
four sides, rising as high as seven hundred yojanas, are hillocks in the
variegated hues of seven kinds of precious stones, which gradually fall
away in a long curve to reveal the expanse of the ocean beyond.
The pathway on Mount Sumeru is a stairway strewn with seven precious
stones. At its broadest, on the lower slope of the mountain, it is sixty
yojanas wide. On both sides of the pathway are sevenfold walls made of
precious stones, embellished with seven railings, seven ornamental nets,
and seven lines of trees. The golden wall is endowed with silver gates,
the silver wall with golden gates, the quartz wall with lapis gates, the lapis
wall with quartz gates, the ruby wall with agate gates, the agate wall with
ruby gates, and the emerald wall with gates decorated with many kinds
of precious stones. The railings are similarly decorated: the golden railing
is ornamented with ropes made of silver, the silver railing with ropes made
of gold, the quartz railing with ropes made of lapis, the lapis railing with
ropes made of quartz, the ruby railing with ropes made of agate, the agate

153

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

115a

railing with ropes made of rubies, and the emerald railing with a variety
of precious stones. Over these railings are hung decorative nets strung
with various ornaments. From the golden net hangs a silver bell; from the
silver net hangs a golden bell; from the lapis net hangs a quartz bell; from
the quartz net hangs a lapis bell; from the ruby net hangs an agate bell;
from the agate net hangs a ruby bell; and from the emerald net hangs a
bell inlaid with various precious stones.
The golden trees have golden trunks and branches and silver ﬂowers
and fruit. The silver trees have silver trunks and branches and golden
ﬂowers and fruit. The quartz trees have quartz trunks and branches and
lapis ﬂowers and leaves, while the lapis trees have lapis trunks and branches
and quartz ﬂowers and leaves. The ruby trees have ruby trunks and
branches and agate ﬂowers and leaves, while the agate trees have agate
trunks and branches and ﬂowers and leaves made of rubies. The emerald
trees have emerald trunks and branches and ﬂowers and leaves made of
a variety of precious stones.
Each of the seven walls has four gates, protected by barriers. Each wall,
topped with a pavilion and veranda, encloses a bathing pond and pleasure
garden ﬁlled with foliage and ﬂowers made of precious treasures. The trees
standing in lines are also made of precious treasures, and bear ﬂowers and
fruit in abundance. Exquisite fragrance arises in all directions, pleasing everyone. Wild ducks and hawks; mandarin ducks, both male and female; and a
host of innumerable rare birds sing harmoniously together.
The pathway on the middle slope of Mount Sumeru is forty yojanas
wide. Here too, on both sides, are sevenfold walls made of precious stones,
embellished with seven railings, seven ornamental nets, seven lines of
trees, and so on, with innumerable rare birds singing harmoniously together,
just as below. On the upper slope the pathway is twenty yojanas wide, with
sevenfold walls made of precious stones on either side, embellished with
seven railings, seven ornamental nets, seven lines of trees, and so on, with
innumerable rare birds singing harmoniously together, just as below.
The Buddha [continued] his discourse to the bhikṣus:

Along the pathway on the lower slope lives a bird called the garuḍa. On
the middle slope lives a deity called Mālādhāra, and on the upper slope

154

Sutra 30

lives the deity Sadāmatta. The foothills [around the mountain] are fortytwo thousand yojanas high, and the palaces of the four guardian gods
[located] on them are ringed by sevenfold walls embellished with seven
railings, seven ornamental nets, and seven lines of trees adorned with
bells made of precious stones, and so on, with innumerable rare birds
singing harmoniously together, just as before.
On top of Mount Sumeru are the palaces of the thirty-three gods, also
ringed by sevenfold walls embellished with seven railings, seven ornamental nets, and seven lines of trees, with golden walls and silver gates,
and silver walls and golden gates, and so on, with innumerable rare birds
singing harmoniously together, just as before. Beyond this, one yojana
higher, is the palace of the god Yama. Beyond this, one yojana higher, is
the palace of the gods of Tuṣita Heaven. Beyond this, one yojana higher,
is the palace of Nirmāṇarati Heaven. Beyond this, one yojana higher, is
the palace of Paranirmitavaśavartin Heaven. Beyond this, one yojana
higher, is the palace of Brahmakāyika Heaven.
Between Paranirmitavaśavartin Heaven and Brahmakāyika Heaven is
the palace of the lord of the evil ones, Māra, an area of sixty thousand
yojanas surrounded by sevenfold walls with seven railings, seven ornamental nets, and seven lines of trees, and so on, with innumerable birds
singing harmoniously together, just as before.
Beyond the Brahmakāyika Heaven, one yojana higher, is the palace of
Ābhāsvara Heaven. Beyond this, one yojana higher, is the palace of Śubhakṛtsna Heaven. Beyond this, one yojana higher, is the palace of Anabhraka
Heaven. Beyond this, one yojana higher, is the palace of Puṇyaprasava
Heaven. Beyond this, one yojana higher, is the palace of Asaṃjñisattva
Heaven. Beyond this, one yojana higher, is the palace of Bṛhatphala Heaven.
Beyond this, one yojana higher, is the palace of Abṛha Heaven. Beyond
this, one yojana higher, is the palace of Atapa Heaven. Beyond this, one
yojana higher, is the palace of Sudṛśa Heaven. Beyond this, one yojana
higher, is the palace of Sudarśana Heaven. Beyond this, one yojana higher,
is the palace of Akaniṣṭha Heaven. Beyond this, one yojana higher, are the
gods of Ākāśānantyāyatana Heaven, the gods of Vijñānānantyāyatana
Heaven, the gods of Ākiṃcanyāyatana Heaven, and the gods of
Naivasaṃjñānāsaṃjñāyātana Heaven. All of this constitutes the abodes of

155

115b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

sentient beings who are conﬁned to their respective realms. All sentient
beings are inherently subject to the law of birth, old age, illness, and death,
they invariably acquire a conﬁguration of the ﬁve psychophysical elements,
and thus they receive nothing more nor less than an existential becoming.
The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

115c

To the north of Mount Sumeru is a land called Uttarakuru, a square area
measuring ten thousand yojanas on each side. The faces of the people
there also are square, reﬂecting the shape of their land. To the east of
Mount Sumeru is a land called Pūrvavideha, which is round with a radius
of nine thousand yojana. The faces of the people there also are round,
reﬂecting the form of their land. To the west of Mount Sumeru is a land
called Aparagodānīya, shaped like a half moon, with a radius of eight
thousand yojana. The faces of the people there similarly reﬂect the form
of their land. To the south of Mount Sumeru is a land called Jambudvīpa,
which is narrower in the south and broad and open in the north, measuring
seven thousand yojanas in length and breadth. The faces of the people of
Jambudvīpa also reﬂect the form of their land. In the northern sky above
Mount Sumeru a golden source of light illuminates the northern region.
In the eastern sky above Mount Sumeru a silvery source of light illuminates
the eastern region. In the western sky above Mount Sumeru a quartz source
of light illuminates the western region. In the southern sky above Mount
Sumeru a source of light made of lapis illuminates the southern region.
In the northern land of Uttarakuru there is a great tree called Mango,
with a diameter of seven yojanas, rising to a height of one hundred yojanas,
whose branches and leaves spread out in all directions to a distance of ﬁfty
yojanas. In the eastern land of Pūrvavideha there is a great tree called Jielanfou, with a diameter of seven yojanas, a height of one hundred yojanas,
and branches and leaves spreading out in all directions to a distance of ﬁfty
yojanas. In the western land of Aparagodānīya there is a great tree called
Jinti, with a diameter of seven yojanas, a height of one hundred yojanas,
and branches and leaves spreading out in all directions to a distance of ﬁfty
yojanas. Under this tree there is a rock tower one yojana high, on which is
carved an image of cattle. In the southern land of Jambudvīpa there is a
great tree called Jambu, with a diameter of seven yojanas, a height of one

156

Sutra 30

hundred yojanas, and branches and leaves spreading out in all directions
to a distance of ﬁfty yojanas. The trees of the garuḍa king and of the nāga
king are called Julishanpoluo, and each has a diameter of seven yojanas, a
height of one hundred yojanas, and branches and leaves spreading in all
directions to a distance of ﬁfty yojanas. The asura king also has a tree,
called Shanhua, with a diameter of seven yojanas, a height of one hundred
yojanas, and branches and leaves spreading in all directions to a distance
of ﬁfty yojanas. The tree in Trāyastriṃśa Heaven is called Zhoudu, with a
diameter of seven yojanas, a height of one hundred yojanas, and branches
and leaves spreading out in all directions to a distance of ﬁfty yojanas.
Near Mount Sumeru there is a mountain called Qutoluo, whose height,
length, and breadth all measure forty-two thousand yojanas. The foothills
of this mountain extend far and wide and glitter with the variegated colors
produced by the seven kinds of treasure. This mountain is located at a
distance of eighty-four thousand yojanas from Mount Sumeru, and the
area between them is ﬁlled with many water lilies, including blue (utpala),
pink (padma), red (kumuda), and white (puṇḍarīka) varieties, with reeds,
pine trees, and bamboo growing among them, all ﬁlling the air with exquisite fragrance.
Not far from this mountain is another mountain, called Yishatoluo,
whose height, length, and breadth all measure twenty-one thousand
yojanas. The foothills of this mountain also extend far and wide and glitter
with the variegated colors produced by the seven kinds of treasure. This
mountain is located at a distance of forty-two thousand yojanas from
Mount Qu, and the area between them is ﬁlled with many water lilies,
including blue, pink, red, and white varieties, with reeds, pine trees, and
bamboo growing among them, all ﬁlling the air with exquisite fragrance.
Not far from this mountain is another mountain, called Shuchentoluo,
with a height of one thousand yojanas and a length and breadth of two
thousand yojanas. The foothills of this mountain also extend far and wide
and glitter with the variegated colors produced by the seven kinds of treasure. This mountain is located at a distance of twenty-one thousand yojanas
from Mount Yisha, and the area between them is ﬁlled with four varieties
of water lilies, with reeds, pine trees, and bamboo growing among them,
all ﬁlling the air with exquisite fragrance.

157

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

116a

Not far from this mountain is another mountain, called Sudarśana, with
a height of six thousand yojanas and a length and breadth of six thousand
yojanas. The foothills of this mountain also extend far and wide and glitter
with the variegated colors produced by the seven kinds of treasure. This
mountain is located at a distance of twelve thousand yojanas from Mount
Shuchen, and the area between them is ﬁlled with four varieties of water
lilies, with reeds, pine trees, and bamboo growing among them, all ﬁlling
the air with exquisite fragrance.
Not far from this mountain is another mountain, called Mashishang,
with a height of three thousand yojanas and a length and breadth of three
thousand yojanas. The foothills of this mountain also extend far and wide
and glitter with the variegated colors produced by the seven kinds of treasure. This mountain is located at a distance of sixty thousand yojanas from
Mount Sudarśana, and the area between them is ﬁlled with four varieties
of water lilies, with reeds, pine trees, and bamboo growing among them,
all ﬁlling the air with exquisite fragrance.
Not far from this mountain is another mountain, called Nimintoluo,
with a height of twelve hundred yojanas and a length and breadth of twelve
hundred yojanas. The foothills of this mountain also extend far and wide
and glitter with the variegated colors produced by the seven kinds of treasure. This mountain is located at a distance of three thousand yojanas from
Mount Mashi, and the area between them is ﬁlled with four varieties of
water lilies, with reeds, pine trees, and bamboo growing among them, all
ﬁlling the air with exquisite fragrance.
Not far from this mountain is another mountain, called Diaofu, with a
height of six hundred yojanas and a length and breadth of six hundred
yojanas. The foothills of this mountain also extend far and wide and glitter
with the variegated colors produced by the seven kinds of treasure. This
mountain is located at a distance of twelve hundred yojanas from Mount
Nimin, and the area between them is ﬁlled with four varieties of water
lilies, with reeds, pine trees, and bamboo growing among them, all ﬁlling
the air with exquisite fragrance.
Not far from this mountain is another mountain, called Jingangwei,
with a height of three hundred yojanas and a length and breadth of three
hundred yojanas. The foothills of this mountain also extend far and wide

158

Sutra 30

and glitter with the variegated colors produced by the seven kinds of treasure. This mountain is located at a distance of six hundred yojanas from
Mount Diaofu, and the area between them is ﬁlled with four varieties of
water lilies, with reeds, pine trees, and bamboo growing among them, all
ﬁlling the air with exquisite fragrance.
Not far from this mountain is a great ocean. On the northern shore of
this ocean is a great tree called Jambu, with a diameter of seven yojanas,
rising to a height of a hundred yojanas, with branches and leaves spreading
out in all directions to a distance of ﬁfty yojanas. There is a [vast] expanse
of land in the neighborhood of this tree, where there are groves of [many]
kinds of trees, such as mango trees spreading over a length and breadth
of ﬁfty yojanas; yenpo trees spreading over a length and breadth of ﬁfty
yojanas; śāla trees spreading over a length and breadth of ﬁfty yojanas;
tāla (palm) trees spreading over a length and breadth of ﬁfty yojanas;
nadoluo trees spreading over a length and breadth of ﬁfty yojanas; weinan
trees spreading over a length and breadth of ﬁfty yojanas; weinü trees
spreading over a length and breadth of ﬁfty yojanas; nannü trees spreading
over a length and breadth of ﬁfty yojanas; sanna trees spreading over a
length and breadth of ﬁfty yojanas; sandalwood trees spreading over a
length and breadth of ﬁfty yojanas; quchouluo trees spreading over a
length and breadth of ﬁfty yojanas; bonapoluo trees spreading over a
length and breadth of ﬁfty yojanas; piluo trees spreading over a length
and breadth of ﬁfty yojanas; xiangna trees spreading over a length and
breadth of ﬁfty yojanas; weili trees spreading over a length and breadth
of ﬁfty yojanas; anshiliu trees spreading over a length and breadth of ﬁfty
yojanas; weigan trees spreading over a length and breadth of ﬁfty yojanas;
helilei trees spreading over a length and breadth of ﬁfty yojanas; pixilei
trees spreading over a length and breadth of ﬁfty yojanas; amolei trees
spreading over a length and breadth of ﬁfty yojanas; and na trees spreading
over a length and breadth of ﬁfty yojanas.
[There are also] ganzhe (sugar cane) spreading over a length and breadth
of ﬁfty yojanas; reeds spreading over a length and breadth of ﬁfty yojanas;
bamboo spreading over a length and breadth of ﬁfty yojanas; śāla trees
spreading over a length and breadth of ﬁfty yojanas; mugua plants spreading over a length and breadth of ﬁfty yojanas; damugua plants spreading

159

116b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

116c

over a length and breadth of ﬁfty yojanas; jietuo ﬂower trees spreading
over a length and breadth of ﬁfty yojanas; zhanpo trees spreading over a
length and breadth of ﬁfty yojanas; poluoluo trees spreading over a length
and breadth of ﬁfty yojanas; xiumona trees spreading over a length and
breadth of ﬁfty yojanas; poshi trees spreading over a length and breadth
of ﬁfty yojanas; duoluoli trees spreading over a length and breadth of ﬁfty
yojanas; jiaya trees spreading over a length and breadth of ﬁfty yojanas;
and grape trees spreading over a length and breadth of ﬁfty yojanas.
Beyond these many kinds of groves and far out to the horizon, the
ground is covered by innumerable ponds, each spreading over a length
and breadth of ﬁfty yojanas and ﬁlled with pink, red, and white lotus blossoms, with poisonous snakes among them. Beyond these ponds lies a vast
expanse consisting of a great lake called Udyāna (Youzhanna). Under the
surface of the water in this lake is the passageway used by the cakravartin
(universal ruler), measuring twelve yojanas wide. On both sides of this
road are sevenfold walls embellished with seven railings, seven ornamental
nets, and seven lines of trees, all made from the seven kinds of treasure.
When the cakravartin appears in the land of Jambudvīpa the water automatically recedes so that the expanse of the passageway stands [ready to
be used].
Not far from this lake is a mountain called Youzhan. The mountain is
beautiful and ﬁlled with luxuriant vegetation, abundant ﬂowers and fruit,
and much exquisite fragrance. All the different kinds of birds and animals,
without exception, live here. Not far from Mount Youzhan is another
mountain, called Suvarṇavarṇa (“Golden Wall”), which has eighty thousand
caves in which eighty thousand royal elephants reside. These elephants
have white hides and multicolored heads, and each has six tusks and gold
ﬁllings in their teeth.
Beyond this mountain is another mountain, called Himalaya (“Snow
Mountain”), ﬁve hundred yojanas in length and breadth, which plunges
into the sea along its eastern and western edges to a depth of ﬁve hundred
yojanas. Within the interior of this snowy mountain is a treasure mountain
twenty yojanas high, as well as [several] hills that are a hundred yojanas
high. On top of the snowy mountain is a lake known as Anavatapta, with
a length and breadth of ﬁfty yojanas, and spotlessly clean, transparent,

160

Sutra 30

and pure water. Leading into [the lake] are stone terraces made from the
seven kinds of treasure, protected by sevenfold walls embellished with
seven railings, seven ornamental nets, and seven lines of trees, all shining
with the variegated colors of the seven kinds of treasure.
The railings are multihued: the golden railing is decorated with silver
ropes, the silver railing with golden ropes, the quartz railing with lapis
ropes, the lapis railing with quartz ropes, the ruby railing with agate ropes,
the agate railing with ropes of rubies, and the emerald railing with ropes
of various precious stones. Ornamental nets are draped over these railings;
the golden net has a pendant silver bell, the silver net has a golden bell,
the lapis net has a quartz bell, the quartz net has a lapis bell, the ruby net
has an agate bell, the agate net has a ruby bell, and the net made of emeralds
has a bell inlaid with various precious stones.
The golden tāla tree has golden roots and branches and silver leaves,
ﬂowers, and fruit. The silver tāla tree has silver roots and branches and
golden leaves, ﬂowers, and fruit. The quartz tree has quartz roots and
branches and lapis leaves, ﬂowers, and fruit, while the lapis tree has lapis
roots and branches and quartz leaves, ﬂowers, and fruit. The ruby tree has
ruby roots and branches and agate leaves, ﬂowers, and fruit, while the
agate tree has agate roots and branches and ruby ﬂowers, leaves, and fruit,
and the emerald tree has emerald roots and branches and leaves, ﬂowers,
and fruit made of various precious stones. Around Anavatapta Lake are
pleasant pavilions amid bathing ponds, many kinds of ﬂowers blooming
in thick layers, and many different kinds of ﬂourishing trees with distinctive
leaves, ﬂowers, and fruit, all ﬁlling the air with exquisite fragrance, and
many different kinds of rare birds singing harmoniously together.
The bottom of Anavatapta Lake is golden sand. Stairways made from
the seven kinds of treasure enter the four sides of the lake: the golden
stairway is lined with silver ropes, the silver stairway is lined with golden
ropes, the lapis stairway is lined with quartz ropes, the quartz stairway is
lined with lapis ropes, the agate stairway is lined with ruby ropes, the
ruby stairway is lined with agate ropes, and the emerald stairway is lined
with ropes made of various precious stones. All around the lake are [continuous] railings; the four kinds of water lilies show their blue, yellow,
red, and white blossoms, and their variegated colors compose the image

161

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

117a

of a wheel, with the roots forming the center. The roots emit sap as white
as milk and sweet as honey. Again, around the lake are pleasant pavilions
set amid bathing ponds and pleasure gardens, with many kinds of ﬂowers
blooming in thick layers, and many different kinds of trees with distinctive
leaves, ﬂowers, and fruit.
To the east of Anavatapta Lake the Ganges River ﬂows from the mouth
of a cow, and with its ﬁve hundred tributaries enters the eastern sea. To
the south of the lake the Indus River ﬂows from the mouth of a lion, and
with its ﬁve hundred tributaries enters the southern sea. To the west of the
lake the Pochahe River ﬂows from the mouth of a horse, and with its ﬁve
hundred tributaries enters the western sea. To the north of the lake the
Situohe River ﬂows from the mouth of an elephant, and with its ﬁve hundred
tributaries enters the northern sea. In Anavatapta Palace there is a [pentagonal] pavilion with ﬁve pillars, where the nāga king has always lived.

The Buddha continued:

Why is [the lake] called Anavatapta? What does this name mean? Every
nāga king in Jambudvīpa suffers from three kinds of trouble, except for
the nāga king of this lake, who alone does not suffer from any trouble.
What are the three? First, the nāga kings in the [southern] land of Jambudvīpa suffer from hot wind and sand that burns their skin and ﬂesh, even
down to the bone and marrow, when it comes into contact with their bodies,
causing excruciating pain. Only the nāga king of Anavatapta Lake has
no trouble of this kind. Second, evil winds sometimes tear through the
palaces of the nāga kings, stripping away their ﬁne clothing and exposing
their naked bodies, to their embarrassment. Only the nāga king of Anavatapta Lake has no trouble of this kind. Third, the nāga kings constantly
fear the giant garuḍa’s predatory raids on their palaces at times when they
are vulnerable; their horror at the thought of being seized and eaten by
this bird is most intense, leaving them in anguish. Only the nāga king of
Anavatapta Lake has no trouble of this kind, because garuḍas that try to
enter the lake all perish. Hence, the lake is called Anavatapta, which in
Chinese means “absence of feverish agony.”
The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

162

Sutra 30

To the right of Snow Mountain is a city called Vaiśālī, and there are seven
dark hills north of this city. Lying north of these hills is Fragrant Mountain,
where the sounds of music, song, and dance are always heard. There are
two caves in that mountain; one is called Noon and the other Forenoon,
and they have been furnished with seven heavenly treasures. [The air in
the caves is] soft and gentle, fragrant and pure, like the touch of a heavenly
garment. The master of music, king of all gandharva musicians, accompanied by an orchestra of ﬁve hundred [musicians], resides in these caves.
To the north of the two caves is the king of śāla trees, called Shanju,
surrounded by eight thousand trees spreading out in all directions. Under
this majestic śāla tree the king of the royal elephants, also called Shanju,
abides. His powerful body is white and he can ﬂy through the air and go
everywhere. [When he appears] the hairs on his ruddy head shine with
variegated colors, and his golden teeth contrast with his six tusks. This
[elephant] king has a retinue of eight thousand royal elephants, who reside
in the forest of eight thousand trees.
To the north of Shanju is a grand bathing pond called Motuoyan, ﬁfty
yojanas long and wide, around which eight thousand smaller ponds are
arranged in a circle. The water in the pond is spotlessly clean and cool.
[The pond] is surrounded by stone terraces made from the seven kinds of
treasure, with seven railings, seven ornamental nets, and seven lines of
trees, all made from the seven kinds of treasure. The gold railing is ornamented with silver ropes, the silver railing with golden ropes, the quartz
railing with lapis ropes, the lapis railing with quartz ropes, the ruby railing
with agate ropes, the agate railing with ropes made of rubies, and the
emerald railing with ropes made of various precious stones. Ornamental
nets adorned with a variety of bells hang over the railings. The gold net
has a pendant silver bell, the silver net has a golden bell, the lapis net has
a quartz bell, the quartz net has a lapis bell, the ruby net has an agate bell,
the agate net has a ruby bell, and the emerald net has a bell inlaid with
various precious stones.
The gold trees have golden roots and branches and silver leaves, ﬂowers,
and fruit. The silver tree has silver roots and branches and golden leaves,
ﬂowers, and fruit. The quartz tree has quartz roots and branches and lapis
leaves, ﬂowers, and fruit, while the lapis tree has lapis roots and branches

163

117b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

117c

and quartz leaves, ﬂowers, and fruit. The ruby tree has ruby roots and
branches and agate leaves, ﬂowers, and fruit, while the agate tree has
agate roots and branches and ruby leaves, ﬂowers, and fruit. The emerald
tree has emerald roots and branches and leaves, ﬂowers, and fruit made
of various precious stones.
At the bottom of Anavatapta Lake is golden sand. Stairways made
from the seven kinds of treasure enter the four sides of the lake: the golden
stairway is lined with silver ropes, the silver stairway with golden ropes,
the lapis stairway with quartz ropes, the quartz stairway with lapis ropes,
the agate stairway with ruby ropes, the ruby stairway with agate ropes,
and the emerald stairway with ropes made of various precious stones. All
around the lake are [continuous] railings; the four kinds of water lilies
show their blue, yellow, red, and white blossoms, and their variegated
colors compose the image of a wheel, with the roots forming the center.
The roots emit sap as white as milk and sweet as honey. Again, around
the lake are pleasant pavilions set amid bathing ponds and pleasure gardens
with many kinds of ﬂowers blooming in thick layers and cool shade provided by many different kinds of trees with distinctive leaves, ﬂowers,
and fruit, and innumerable rare birds singing harmoniously together.
The royal elephant king Shanju, wishing to visit the great pond to bathe
and play, extends that wish to his retinue, and eight thousand elephants
in turn become aware of the thought, “King Shanju is thinking of us; we
need to see him.” So the eight thousand elephants array themselves before
their king. The elephant king then walks to Motuoyan Pond accompanied
by his retinue of eight thousand. Some hold a canopy over the king to
shade him, while others cool him with a fan, and still others play music
to lead the procession. At the pond, the elephant king Shanju regally enters
the water and, together with his company, enjoys a performance of royal
music and dance. Some of the elephants wash his trunk while others
cleanse his mouth, head, tusks, ears, stomach, back, tail, and feet. Some
go off to pluck the roots of ﬂowers, which they wash and offer to the king
to eat. Others gather ﬂowers and scatter them over the king.
The elephant king Shanju, having bathed and fed and enjoyed the royal
entertainment with his company, now leaves the water and stands on the
bank, facing the tree called Shanju, his abode. All eight thousand elephants

164

Sutra 30

enter the pond to bathe, feed, and frolic with each other before lining up
to follow their king. The elephant king, accompanied by attendants before
and after, then returns to the tree called Shanju. As before, some elephants
hold a canopy to shade the king, while others cool him with a fan, and still
others play music to lead the procession. Returning to the tree, the elephant
king now sits, lies down, or walks about as he pleases. The other elephants
retire to their respective trees to sit, lie down, or walk about as they please.
Among those eight thousand trees, some are as large as eight xin,24
while others measure ten to ﬁfteen xin, but only the śāla tree of the elephant
king Shanju is as large as sixteen xin. When the leaves of the eight thousand
śāla trees fall to the ground, the wind rises and carries them outside the
forest. And when the eight thousand elephants urinate and excrete, ghostly
yakṣas carry those deposits out of the forest.

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

The elephant king Shanju has indeed gained meritorious blessings to this
extraordinary degree. Even though it is only an animal, even an elephant is
capable of receiving such uncommon rewards because of its [previous] merit.

Article 2: The Land
of Uttarakuru

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

In the land of Uttarakuru there are many mountains, and many pleasure
gardens with pavilions and bathing ponds alongside. Flowers bloom in
profusion and the trees and plants, thriving in the cool, clean air, produce
abundant fruit and ﬂowers. Among them are many varieties of birds,
singing harmoniously together. Many streams ﬂow gently through these
mountains without strong currents, and myriad ﬂowers hang down from
the bank to the water’s surface as the river ﬂows calmly and expansively.
Trees shade both banks of the stream, their branches heavy with fruit and
ﬂowers. The ground is covered with soft grass, moistened by dew so that
[the blades of grass] all turn to the right with the softness of a heavenly
garment, with a sheen like the colors of a hummingbird and a delicate
scent like jasmine (poshijia). When you step on the grass your foot sinks

165

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

118a

down about four inches and the grass springs back after you lift your foot.
Yet the ground has no unseen bumps or depressions and is as level as the
surface of the palm of your hand.
O bhikṣus, on each of the four sides of the land of Uttarakuru there is
an Anavatapta Lake. Each lake is one hundred yojanas long and wide,
with spotlessly clean, transparent, and pure water. The lakes are surrounded
by stone terraces made from the seven kinds of treasure, and so on, with
innumerable rare birds singing harmoniously together. The features of
these lakes are indeed no different than those of the grand pond of
Motuoyan. From the four lakes issue four rivers, each ten yojanas in
breadth, ﬂowing gently with no turbulence. Myriad ﬂowers reach down
from the bank as the river ﬂows by, calmly and expansively. Both the
riverbanks are shaded by trees, their branches heavy with fruit and ﬂowers.
The ground is covered with soft grass, moistened by dew so that [the
blades] all turn to the right with the softness of a heavenly garment, with
a sheen like the colors of a hummingbird and a delicate scent like jasmine.
When you step on the grass your foot sinks down about four inches yet
the grass springs back when you removes your foot. Yet the ground has
no unseen bumps or depressions and is as level as the surface of the palm
of your hand.
There are no mountain torrents or ditches, no pits or dark holes, no
thorny plants or unexpected tree stumps or trunks, no insects such as mosquitoes or gadﬂies, no water lizards or snakes, no bees or grubs, no dangerous beasts such as leopards or tigers. The ground is naturally fertile,
pure, and without any pebbles or stones. The negative and positive forces
[of nature] are harmonized, and so too are the four seasons gentle and
peaceful, neither [too] cold or hot. The land is free of storms and various
misfortunes and is everywhere fertile and abundant, without ﬁlth or deﬁlement or even a single clod of ﬂying dirt, as if the ground had been brushed
with the ﬁnest oil.
In the absence of winter and summer many varieties of grasses grow
year around. Trees and plants grow luxuriously and produce abundant
fruit and ﬂowers. The ground is covered with soft grass, moistened by
dew so that [the blades] all turn to the right with the softness of a heavenly
garment, with a sheen like the colors of a hummingbird and a delicate

166

Sutra 30

scent like jasmine. When you step on the grass your foot sinks down about
four inches yet the grass springs back when you lift your foot. Yet the
ground has no unseen bumps or depressions and is as level as the surface
of the palm of your hand.
In that land rice grows naturally, without husks or any need for seeding.
It appears like piles of tiny white ﬂowers and is permeated with all good
ﬂavors, like the food of the Trāyastriṃśa gods. In that land there is a cooking pot that emits heavenly fragrance and a magical gem (maṇi), known
as yanguang, that will heat any pot placed over it and automatically stop
when the meal is cooked, without need for a ﬁre or for any handling. In
that land there is also a kind of tree, known as qugong, with such thickly
layered foliage that no rain can leak through, and the people of that land
know to take shelter under it overnight.
There are trees as tall as seventy li,25 with abundant ﬂowers and fruit
and a beguiling scent. As each fruit ripens its skin opens by itself, emitting
[an exquisite] fragrance. Some trees are as high as sixty, ﬁfty, or forty li,
and even the smallest of them reaches ﬁve li. All the trees produce abundant
ﬂowers and fruit, and when the fruit ripens the skin opens by itself, emitting
[an exquisite] fragrance.
There are trees as tall as seventy li, with abundant ﬂowers and fruit
that provide cloth. As each fruit ripens its skin opens by itself, discharging
different kinds of cloth. Some of the trees are as high as sixty, ﬁfty, or
forty li, and even the smallest of them reaches ﬁve li. All the trees produce
abundant ﬂowers and fruit, and when their fruit ripens the skin opens by
itself, discharging different kinds of cloth.
There are trees as tall as seventy li, with abundant ﬂowers and fruit
that provide curios. As each fruit ripens its skin opens by itself, discharging
a variety of ornaments. Some of the trees are as high as sixty, ﬁfty, or
forty li, and even the smallest of them reaches ﬁve li. All the trees produce
abundant ﬂowers and fruit, and when the fruit ripens the skin opens by
itself, discharging a variety of ornaments.
There are trees as tall as seventy li, with abundant ﬂowers and fruit that
provide ﬂower garlands. As each fruit ripens its skin opens by itself, discharging various garlands. Some of the trees are as high as sixty, ﬁfty, or
forty li, and even the smallest of them reaches ﬁve li. All the trees produce

167

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

118b

abundant ﬂowers and fruit, and when the fruit ripens the skin opens by
itself, discharging a variety of ﬂower garlands.
There are trees as tall as seventy li, with abundant ﬂowers and fruit
that provide a variety of vessels. As each fruit ripens its skin opens by
itself, discharging different kinds of vessels. Some of the trees are as high
as sixty, ﬁfty, or forty li, and even the smallest of them reaches ﬁve li. All
the trees produce abundant ﬂowers and fruit, and when the fruit ripens
the skin opens by itself, discharging various vessels.
There are trees as tall as seventy li, with abundant ﬂowers and fruit
that produce a variety of nuts. As each fruit ripens the skin opens by itself,
discharging different kinds of nuts. Some of the trees are as high as sixty,
ﬁfty, or forty li, and even the smallest of them reaches ﬁve li. All the trees
produce abundant ﬂowers and fruits, and when the fruit ripens the skin
opens by itself, discharging a variety of nuts.
There are trees, as tall as seventy li, with abundant ﬂowers and fruit that
provide musical instruments. As each fruit ripens its skin opens by itself,
discharging a variety of musical instruments. Some of the trees are as high
as sixty, ﬁfty, or forty li, and even the smallest of them reaches ﬁve li. All
the trees produce abundant ﬂowers and fruit, and when the fruit ripens the
skin opens by itself, discharging a variety of musical instruments.
In that land there is a lake known as Sudarśana, one hundred yojanas
long and wide, with spotlessly clean, transparent, and pure water. The
lake is surrounded by stone terraces made from the seven kinds of treasure,
with seven railings, seven ornamental nets, and seven lines of trees, and
so on, with innumerable rare birds singing harmoniously together. At the
north end of the lake there is a tree known as Mango (anmoluo), with a
circumference of seven li and a height of one hundred li. Its branches and
leaves spread out in all directions to a distance of ﬁfty li.
From the eastern side of the lake the Shandao River ﬂows out, expanding to a width of one yojana. The river ﬂows ever gently, showing no sign
of turbulence. Myriad ﬂowers hang down from the bank to touch the
river’s surface as the water ﬂows by, calmly and expansively. Both riverbanks are shaded by trees, their branches heavy with fruit and ﬂowers.
The ground is covered with soft grass, moistened by dew so that [the
blades] all turn to the right with the softness of a heavenly garment, and

168

Sutra 30

a sheen like the colors of a hummingbird and a delicate scent like jasmine.
When you step on the grass your foot sinks down about four inches yet
the grass springs back when you lift your foot. Yet the ground has no
unseen bumps or depressions and is as level as the surface of the palm of
your hand.
Richly decorated boats ply the river. When the people of that land wish
to bathe and play in the water they leave their clothing on the bank, board
a boat, and, after bathing and playing midstream, they cross the river [to
the other side] and don any pieces of clothing they may come upon without
bothering to retrieve [their own clothes that they had left behind]. When
they [ﬁrst] come to the trees with a beguiling scent, they bend over to collect whatever scented powder they like and spread it over their bodies.
Next, on coming to the trees that provide cloth, they bend over to pick up
whatever kinds of cloth they like and wind it around their bodies freely.
Next, reaching the trees that provide curios, they bend over to pick up the
curios they like and display them on their bodies. Next, on coming to the
trees that provide ﬂower garlands, they bend over to pick up whatever
garlands they like and drape them around their heads. Next, on coming
to the trees that provide vessels, they bend over to pick up whatever vessels
they like [and use them] to carry [things]. Next, on coming to the trees
that produce nuts, they bend over to pick up different kinds of nuts, both
to savor their taste or to extract their oils. Next, on coming to the trees
that provide musical instruments, they bend over to pick up whatever
instruments they like to play, tune them accordingly, and proceed to play.
Singing in good voice with musical accompaniment, they go on to ﬁnd a
grove where they can stop to enjoy their amusements for a day or two, or
even up to a week. After all, when they leave the grove they have no particular home to which to return.
From the southern side of Sudarśana Lake the Miaoti River ﬂows out,
from the western side the Miaomi River ﬂows out, and from the northern
side the Guangying River ﬂows out, just as always. To the east of the lake
is a pleasure garden, also called Sudarśana, one hundred yojanas long and
wide, around which are seven railings, seven ornamental nets, and seven
lines of trees. The mix of colors it presents is due to the seven kinds of
treasure used to build it.

169

118c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

On the four sides of this garden are large gates ringed by seven railings,
all made from the seven kinds of treasure. Inside, the garden is immaculate—there are no hidden thorns among the vines and the ground is even,
with no bumps, holes, or pitfalls. There are no mosquitoes or gadﬂies,
ﬂies, ﬂeas, or lice; no water lizards, snakes, bees, grubs, or threatening
beasts such as leopards and tigers.
The ground is fresh, naturally fertile, and without any stones or pebbles.
Both the malignant and beneﬁcial inﬂuences [of nature] are in harmony,
and so are the four seasons. The land is gentle and peaceful, not [too] hot
or cold, always free of any kind of trouble, and fruitful and abundant without
any sign of ﬁlth or deﬁlement, as if the ground had been covered with balm.
In the absence of winter or summer grasses grow year round, and plants
and trees spread profusely, producing lavish quantities of ﬂowers and fruit.
The ground is covered with a carpet of soft grass, moistened by dew so that
[the blades] all turn to the right with the softness of a heavenly garment, and
a sheen like the colors of a hummingbird and a delicate scent like jasmine.
When you step on the grass your foot sinks about down four inches but the
grass springs back when you lift your foot. Yet the ground has no unseen
bumps or depressions and is as level as the surface of the palm of your hand.
In that land rice grows naturally without husks or any need for seeding.
It appears like piles of tiny white ﬂowers and is permeated with all good
ﬂavors, like the food of the Trāyastriṃśa gods. In that land there is a cooking pot that emits heavenly fragrances, and a magical gem, known as yenguang, that will heat any pot placed over it and automatically stop when
the meal is cooked, without need for a ﬁre or any handling. In that land
there is also a kind of tree, known as qugong, with thickly layered foliage
that no rainfall can leak through, and the people of that land know to take
shelter under it overnight.
There is also a tree as tall as seventy li, with abundant ﬂowers and fruit
and a beguiling scent. As each fruit ripens its skin opens by itself, emitting
[an exquisite] fragrance. Some of these trees are as high as sixty, ﬁfty, or
forty li, and even the smallest of them reaches ﬁve li. All the trees produce
abundant ﬂowers and fruit, and when the fruit ripens the skin opens by
itself, emitting an [exquisite] fragrance. And so on, as already described,
including a kind of tree that provides musical instruments.

170

Sutra 30

The people of that land come to the garden and enjoy amusements for
a day or two, or even up to a week. There is no guard in the Sudarśana
pleasure garden. Those who come to the garden freely enjoy their time
there and then depart. South of Sudarśana Lake is a garden called Mahāsudarśana, to the west of the lake is a garden called Yuluo, and to the north
of the lake is a garden called Denghua. All of these are similar to what
has already been described.
In that land, during the middle and late watches of the night, or whenever required, the nāga king causes fresh clouds to waft up and permeate
the sky, with rainshowers falling like drops of nectar to the herds of cattle
below. The liquid itself is rich, blending eight distinct tastes. Just as a garland maker scatters water over his ﬂowers to keep them fresh and prevent
withering, the water does not linger on the ground in puddles, so muddy
roads cannot form. When it stays clear and there is no rain during the
night, a bright moon traverses the sky, causing cool breezes to rise from
the ocean. Clean and pure, each breeze gently caresses one’s body, creating
a most delightful sensation.
The land is well populated and prosperous. When people wish to cook
a meal they put some rice in a pot and place a yanguong gem beneath it.
The heat rising from the gem automatically stops when the rice is cooked.
Anyone who comes along, even if the pot’s owner is absent, can share
the meal since the food is never used up. When the owner is present, those
who also wish to partake are welcome to do so. The cooked rice is as
appealing as a cluster of tiny white ﬂowers, permeated with all good
ﬂavors, like the food of the Trāyastriṃśa gods. All those who eat this food
remain free from illness, never succumb to exhaustion, and are very vigorous, with a gentle and pleasant appearance.
Again, the residents of that land all look the same in both bodily and
facial features, resembling young people of twenty years of age in Jambudvīpa. Their teeth are even, without any gaps, and clean and white. Their
hair is dark blue, not discolored by dirt or ﬁlth, and they wear their hair
shoulder-length, neither long nor short. If a man of that land desires a
woman, he gazes intently at her but does not accost her. If the woman
then follows him to a nearby grove or garden, the trees will refuse to give
them shelter and shade if the couple’s bloodlines are too closely related.

171

119a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

119b

Consequently, the two would then [separate] and go their respective ways.
If the couple is not too closely related so that an intimate relationship would
be incestuous, however, the tree branches shield them from public sight.
After enjoying conjugal union for a day or two, or as long as a week, the
two will depart and go their respective ways. If the woman becomes pregnant the baby will be delivered within seven or eight days. Regardless of
whether the baby is male or female, the mother will leave the child at a
major crossroads and depart. People passing by will clean out the baby’s
mouth with a ﬁnger and give it sweet milk, and after seven days the child
will have matured to adulthood. A male will join the group of men, and a
female will join the group of women. Even when someone dies there are
no cries of lamentation. The dead body is ornamented and placed at a major
crossroads, and after doing this the people go away. Then a bird called
youweichanjia collects the corpse and transports it to another region. Also,
when the people of that land relieve themselves, the ground automatically
opens to receive it, and closes over it again when they have ﬁnished. The
residents of that land do not remember others with affection, nor do they
save anything [for an emergency, or the like]. Their life span is always predetermined, and when they die they are invariably reborn in a heaven.
Why do the people of that land have a predetermined life span? It is
because their birth in the land of Uttarakuru is the result of having practiced
the ten norms of moral conduct. This practice gave them all life spans of
exactly a thousand years, and every member of the society is equal in that
respect. Now, someone who murders another human being will fall into
an evil course of life, while those who have refrained from committing
murder will be born into a good course of life. In a similar manner, those
who commit theft or sexual abuse, or who speak harshly or deceptively,
or speak falsehoods, and those who indulge in frivolous sycophancy while
harboring wrong views, a covetous frame of mind, and malicious intent
are bound to fall into an evil course of life [after death]. On the other hand,
those who have been born into a good course of life who have refrained
from murder, theft, and sexual abuse, and from speaking harshly and
deceptively, or speaking falsehoods, and have not indulged in frivolous
sycophancy while harboring wrong views, a covetous frame of mind, and
malicious intent, are bound to be born in the land of Uttarakuru after the

172

Sutra 30

dissolution of their bodies at the end of life, and they are predetermined
to live exactly one thousand years. Because of this, the people of that land
all have equal life spans.
Again, one who is covetous, stingy, and does not give alms will fall
into an evil course of life after death. Those who are open-minded and
free from parsimony, and who offer alms liberally, will enter a good course
of life after death. Those who liberally give alms to śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas and engage in charitable acts on behalf of the destitute, beggar
children, and the ill, who are covered with sores or who have succumbed
to various difﬁculties, providing them with clothing, food, transportation,
ﬂower garlands, incense, and a couch, blanket, or shelter, and who also
offer oil lamps and candles and build commemorative towers (stupas)
and shrines, are all bound to be born in the land of Uttarakuru after the
dissolution of their bodies at the end of life, and they are predetermined
to live a thousand years, no more and no less. Hence the people of that
land are totally equal in their life spans.
Why is that land called Uttarakuru? It is because the people there are
superior [to all other human beings]. While they do not receive the ten
norms as their vow of precepts, their behavior is naturally in accord with
these ten normative standards, and thus they are certain to be born in a
heavenly domain after the dissolution of their bodies at the end of life.
Because of this, the people in that land are called Uttarakuru. What is the
meaning of this term? Of the three continents [besides Jambudvīpa], this
land surpasses the others and so is called Uttarā, which in the Indian language means “highest.”

Article 3: The Universal Ruler

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

The universal ruler (cakravartin) who turns the sacred wheel in this world
is endowed with four supernormal blessings and seven treasures. What
does it mean to say that the universal ruler is endowed with seven treasures?
The seven treasures are (1) the golden wheel, (2) the white elephant, (3)
the dark blue horse, (4) the divine gem, (5) the jadelike queen, (6) the
[gentleman] householder, and (7) the military commander.

173

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

119c

How did the universal ruler come to use his ﬁrst treasure, the golden
wheel? When the cakravartin ﬁrst appeared in the land of Jambudvīpa
he was from the kṣatriya class and his head was anointed with sacred
water for the throne. He bathed in scented water on the full moon day,
the ﬁfteenth of the month, and ascended to the top of a pavilion surrounded
by the palace ladies. The sacred wheel, with a thousand spokes of rich
color and splendor, then appeared of its own accord before the king. It
was built by a heavenly master and did not belong to the human world.
Made of genuine gold, it had a diameter of thirty-two feet.
Seeing it, the king quietly thought to himself, “I once heard from my
virtuous elders the following words: ‘When a king of the kṣatriya class,
anointed on his head for the throne, takes a scented bath on the full moon
day, the ﬁfteenth of the month, and ascends to the top of the pavilion surrounded by the palace ladies, then at that moment the golden wheel will
appear before him of its own accord. The wheel has a thousand spokes
of rich color and splendor. It was built by a heavenly master and does not
belong to this world. It is made of genuine gold and has a diameter of
thirty-two feet. Thereupon, the king is called the cakravartin, ‘one who
turns the sacred wheel.’ Now I see this wheel before me, but who knows
if it really works. I should now test this golden treasure wheel.”
The cakravartin called the four divisions of the army to assemble. He
faced the golden wheel directly and, rearranging his garment to expose
his right shoulder and kneeling with his right knee on the ground, he
rubbed the wheel with his right hand and said to it, “Let the wheel turn
itself toward the east, turning as it should, without losing regularity.” The
wheel at once began to roll toward the east. Leading the four divisions of
his army, King Mahāsudarśana followed it. As the golden wheel rolled
forward the four gods were in charge of guiding it. Wherever the wheel
stopped, the king stopped his chariot.
At that time, having seen the great king approaching, the rulers of the
small countries in the eastern regions prepared a golden bowl ﬁlled with
silver grains and a silver bowl ﬁlled with golden grains. [When the king
arrived] they stepped forward to approach him and, with heads bowed,
said, “Welcome, great king. The eastern countries are blessed with an
abundance of harvests and produce, the people are prosperous, the nature

174

Sutra 30

of the populace is friendly and harmonious, and all are ﬁlial to their parents
and loyal to their rulers. O holy ruler, Your Majesty is recommended to
govern these lands through ofﬁces established here. We shall closely attend
Your Majesty and will execute your commands as you wish, sir.”
At that time, the cakravartin replied to the rulers of the small countries,
“Enough, dear wise kings, your offerings are already appreciated by me.
Your kingships rule these countries on the basis of the right Dharma, so that
neither injustice nor wrong action can take place in your countries. May
your kingships adhere to the vow of not taking life, and do not permit any
of your subjects to commit murder, theft, or sexual abuse, or speak harshly
or deceptively, or to speak falsehoods, or to indulge in frivolous sycophancy
while holding wrong views, a covetous frame of mind, and malicious intent.
I say that these [ten] principles encapsulate my governance.”
After listening to his exhortation, the kings of the small countries
accompanied him on his inspection tour until they reached the eastern
ocean. Next, the great king proceeded toward the south, then to the west,
and then to the north; in whatever direction the wheel rolled the [king and
his army] followed. The kings of the small countries in these regions all
abnegated their dominions for the sake of the great ruler, just as the eastern
rulers had done.
The land of Jambudvīpa, renowned for its fertile soil, produced many
precious things. In a vast expanse of forest where the waters ran pure and
clean, the golden wheel delineated the boundaries of a territory measuring
twelve yojanas from east to west and ten yojanas from north to south.
During the night heavenly gods built a city protected by seven railings,
seven ornamental nets, and seven lines of trees, all adorned with the seven
kinds of treasure, and so on, with innumerable rare birds singing harmoniously together. Having measured the city structure, the golden wheel
marked out an area within it that measured four yojanas from east to west
and two yojanas from north to south. Once again, during the night heavenly
gods built a royal palace with sevenfold walls embellished with the seven
kinds of treasure and so on, with innumerable rare birds singing harmoniously together, just as before. When the palace was completed the golden
wheel hovered in midair above the palace gate, poised [in readiness] but
not turning. Rejoicing, leaping and dancing, the cakravartin exclaimed,

175

120a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

“This treasure, the golden wheel, is indeed a blessing! Now I am truly
the one who turns the sacred wheel.” This is called the realization of the
ﬁrst treasure, the golden wheel.
How did the king come to use his second treasure, the white elephant?
Early in the morning when the cakravartin was seated in the main hall of
the palace, the white elephant suddenly appeared before him of its own
accord. The color of its hair was pure white, the seven parts of its body (four
feet, two shoulders, and neck) were well developed and proportional, and
it could ﬂy in midair. It had variegated colors on its neck and its six delicate
tusks were studded with pieces of real gold. Seeing the elephant, the king
thought to himself, “This elephant is said to be wise and good-natured. If
it is well trained it can serve me as a mount for riding.” He immediately set
about to see if the elephant could be trained and found that it was capable
for all training. Wishing to take his ﬁrst morning ride, the cakravartin
mounted the elephant, went out of the capital, made a round of all four
oceans, and had already returned to the palace by breakfast time. Rejoicing,
leaping and dancing, the cakravartin exclaimed, “This white elephant is
indeed a blessing! Now I am truly the one who turns the sacred wheel.”
This is called the realization of the second treasure, the white elephant.
How did the king come to use his third treasure, the dark blue horse?
Early in the morning when the cakravartin was seated in the main hall of
the palace, the horse suddenly appeared before him of its own accord. Its
body was dark blue but its long mane and tail were red. Its head and neck
were like those of an elephant, and it could ﬂy in midair. Seeing this treasure of a horse, the king thought to himself, “This horse is said to be wise
and good-natured. If it is well trained it can serve as my steed.” He immediately set about to see if the horse could be trained and found that it was
capable for all training. Then, wishing to take his ﬁrst morning ride, the
king mounted the horse, went out of the capital, made a round of all four
oceans, and returned to the palace by breakfast time. Rejoicing, leaping
and dancing, the cakravartin exclaimed, “This dark blue horse is indeed
a blessing! Now I am truly the one who turns the sacred wheel.” This is
called the realization of the third treasure, the dark blue horse.
How did the king come to use his fourth treasure, the divine gem?
Early in the morning when the cakravartin was seated in the main hall of

176

Sutra 30

the palace, the divine gem suddenly appeared before him of its own accord.
Its quality and color were clear and transparent, and it was spotless. Seeing
this divine gem, the king thought to himself, “This gem is very appealing
and mysterious at the same time; it is said to be able to illuminate an area
as wide as this entire palace compound when a light is shined upon it.”
Then, wishing to test the gem himself, the cakravartin immediately mustered
the four divisions of his army and placed the gem on top of a ﬂagpole. As
he carried the ﬂagpole out of the city in the darkness, the gem emitted a
ray of light that illuminated the entire army as if it were daylight. Rejoicing,
leaping and dancing, the cakravartin exclaimed, “This treasure of a gem
is indeed a blessing! Now I am truly the one who turns the sacred wheel.”
This is called the realization of the fourth treasure, the divine gem.
How did the king come to be served by his ﬁfth treasure, the jadelike
queen? When the queenly treasure suddenly appeared before the king, he
saw that she was beautiful, with a ﬁne complexion, and she was neither
too tall nor too short, neither stout nor thin, her skin was neither too light
nor too dark, her features neither hard nor soft, and her body was able to
remain warm in winter and cool in summer. A sandalwood scent emerged
from the roots of her hair, enveloping her body, and the fragrance of a
blue lotus emanated from her mouth. Her words and manner of speech
were invariably gentle and her demeanor was calm; she never failed to
awake before the king or to stay awake until he fell asleep. The king had
realized purity [by extinguishing deﬁlements] so he was totally free from
attachment and did not obsess about her in his mind even for a moment;
how much less would he have approached her physically [as an object of
sexual desire]. Rejoicing, leaping and dancing, the cakravartin exclaimed,
“This treasure, the jadelike queen, is indeed a blessing! Now I am truly
the one who turns the sacred wheel.” This is called the realization of the
ﬁfth treasure, the jadelike queen.
How did the king come to be assisted by his sixth treasure, the gentleman householder? When the householder suddenly appeared before the
king of his own accord, the royal storehouses were automatically ﬁlled
with immeasurable riches and treasures. This person had been endowed
with special vision due to his past merit, namely, the ability to see any
treasure buried underground, no matter to whom it belonged. He did not

177

120b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

120c

take the treasure owned by some, while turning over to the king’s treasury
any treasure that had no owner. The householder came to the king and
said, “O great king, please do not think about paying me any stipend. I
am able to manage by myself, sir.” The king decided to test the well-bred
treasurer and arranged an excursion on a pleasure boat. While aboard, the
king said to the gentleman householder, “I am in need of some pieces of
gold. Provide them at once.” The treasurer replied, “O great king, give
me some time to go ashore.” Pressing him further, the king said, “I cannot
stop this boat. I need the golden treasure right away.” Hearing the king’s
urgent order, the householder knelt and dipped his right hand into the
water. A succession of urns ﬁlled with treasure arose from the water, following his hand upward just like insects clinging to tree branches. Then
the other treasurers all joined in, dipping their hands into the water to
draw up an equal amount of immeasurable riches, so that the boat was
soon ﬁlled with treasure. The gentleman householder then asked, “Your
Majesty needed some gold pieces before; how much more will you need,
sir?” The cakravartin replied, “That is enough. I do not need any more.
I only wished to test your ability. Your service is much appreciated.” On
hearing the king’s words, the householder returned all the treasure to the
water. Then, rejoicing, leaping and dancing, the cakravartin exclaimed,
“This treasure of a householder is indeed a blessing! Now I am truly the
one who turns the sacred wheel.” This is called the realization of the sixth
treasure, the householder.
How did the king come to be assisted by his seventh treasure, the military commander? When the brilliant, decisive military commander, whose
expertise in strategy was equaled by his valor and strength, suddenly
appeared before the king, he said, “Great king, may Your Majesty be free
from worry. When you wish to attack any country, sire, I shall willingly
accomplish it.” The cakravartin decided to test him at once and mustered
the four divisions of the army. He said to his general, “Make sure the
entire army is ready for battle. Those who have not come out should
assemble; those who have already come can be dismissed. Those who are
untrained should prepare themselves for battle; those who are ready can
be dismissed. Let those who are here on duty return home, and let those
who are already at home remain there.” Upon hearing the king’s words,

178

Sutra 30

the military commander promptly assembled those who had not come forth
and released those who had already assembled; he began to train those
who were ill prepared and released those who were already qualiﬁed. Those
who were on duty he let return home, and those who had already gone
home were allowed to remain there. Then, rejoicing, leaping and dancing,
the cakravartin exclaimed, “This treasure, my military commander, is a
blessing! Now I am now truly the one who turns the sacred wheel.”
What are the four blessings that pertain to the universal ruler? First,
as the universal king, he has longevity and will never meet with an early
death; in this, no one can match the king. Second, he has a strong physical
body and never contracts illness; in this, no one can match the king. Third,
he has a most handsome appearance; in this, no one can match the king.
Fourth, his storehouses are ﬁlled with treasure; in this, no one can match
the king. The foregoing are the seven treasures and four blessings that
pertain to the universal ruler.
After a time, the cakravartin had his carriage prepared for a visit to the
royal park grove. He said to his charioteer, “Proceed deliberately while
driving the carriage. I wish to ascertain whether the kingdom is safe and
our citizens are at ease.” At the same time, those who saw the king asked
his attendant, “Please drive slowly, for we wish to see the face of the holy
ruler.” The great cakravartin was as attentive to the well-being of his people
as to their material needs, just as a father is concerned for his children, and
the people felt affection toward the king as if he were their father. They
presented all sorts of rare items to the king, saying, “May Your Majesty
accept this” and “May this be of use to Your Majesty.” The king would
always reply, “Bring me no more precious items, my dear subjects. I have
my own treasures. You should keep these things for yourselves.”
When the cakravartin is in command of the land of Jambudvīpa, the
terrain is even, having neither thorny plants nor pits or ditches, nor any
bumpy protrusions at all. There are no poisonous creatures such as mosquitoes, gadﬂies, bees, grubs, ﬂies, ﬂeas, snakes, or water lizards. Sand
and rocks, forming inscriptions, automatically sink into the ground, while
gold, silver, and precious gems rise to the surface. The four seasons are
harmonized into a gentle calm state that is neither hot nor cold. The soil
is soft and malleable, with no ﬁlth or deﬁlement. As if bathed in oil, it is

179

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

121a

clean and pure, with a rich luster and no pollution at all. The earth [here]
will be the same when the cakravartin rules this world. The springwater
that ﬂows out of the ground is clean and pure and will never dry up, producing ﬁelds of soft grass that stay green throughout the year, summer
and winter.
Plants and trees grow profusely, producing lavish quantities of ﬂowers
and fruits. The ground is covered with a carpet of grass, moistened by
dew so that [the blades] all turn to the right with the softness of a heavenly
garment, and a sheen like the colors of a hummingbird and a delicate scent
like jasmine. When you step on it your foot sinks down about four inches
and yet the grass springs back when you lift your foot. Rice grows naturally
without husks and is permeated with all good ﬂavors. There are trees with
abundant ﬂowers and fruit that produce a beguiling scent. As each fruit
ripens its skin opens by itself, emitting [an exquisite] fragrance. There
are trees with abundant ﬂowers and fruit that provide cloth; as each fruit
ripens its skin opens by itself, discharging different kinds of cloth. There
are trees with abundant ﬂowers and fruit that provide ornaments; as each
fruit ripens its skin opens by itself, discharging a variety of curios. There
are trees with abundant ﬂowers and fruit that provide ﬂower garlands; as
each fruit ripens its skin opens by itself, discharging various ﬂower garlands. There are trees with abundant ﬂowers and fruit that provide a variety
of vessels; as each fruit ripens its skin opens by itself, discharging different
kinds of vessels. There are trees with abundant ﬂowers and fruit that produce a variety of nuts; as each fruit ripens its skin opens by itself, discharging different kinds of nuts. There are trees with abundant ﬂowers
and fruit that provide musical instruments; as each fruit ripens its skin
opens by itself, discharging various musical instruments.
When the cakravartin rules the world, the nāga king of Anavatapta
Lake causes heavy clouds to rise and permeate the sky after midnight,
and rainshowers to fall to the cattle being herded below. The abundant
rainwater, blending eight distinct tastes, falls everywhere. And just as a
garland maker scatters water over his ﬂowers to keep them fresh without
withering, the copious rain causes the grasses and trees to grow luxuriantly,
without any standing water to form puddles or muddy roads. When it
stays clear [without any rain during the night], a bright moon traverses

180

Sutra 30

the sky, causing cool breezes to rise from the ocean. Clean and pure, each
breeze gently caresses one’s body, creating a most delightful sensation.
When the cakravartin rules the world, the land of Jambudvīpa is blessed
with an abundant harvest of every crop (lit., “ﬁve kinds of grain”), the
people enjoy growth and prosperity, with universal afﬂuence and wealth
without deﬁciency. So long as the cakravartin governs justly there is never
a cause of grievance. When the king himself adheres to the ten norms of
moral conduct, his subjects will also cherish right views and uphold the
ten normative standards. And when, after a long time, the king ﬁnally succumbs to illness and reaches the end of life, like a man who has enjoyed
his food perhaps a little more than necessary, making it a little less suited
to his body, he passes away and is reborn in Brahmā Heaven.
Thereupon, the treasured [jadelike] queen, the [gentleman] householder,
and the military commander lead all the people of the land in the cakravartin’s funeral rite, conducted with music and dance. They cleanse the
king’s body with warm scented water, cover it with [new] cotton cloth,
and wrap it in a shroud as long as ﬁve hundred pairs of garments. Then
they put the body into a golden cofﬁn, pour sesame oil over it, and seal
the cofﬁn inside an iron vault, which is enclosed within a sandalwood
vault, then covered with incense and cremated. [After retrieving the ashes,]
the people erect a commemorative tower, built out of the seven treasures,
at each major crossroads, ﬁlling an area measuring one yojana long and
wide with the variegated colors of the seven kinds of treasure. On each
of the tower’s four sides is a single gate protected by a barrier made from
the seven kinds of treasure, and from each side an open space extends as
far as ﬁve yojanas in length and breadth. The tower walls are sevenfold,
with seven railings, seven ornamental nets, and seven lines of trees.
The golden wall is endowed with silver gates, the silver wall with
golden gates, the quartz wall with lapis gates, the lapis wall with quartz
gates, the ruby wall with agate gates, the agate wall with ruby gates, and
the emerald wall with gates decorated with many kinds of precious stones.
The railings are similarly decorated: the golden railing is hung with ropes
made of silver, the silver railing with ropes made of gold, the quartz railing
with ropes made of lapis, the lapis railing with ropes made of quartz, the
ruby railing with ropes made of agate, the agate railing with ropes made

181

121b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

of rubies, and the emerald railing with a variety of precious stones. Over
these railings decorative nets, on which various ornaments are attached,
are suspended. From the golden net hangs a silver bell; from the silver
net hangs a golden bell; from the lapis net hangs a quartz bell; from the
quartz net hangs a lapis bell; from the ruby net hangs an agate bell; from
the agate net hangs a ruby bell; and from the emerald net hangs a bell
inlaid with a variety of precious stones.
The golden trees have silver ﬂowers and fruit. The silver trees have
golden ﬂowers and fruit. The quartz trees have lapis ﬂowers and leaves,
while the lapis trees have quartz ﬂowers and leaves. The ruby trees have
agate ﬂowers and leaves, while the agate trees have ﬂowers and leaves
made of rubies. The emerald trees have ﬂowers and leaves made of various
precious stones.
Each of the seven walls has four gates, protected by barriers. Each
wall, topped with a pavilion and veranda, encloses a ﬂowing spring with
a bathing pond and a pleasure garden ﬁlled with a variety of ﬂowers and
trees laden with abundant fruit. Exquisite fragrance arises in all directions,
and a host of rare birds sing harmoniously together.
When the commemorative tower is complete the treasured [jadelike]
queen, the [gentleman] householder, and the military commander, together
with all the people of the land, pay their respects with a variety of offerings
and [simultaneously] engage in charitable acts without distinction, providing
food to those who lack food, clothing if they need clothing, and even [offering] the treasured horses and elephants of the deceased cakravartin if they
need transportation, each according to their own wish. These are the supernormal blessings and merits ascribed to the universal cakravartin.

Article 4: The Hells

121c

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

There are eight thousand worlds surrounding the four continents, and
these eight thousand worlds are further surrounded by a great ocean.
Around this ocean is a great mountain [range] made of diamonds, and
beyond it looms a second great diamond [range]. The region between
them is dark and hidden; even heavenly gods like the sun and moon are

182

Sutra 30

unable to illuminate there despite their great brightness. In that darkness
are eight great hells, each containing sixteen smaller hells. The ﬁrst great
hell is called Conscious Recovery; the second is called Black Rope; the
third, Compression; the fourth, Screaming; the ﬁfth, Great Screaming;
the sixth, Fiery Heat; the seventh, Great Fiery Heat; and the eighth,
Unremitting Suffering. In that ﬁrst hell are sixteen smaller hells, each
measuring ﬁve hundred yojanas in length and breadth. These minor hells
are called (1) Black Sands (coal pit), (2) Boiling Excrement, (3) Five Hundred Nailings, (4) Starvation, (5) Thirst, (6) Copper Cauldron, (7) Copper
Cauldrons, (8) Grindstone, (9) Blood and Pus, (10) Fire Tending, (11)
River of Ashes, (12) Iron Fetters, (13) Axes and Hatchets, (14) Wolf Pack,
(15) Bladed Trees, and (16) Cold and Icy.
Why is the ﬁrst great hell called Conscious Recovery? Iron nails grow
on the hands of the sentient beings who fall into this hell. They use these
long and sharp nails to injure and kill each other when they become angry.
Tearing at one another, they strip away pieces of ﬂesh and clean off bones,
until they eventually collapse as if dead. But when a cool breeze passes
over their bodies, the skin and ﬂesh regenerates as they were before. Then
these [hell] beings stand up and think, “I have come back to life,” and the
others around them say, “We see that you have come back to life.” Because
of this, the ﬁrst hell is called Conscious Recovery.
Again, since the sentient beings who fall into this hell [have a tendency
to] irritate each other, they take up any knives or swords that may be available and use them to injure or kill. The knives and swords pierce and slice;
skin is cut away, ﬂesh is sliced open, bodies are severed and fall insensate
to the ground. Yet with cool breezes the skin and ﬂesh regrow and the
bodies return to life. Standing up, they think, “I have come back to life,”
and others say, “I see that you have come back to life.” For this reason,
the ﬁrst hell is called Conscious Recovery.
Again, when the sentient beings who fall into this hell irritate each
other, they seize youyingdao knives26 intending to injure and kill. The
sharp knives pierce and slice; skin is cut away, ﬂesh is sliced open, bodies
are severed and fall insensate to the ground. Yet with cool breezes the
skin and ﬂesh regrow and the bodies return to life. Standing up, they think,

183

122a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

“I have come back to life,” and others say, “I see that you have come back
to life.” For this reason, the ﬁrst hell is called Conscious Recovery.
Again, when the sentient beings who fall into this hell irritate each
other, they take up [small] daggers with the intent to injure and kill. The
sharp daggers pierce and slice; skin is cut away, ﬂesh is sliced open, bodies
are severed and fall insensate to the ground. Yet with cool breezes the
skin and ﬂesh regrow and the bodies return to life. Standing up, they think,
“I have come back to life,” and others say, “I see that you have returned
to life.” For this reason, the ﬁrst hell is called Conscious Recovery.
(1) Sentient beings who complete their respective periods of punishment
emerge from [Conscious Recovery] hell and ﬂee in terror, seeking to be
rescued and protected. Without knowing, however, they are drawn by
their past actions and immediately arrive at Black Sands hell, where a hot
wind rages, blowing up clouds of hot black sand. Not only does the sand
stick to their bodies, turning them as dark as black clouds, but it sears the
skin, eating away the ﬂesh and penetrating to the bone. Now their bodies
send up a dark smoke, which revolves around the body and returns back
into it, eating at it from within. Malefactors necessarily undergo this punishment for their actions and are prevented from dying until their offenses
have been fully expiated.
(2) After undergoing the torments of this hell for a long time, they
emerge from Black Sands hell and ﬂee in terror, seeking to be rescued
and protected. Without knowing, however, they are drawn by their past
actions and immediately arrive at the hell of Boiling Excrement, where
hot iron balls lie in wait. When malefactors enter the iron balls appear
and cannot be evaded; as soon as it touches them the intense heat burns
every part of their bodies. The malefactors cannot help opening their
mouths, and then the hot balls scald their lips and tongue and throat, down
to the stomach. Wherever the iron balls touch them, they eat away [the
ﬂesh]. [Moreover,] there are vermin [in that hell] that feed on iron and
they gnaw on the bodies, penetrating the bones and marrow. The malefactors experience immeasurable hardship and suffering, but they must
undergo this punishment for their past actions and are prevented from
dying until their offenses have been fully expiated.

184

Sutra 30

(3) After undergoing the torments of this hell for a long time, they
emerge from Boiling Excrement hell and ﬂee in terror, seeking to be rescued and protected. Without knowing, however, they are drawn by their
past actions and immediately arrive at the hell of Five Hundred Nailings.
When they enter the guards immediately hurl them to the ground. One
by one, they are taken and stretched out over hot irons and nails are fastened
through their hands and feet and every part of their bodies, numbering
ﬁve hundred in all. The malefactors scream in agony for there is no end
to their distress, but they must undergo this punishment and are prevented
from dying until their offenses have been fully expiated.
(4) After undergoing the torments of this hell for a long time, they
emerge from Five Hundred Nailings hell and ﬂee in terror, seeking to be
rescued and protected. Without knowing, however, they are drawn by
their past actions and immediately arrive at the hell of Starvation. When
they enter the guards ask, “Now you are here, what is it you want?” They
reply, “Sir, we are starving.” At once the guards throw them down and
stretch their bodies one after another over hot irons; they pull their mouths
open with iron hooks and pour in hot iron balls that scald their lips, tongues,
and throats, down to their stomachs. Wherever the iron balls touch their
bodies they eat away at everything. The malefactors scream in agony, but
they must undergo this punishment for their actions and are prevented
from dying until their offenses have been fully expiated.
(5) After undergoing the torments of this hell for a long time, they
emerge from Starvation hell and ﬂee in terror, seeking refuge and protection. Without knowing, however, they are drawn by their past actions and
immediately arrive at the hell of Thirst. When they enter the guards ask,
“Now you are here, what is it you want?” They each reply, “Sir, I am
thirsty.” At once the guards throw them down and stretch out their bodies
on hot irons; they open their mouths with iron hooks and pour in melted
copper that scalds their lips, tongues, and throats, down to their stomachs.
Wherever the melted copper touches their bodies, it eats away at everything.
The malefactors scream in agony, but they must undergo this punishment
for their actions and are prevented from dying until their offenses have
been fully expiated.

185

122b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

122c

(6) After undergoing the torments of this hell for a long time, they
emerge from Thirst hell and ﬂee in terror, seeking to be rescued and protected. Without knowing, however, they are drawn by their past actions
and immediately arrive at Copper Cauldron hell. The angry guards glare
and seize the offenders by the feet, throwing them into the cauldron. As
the liquid in the cauldron comes to a boil, their bodies slowly revolve from
the surface down to the bottom and back again, sometimes hovering in the
middle, like beans circulating in boiling water until they are cooked. The
malefactors, tossed like beans [in hot broth,] scream and howl, crying out
in bitter suffering, but they must undergo this punishment for their actions
and are prevented from dying until their offenses have been fully expiated.
(7) After undergoing the torments of this hell for a long time, they
emerge from Copper Cauldron hell and ﬂee in terror, seeking to be rescued
and protected. Without knowing, however, they are drawn by their past
actions and immediately arrive at the hell of Copper Cauldrons. The
guards, glaring in anger, seize the offenders by the feet and throw them
into other cauldrons. As the liquid comes to a boil, their bodies slowly
revolve from the surface to the bottom and back again, sometimes hovering
in the middle, like beans circulating in boiling water until they are cooked.
The malefactors are tossed like beans as they plunge to the bottom and
come up again, their hands and feet sometimes appearing at the surface,
or their hips and bellies, or sometimes just their heads and faces. The guards
use iron hooks to spike the bodies and pull them out, tossing them [from
one cauldron] to another. The malefactors scream and howl, crying in bitter
suffering, but they must undergo this punishment for their actions and are
prevented from dying until their offenses have been fully expiated.
(8) After undergoing the torments of this hell for a long time, they
emerge from Copper Cauldrons hell and ﬂee in terror, seeking refuge and
protection. Without knowing, however, they are drawn by their past actions
and immediately arrive at Grindstone hell, which is ﬁve hundred yojanas
long and wide. The guards, glaring ﬁercely, throw the offenders down onto
hot stone slabs and slowly stretch them out, using heated boulders to grind
their bodies into tiny fragments of ﬂesh and bone, producing torrents of
blood and pus. The malefactors scream and howl, crying in extreme bitter

186

Sutra 30

suffering, but they must undergo this punishment for their actions and are
prevented from dying until their offenses have been fully expiated.
(9) After undergoing the torments of this hell for a long time, they
emerge from Grindstone hell and ﬂee in terror, seeking to be rescued and
protected. Without knowing, however, they are drawn by their past actions
and immediately arrive at the hell of Blood and Pus, stretching ﬁve hundred
yojanas long and wide, with boiling springs of blood and pus steaming
in the air. The malefactors run wildly through the boiling liquid and their
hands and feet, and then their heads, faces, and entire bodies, are consumed
by the heat. Ingesting the boiling liquid, their lips, tongues, and throats
are scalded, down to their stomachs, and wherever their bodies are touched
by the blood and pus [their ﬂesh] boils away. The malefactors must undergo
this punishment for their actions, however, and are prevented from dying
until their offenses have been fully expiated.
(10) After undergoing the torments of this hell for a long time, they
emerge from Blood and Pus hell and ﬂee in terror, seeking to be rescued
and protected. Without knowing, however, they are drawn by their past
actions and immediately arrive at the hell of Fire Tending, ﬁve hundred
yojanas long and wide, where a gigantic bonﬁre burns from within. Erupting in ﬂames when they appear, the ﬁre emits intense heat as the offenders
are rounded up by ﬁerce guards and forced to pick up hot iron rods to
tend the ﬁery pile. As they work on the ﬁre, they suffer extreme burns not
only on their hands and feet but all over their bodies. The heat is excruciating and they cry out in their suffering, but they must undergo this punishment for their actions and are prevented from dying until their offenses
have been fully expiated.
(11) After undergoing these torments for a long time, they emerge from
Fire Tending hell and ﬂee in terror, seeking to be rescued and protected.
Without knowing, however, they are drawn by their past actions and immediately arrive at River of Ashes hell, ﬁve hundred yojanas in length,
breadth, and depth, where boiling waves of hot ash gush forth, ﬁlling the
place with putrid air. The sound of the churning waves crashing over them
is terrifying, and as they come to the surface the waves turn into iron needles, like eight-inch spearheads. [Moreover,] long swords are lined up on

187

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

123a

the riverbank, and wolves and guards lie in wait in a forest of trees whose
branches, leaves, and fruit resemble swords and daggers with eight-inch
blades. When the malefactors enter the river their bodies sink and ﬂoat
as they are tossed by the waves, and they are pierced repeatedly by the
iron spears, which tear open their rotting skin and ﬂesh, releasing torrents
of blood and pus. The malefactors scream in agony from the excruciating
pain in every part of their bodies, but they must undergo this punishment
for their actions and are prevented from dying until their offenses have
been fully expiated.
After undergoing the torments of this hell for a long time, they emerge
from River of Ashes hell and as they crawl up over the bank, their bodies
slashed and grievously wounded, they are met by sharp swords set up on
the bank that slice their hands and feet. The guards ask, “Now you are here,
what is it you want?” They reply, “Sir, we are starving.” Immediately the
guards strike the offenders down and stretch their bodies one after another
over hot irons; they pull their mouths open with iron hooks and pour in
molten copper that scalds their lips, tongues, and throats, down to their
stomachs. Wherever the molten copper touches their bodies it eats away at
everything. Even more, wolves with long, sharp fangs tear off pieces of
their ﬂesh and devour them as they watch.
After cooking in the River of Ashes and drinking molten copper, the
malefactors, pierced by spears and chewed up by wolves, try to ﬂee. Climbing
up trees, they encounter sharp blades pointed down that slice their hands;
climbing back down, they ﬁnd the blades all turned upward, slashing their
feet. Swords and daggers pierce their bodies and their skin and ﬂesh falls
away, amid a stream of blood and pus, until only sinews hold together the
bones of the white skeletons that remain. Then iron birds from the trees
peck at their skulls to break them open so they can get at the brains. In
excruciating pain, the malefactors scream in agony but they must undergo
this punishment for their actions and are prevented from dying until their
offenses have been fully expiated.
(12) Returning to the River of Ashes, they sink and ﬂoat as they are
tossed by the waves. Iron spears pierce their bodies again, tearing away
the rotting skin and ﬂesh and releasing jets of blood and pus until only
white skeletons are left to drift away. But when a cool breeze blows over

188

Sutra 30

them their skin and ﬂesh regenerate as before. Standing up, they immediately ﬂee in terror, seeking to be rescued and protected. Without knowing,
however, they are drawn by their past actions and immediately arrive at
the hell of Iron Fetters, which is ﬁve hundred yojanas long and wide.
When the malefactors enter hot iron fetters suddenly appear and they are
forcibly shackled by the guards. The offenders watch their hands and feet
burning down to stumps, as their entire bodies are eaten away. In excruciating pain, they scream in agony but they must undergo this punishment
for their actions and are prevented from dying until their offenses have
been fully expiated.
(13) After undergoing the torments of this hell for a long time, the malefactors emerge from Iron Fetters hell and ﬂee in terror, seeking to be rescued
and protected. Without knowing, however, they are drawn by their past
actions and immediately arrive at the hell of Axes and Hatchets, which is
ﬁve hundred yojanas in length and breadth. When they enter, guards glaring
in anger grab the offenders and throw them down on hot irons; with heated
axes and hatchets, they chop off their noses and ears, hands and feet, and
hack at their bodies. In excruciating pain, the malefactors scream in agony,
but they must undergo this punishment for their actions and are prevented
from dying until their offenses have been fully expiated.
(14) After undergoing the torments of this hell for a long time, the
malefactors emerge from Axes and Hatchets hell and ﬂee in terror, seeking
to be rescued and protected. Without knowing, however, they are drawn
by their past actions and immediately arrive at the Wolf Pack hell, stretching
ﬁve hundred yojanas long and wide. When they enter a pack of wolves
rushes forward to attack, pulling them down as [they try to] escape. The
wolves seize the offenders by their limbs and toss them about viciously,
tearing at their ﬂesh and bones while blood and pus pool on the ground.
In excruciating pain, the malefactors feel racked in every part of their
bodies but they must undergo this punishment for their actions and are
prevented from dying until their offenses have been fully expiated.
(15) After undergoing the torments of this hell for a long time, the
malefactors emerge from Wolf Pack hell and ﬂee in terror, seeking to be
rescued and protected. Without knowing, however, they are drawn by
their past actions and immediately arrive at the hell of Bladed Trees, ﬁve

189

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

123b

hundred yojanas in length and breadth. When they enter they are met by
a great storm. Gusts blow through the trees and blade-like leaves fall in
a steady stream, severing their hands and feet and piercing every part of
their bodies, including their faces and heads, while iron birds swoop down
and peck at their eyes. In excruciating pain, the malefactors scream in
agony but they must undergo this punishment for their actions and are
prevented from dying until their offenses have been fully expiated.
(16) After undergoing the torments of this hell for a long time, the
malefactors emerge from Bladed Trees hell and ﬂee in terror, seeking to
be rescued and protected. Without knowing, however, they are drawn by
their past actions and immediately arrive at the Cold and Icy hell, stretching
ﬁve hundred yojanas long and wide. When they enter they are met by a
great blast of cold wind that freezes their bodies. As their skin and ﬂesh
fall to the ground, the malefactors scream in agony and thereupon their
lives come to an end.
The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

The great Black Rope hell contains sixteen minor hells, each of which is
ﬁve hundred yojanas long and wide and is enclosed by a fence separating
it from Cold and Icy hell. Why is it called Black Rope? The guards [in
that hell] throw the malefactors down and stretch their bodies one after
another over hot irons. Shackled with hot iron chains, the bodies are kept
in a straight line so that the guards, using hot iron hatchets, can slice all
of them into pieces, making up a chain of a hundred thousand parts, just
as a craftsman uses a sharp hatchet to shape pieces of wood and rope to
form them into a chain. Punished in this manner, the malefactors experience
pain and suffering beyond measure, but they must undergo this punishment
for their actions and are prevented from dying until their offenses have
been fully expiated. For this reason, it is called the Black Rope hell.
Again, the guards in this hell throw the malefactors down and stretch
their bodies one after another over hot irons. Shackling them with iron
chains, the guards saw through their bodies with handsaws, just as a craftsman uses a saw to cut pieces of wood. Punished in this manner, the malefactors experience pain and suffering beyond measure, but they must
undergo this punishment for their actions and are prevented from dying

190

Sutra 30

until their offenses have been fully expiated. For this reason, it is called
Black Rope hell.
Again, the guards in this hell throw the malefactors down and stretch
their bodies one after another over hot irons. Shackled with hot iron chains,
they feel their skin blistering, their ﬂesh burning, their bones melting, and
their marrow coming to a boil. Their pain and suffering are beyond measure, but they must undergo this punishment for their actions and are prevented from dying until their offenses have been fully expiated. For this
reason, it is called Black Rope hell.
Again, the guards in this hell suspend hot iron chains, layer upon layer,
and hung crosswise as well. They drive the malefactors through these
hanging chains, which are tossed by a violent wind. Entangled, the malefactors watch their skin blistering, their ﬂesh burning, their bones melting,
and their marrow boiling. Their pain and suffering are beyond measure,
but they must undergo this punishment for their actions and are prevented
from dying until their sins have been fully expiated. For this reason, it is
called Black Rope hell.
Again, the guards in this hell seize the malefactors and force them to
wrap hot iron chains around their bodies and watch as their skin blisters,
their ﬂesh burns, their bones melt, and their marrow boils. Their pain and
suffering are beyond measure, but they must undergo this punishment for
their actions and are prevented from dying until their offenses have been
fully expiated. For this reason, it is called Black Rope hell.
After undergoing the torments of this hell for a long time, the malefactors at length emerge from Black Rope hell and ﬂee in terror, seeking
to be rescued and protected. Without knowing, however, they are drawn
by their past actions and immediately arrive at Black Sands hell, and so
on, until they reach Cold and Icy hell and subsequently their lives come
to an end, just as before.
The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

The great hell of Compression contains sixteen minor hells, each of which
is ﬁve hundred yojanas long and wide and is enclosed by a fence. Why
is it called Compression? Because it is a great mountain of rock that splits
open to allow offenders to enter, but when they do the two sides suddenly

191

123c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

come together, crushing them into bits of ﬂesh and bone, and then reopen,
like two wooden clappers that rebound after each strike. Punished in this
way, the malefactors experience pain and suffering beyond measure but
they are prevented from dying until their offenses have been fully expiated.
For this reason, it is called the hell of Compression.
Again, there is a huge iron elephant in this hell that bellows ﬁercely
as it charges. Raging among the offenders, the elephant crushes their
bodies into bits of ﬂesh and bone, releasing torrents of blood and pus. In
excruciating pain, the malefactors scream in agony but they are prevented
from dying until their offenses have been fully expiated. For this reason,
it is called the hell of Compression.
Again, the guards in this hell seize the offenders, placing them in a
grindstone and crushing their ﬂesh and bones, releasing torrents of blood
and pus. Their pain and suffering are beyond measure but they are prevented from dying until their offenses have been fully expiated. For this
reason, it is called the hell of Compression.
Again, the guards in this hell seize the offenders, putting them face
down over a great rock and using another huge rock to crush their bodies
into bits of ﬂesh and bone, releasing torrents of blood and pus. The pain
they experience as their distress mounts is as intense as that of all the worst
poisons taken together, but they are prevented from dying until their offenses
have been fully expiated. For this reason, it is called the hell of Compression.
Again, the guards in this hell seize the offenders, placing them face
down in an iron mortar and methodically applying the pestle, beginning
at their feet and moving up to their heads, crushing their bodies into bits
of ﬂesh and bone and releasing torrents of blood and pus. The pain they
experience as their distress mounts is as intense as that of all the worst poisons taken together, but they are prevented from dying until their offenses
have been fully expiated. For this reason, it is called the hell of Compression.
After undergoing the torments of this hell for a long time, the malefactors emerge from Compression hell and ﬂee in terror, seeking to be
rescued and protected. Without knowing, however, they are drawn by
their past actions and immediately arrive at Black Sands hell, and so on,
until they reach Cold and Icy hell and subsequently their lives come to
an end, just as before.

192

Sutra 30

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

The great hell of Screaming contains sixteen minor hells that stretch ﬁve
hundred yojanas long and wide and are enclosed by fences. Why is it known
as Screaming? The guards in this hell seize the offenders and toss them into
a huge cauldron, where they burn in boiling water. The pain they experience
as their distress mounts is as intense as that of all the worst poisons taken
together, but they are prevented from dying until their offenses have been
fully expiated. For this reason, it is called the hell of Screaming.
Again, the guards in this hell seize the offenders and toss them into a
huge iron jar, where they burn in boiling water. The pain they experience
as their distress mounts is as intense as that of all the worst poisons taken
together, but they are prevented from dying until their offenses have been
fully expiated. For this reason, it is called the hell of Screaming.
Again, the guards in this hell seize the offenders and stuff them into a
small cauldron, where they burn in boiling water. They scream in agony
but they are prevented from dying until their offenses have been fully
expiated. For this reason, it is called the hell of Screaming.
Again, the guards in this hell seize the offenders and throw them into
a large iron frying pan, where they are repeatedly fried and then boiled.
The malefactors scream in agony but they are prevented from dying until
their offenses have been fully expiated. For this reason, it is called the
hell of Screaming.
After undergoing the torments of this hell for a long time, the malefactors emerge from Screaming hell and ﬂee in terror, seeking to be rescued
and protected. Without knowing, however, they are drawn by their past
actions and immediately arrive at Black Sands hell, and so on, until they
reach Cold and Icy hell and subsequently their lives come to an end, just
as before.
The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

The hell of Great Screaming contains sixteen minor hells, each of which
is ﬁve hundred yojanas long and wide and enclosed by a fence. Why is
it known as Great Screaming? The guards in this hell seize the offenders
and throw them into a huge cauldron, where they burn in boiling water.

193

124a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

124b

The screaming that erupts is desperate, for the pain they experience as
their distress mounts is as intense as that of all the worst poisons taken
together, yet they are prevented from dying until their offenses have been
fully expiated. For this reason, it is called the hell of Great Screaming.
Again, the guards in this hell seize the offenders and throw them into
an immense iron jar, where they burn in boiling water. The screaming that
erupts mounts ever higher because the pain they experience is as intense
as that of all the worst poisons taken together, yet they are prevented from
dying until their offenses have been fully expiated. For this reason, it is
called the hell of Great Screaming.
Again, the guards in this hell seize the offenders and throw them into
an iron cauldron, where they burn in boiling water. The screaming that
erupts mounts ever higher because the pain they experience is as intense
as that of all the worst poisons taken together, yet they are prevented from
dying until their offenses have been fully expiated. For this reason, (124b)
it is called the hell of Great Screaming.
Again, the guards in this hell seize the offenders and throw them into
a huge frying pan, where they are repeatedly fried and then boiled. The
screaming that erupts mounts ever higher because the pain they experience
is as intense as that of all the worst poisons taken together, yet they are
prevented from dying until their offenses have been fully expiated. For
this reason, it is called the hell of Great Screaming.
After undergoing the torments of this hell for a long time, the malefactors emerge from Great Screaming hell and ﬂee in terror, seeking to
be rescued and protected. Without knowing, however, they are drawn by
their past actions and immediately arrive at Black Sands hell, and so on,
until they reach Cold and Icy hell and subsequently their lives come to
an end, just as before.
The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

The great hell of Fiery Heat contains sixteen minor hells, each of which
is ﬁve hundred yojanas long and wide and enclosed by a fence. Why is it
known as Fiery Heat? The guards in this hell take offenders to an iron
castle that glows, inside and out, with the heat of the ﬁre burning within.

194

Sutra 30

The malefactors are left here and are slowly incinerated, their skin and
ﬂesh burned away amid mounting pain as intense as that of all the worst
poisons taken together, yet they are prevented from dying until their offenses
have been fully expiated. For this reason, it is called the hell of Fiery Heat.
Again, the guards in this hell take the offenders to an iron room that
glows, inside and out, with the heat of the ﬁre burning within. There the
malefactors are incinerated, their skin and ﬂesh burned away amid mounting pain as intense as that of all the worst poisons taken together, yet they
are prevented from dying until their offenses have been fully expiated.
For this reason, it is called the hell of Fiery Heat.
Again, the guards in this hell take the offenders to an iron tower that
glows, inside and out, with the heat of the ﬁre burning within. There the
malefactors are incinerated, their skin and ﬂesh burned away amid mounting pain as intense as that of all the worst poisons taken together, yet they
are prevented from dying until their offenses have been fully expiated.
For this reason, it is called the hell of Fiery Heat.
Again, the guards in this hell throw the offenders into a gigantic iron
pot that glows, inside and out, with the heat of the ﬁre burning within.
There the malefactors are incinerated, their skin and ﬂesh burned away
amid mounting pain as intense as that of all the worst poisons taken
together, yet they are prevented from dying until their offenses have been
fully expiated. For this reason, it is called the hell of Fiery Heat.
Again, the guards in this hell throw the offenders down onto a ﬂat iron
plate whose surfaces glow with the heat of the ﬁre burning within. There
the malefactors are incinerated, their skin and ﬂesh burned away amid
mounting pain as intense as that of all the worst poisons taken together,
yet they are prevented from dying until their offenses have been fully
expiated. For this reason, it is called the hell of Fiery Heat.
After undergoing the torments of this hell for a long time, the malefactors
emerge from Fiery Heat hell and ﬂee in terror, seeking to be rescued and
protected. Without knowing, however, they are drawn by their past actions
and immediately arrive at Black Sands hell, and so on, until they reach Cold
and Icy hell and subsequently their lives come to an end, just as before.
The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

195

124c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

The great hell of Great Fiery Heat contains sixteen minor hells, each of
which is ﬁve hundred yojanas long and wide and enclosed by a fence.
Why is it known as Great Fiery Heat? The guards in this hell put the
offenders inside an iron castle that glows, inside and out, with the heat of
the ﬁre burning within. There the malefactors are incinerated twice over,
their skin and ﬂesh burned away amid mounting pain as intense as that
of all the worst poisons taken together, yet they are prevented from dying
until their offenses have been fully expiated. For this reason, it is called
the hell of Great Fiery Heat.
Again, the guards in this hell take the offenders to an iron room that
glows, inside and out, with the heat of the ﬁre burning within. There the
malefactors are incinerated twice over, their skin and ﬂesh burned away
amid mounting pain as intense as that of all the worst poisons taken
together, yet they are prevented from dying until their offenses have been
fully expiated. For this reason, it is called the hell of Great Fiery Heat.
Again, the guards in this hell take the offenders to an iron tower that
glows, inside and out, with the heat of the ﬁre burning within. There the
malefactors are incinerated twice over, their skin and ﬂesh burned away
amid mounting pain as intense as that of all the worst poisons taken
together, yet they are prevented from dying until their offenses have been
fully expiated. For this reason, it is called the hell of Great Fiery Heat.
Again, the guards in this hell throw the offenders into a gigantic iron
pot that glows, inside and out, with the heat of the ﬁre burning within.
There the malefactors are incinerated twice over, their skin and ﬂesh burned
away amid mounting pain as intense as that of all the worst poisons taken
together, yet they are prevented from dying until their offenses have been
fully expiated. For this reason, it is called the hell of Great Fiery Heat.
Again, there is a natural ﬁrepit in this hell, ﬂanked by two volcanic
mountains. The guards seize the offenders, skewer them with an iron rod,
and lower them into the ﬁrepit. The malefactors are incinerated twice
over, their skin and ﬂesh burned away amid mounting pain as intense as
that of all the worst poisons taken together, yet they are prevented from
dying until their offenses have been fully expiated. For this reason, it is
called the hell of Great Fiery Heat.

196

Sutra 30

After undergoing the torments of this hell for a long time, the malefactors emerge from Great Fiery Heat hell and ﬂee in terror, seeking to
be rescued and protected. Without knowing, however, they are drawn by
their past actions and immediately arrive at Black Sands hell, and so on,
until they reach Cold and Icy hell and subsequently their lives come to
an end, just as before.
The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

The great hell of Unremitting Suffering (wujiantadiyu; avīci) contains sixteen minor hells, each of which is ﬁve hundred yojanas long and wide and
enclosed by a fence. Why is it known as Unremitting Suffering? The guards
in this hell seize the offenders, skin them alive from head to toe, and use
their ﬂayed skin to lash them to the hot wheels of a chariot, which they
drive back and forth across a ﬁery iron track. Once crushed, the bodies of
the malefactors disintegrate into tiny bits of ﬂesh and bone and left scattered
along the track. The pain they experience as their distress mounts is as
intense as that of all the worst poisons taken together, yet they are prevented
from dying until their offenses have been fully expiated. For this reason,
it is called the hell of Unremitting Suffering.
Again, there is a great iron castle in this hell that is besieged [at times]
with blazing ﬁres on all four sides. The ﬂames on the eastern side leap
over the castle to the western side, and vice versa; the ﬂames on the southern side reach the northern side, and vice versa. Similarly, the ﬂames in
the upper stories reach down to the cellar, and the ﬂames in the cellar rise
up without cease, leaving nothing untouched. The malefactors within the
castle try to ﬂee but they cannot escape and wherever they turn their skin
and ﬂesh are devoured by the ﬂames. The pain they experience as their
distress mounts is as intense as that of all the worst poisons taken together,
yet they are prevented from dying until their offenses have been fully
expiated. For this reason, it is called the hell of Unremitting Suffering.
Again, the iron castles in this hell burn from within, like ﬁery caves.
The malefactors trapped within the castles are incinerated, their skin and
ﬂesh burned away. The pain they experience as their distress mounts is as
intense as that of all the worst poisons taken together, yet they are prevented

197

125a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

from dying until their offenses have been fully expiated. For this reason,
it is called the hell of Unremitting Suffering.
Again, after being trapped for some time, the malefactors see the gate
to this hell begin to open and they rush toward it, desperate [to escape].
As they run, like a strongman carrying a ﬁery torch and running against
the wind, the joints in their limbs feel as if they are being consumed in
ﬂames. But when they reach the gate it suddenly closes and they fall onto
a sizzling iron ﬂoor. As their skin and ﬂesh are burned away, the pain they
experience as their distress mounts is as intense as that of all the worst
poisons taken together, yet they are prevented from dying until their
offenses have been fully expiated. For this reason, it is called the hell of
Unremitting Suffering.
Again, everything the malefactors see in this hell is repulsive, everything
they hear is grotesque, everything they smell is offensive, everything they
touch is painful, and every passing notion is a malevolent thought. There
is no letup in their suffering, not even for as brief a moment as a ﬁnger
snap. For this reason, it is called the hell of Unremitting Suffering.
After undergoing the torments of this hell for a long time the malefactors
emerge from Unremitting Suffering hell and ﬂee in terror, seeking to be
rescued and protected. Without knowing, however, they are drawn by
their past actions and immediately arrive at Black Sands hell and so on,
until they reach Cold and Icy hell and subsequently their lives come to
an end, just as before.

The World-honored One then continued in verse:

125b

Committing evil physical actions,
And so too evil speech and thought,
One falls into the hell of Conscious Recovery;
Fearing this, your hair stands on end.

When hiding an evil thought, one meets
One’s parents, the Buddha, and his saintly disciples,
One falls into the Black Rope hell;
The suffering there is beyond imagination.

When one commits nothing but the three evils,

198

Sutra 30

Without performing any of the three kinds of good,
One falls into the hell of Compression;
The suffering there is beyond imagination.

When one holds malevolent intent in hatred and anger,
And is deﬁled with the blood of one’s victims
Through many kinds of evil actions,
One falls into the hell of Screaming.

When one follows various evil views,
Bewildered by the bonds of love and lust,
Committing abject [bad] deeds out of blindness,
One falls into the hell of Great Screaming.

Whoever does anything out of passion,
Subjecting other sentient beings to the ﬂames,
[He or she] falls into the hell of Fiery Heat
And suffers there for a long time.

Whoever abandons the actions that promote good
And the purity that leads to a good end,
Committing abject and evil deeds,
[That person] falls into the hell of Great Fiery Heat.

Whoever commits egregious offenses
Creates the power that leads to an evil end
And falls into the hell of Unremitting Suffering;
The punishments therein are beyond imagination.

Conscious Recovery, Black Rope, Compression, Screaming,
Great Screaming, Fiery Heat, Great Fiery Heat, Unremitting Suffering:
The eight great hells are like caves glowing with ﬁre;
Each contains sixteen minor hells for all one’s past [evil] actions.

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

Between the two diamond mountain [ranges] great gusts of wind called
sāṃkhya [occasionally] rage. If a storm were to sweep over the four continents and their eighty thousand territories, it would race through the air

199

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

125c

and smash everything into pieces, blasting the very earth and the great
mountains, including the greatest mountain of all, Mount Sumeru, as well
as everything else up to ten or a hundred li above the ground, just as when
one takes a handful of bran and throws it into the air. Such would be the
effect if a great storm were to blow through this world. But the two diamond ranges block [this raging wind] from reaching this world.
O bhikṣus, you should know that the two beneﬁcial diamond ranges
are the result of the good conduct of sentient beings. Again, the raging
winds between the two ranges blow with intense heat and ﬁery ﬂames. If
those winds were to blow through this world, all the sentient beings, as
well as the hills, rivers, inlets, oceans, grasses and trees, bushes and forests,
would at once shrivel up and burn, just as live grass withers within an
hour when it is cut and left under the hot summer sun. The heat from these
raging winds would consume everything in like manner. But the two diamond ranges block them from reaching this world.
O bhikṣus, you should know that the two beneﬁcial diamond ranges
are the result of the good conduct of sentient beings. Again, the raging
winds between the two ranges have a putrid smell, like something
extremely foul. If these winds were to blow through this world the noxious
stench would cause all sentient beings to lose their sight. But the two diamond ranges block them from reaching this world.
O bhikṣus, you should know that the two beneﬁcial diamond ranges
are the result of the good conduct of sentient beings. Again, between the
two ranges are ten hells, called (1) Thick Cloud, (2) Absent Cloud, (3)
Hehe (4) Nahe, (5) Bleating Sheep, (6) Sūgandhika, (7) Utpala, (8)
Kumuda, (9) Puṇḍarīka, and (10) Padma.
Why is the ﬁrst hell called Thick Cloud? The bodies of the offenders
who fall into this hell grow of their own accord, just as a heavy cloud
[forms of its own]. Hence it is called Thick Cloud. Why is the second
[hell] called Absent Cloud? The bodies of the offenders in this hell automatically regrow, like ﬂesh that can be consumed. Hence it is called Absent
Cloud. Why is the third [hell] called Hehe? The offenders in this hell utter
the sound he he when their ﬂesh is pierced. Hence it is called Hehe. Why
is the fourth [hell] called Nahe? Because the offenders who suffer from
their ﬂesh being pierced have no rescuers, everyone in this hell mutters,

200

Sutra 30

“Nahe (“no one”) to rely on.” Hence it is called Nahe. Why is the ﬁfth
[hell] called Bleating Sheep? Here the offenders who suffer from their
ﬂesh being pierced try to speak but they are unable to move their tongues
and can only utter the sound baaaa. Hence it is called Bleating Sheep.
Why is the sixth [hell] called Sūgandhika? Everything in this hell is black,
like the color of sūgandhika blossoms. Hence it is called Sūgandhika.
Why is the seventh [hell] called Utpala? Everything in this hell is blue,
like the color of a blue lotus (utpala). Hence it is called Utpala. Why is
the eighth [hell] called Kumuda? Everything in this hell is pink (kumuda).
Hence it is called Kumuda. Why is the ninth [hell] called Puṇḍarīka?
Everything in this hell is white (puṇḍarīka). Hence it is called Puṇḍarīka.
Why is the tenth [hell] called Padma? Everything [in this hell] is red
(padma). Hence it is called Padma.

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

Take the example of a container that holds sixty-four hu27 of grain. Suppose
this container was ﬁlled with sesame seeds and you were to remove a
single seed from the container every one hundred years. Even when all
the seeds have been removed, a malefactor in Thick Cloud hell will not
yet have completed the term of his atonement. Now, multiply one term
in Thick Cloud twenty times and that equals a single term in Absent Cloud
hell. Twenty times a term in Absent Cloud equals a single term in Hehe
hell. Twenty times a term in Hehe equals a single term in Nahe hell. Twenty
times a term in Nahe equals a single term in Bleating Sheep hell. Twenty
times a term in Bleating Sheep equals a single term in Sūgandhika hell.
Twenty times a term in the Sūgandhika equals a single term in Utpala
hell. Twenty times a term in Utpala equals a single term in Kumuda hell.
Twenty times a term in Kumuda equals a single term in Puṇḍarīka hell.
Twenty times a term in Puṇḍarīka equals a single term in Padma hell.
Twenty times a term in Padma hell is called a median eon, and twenty
median eons make up a major eon. Now the fiery heat in Padma is so
intense that it can burn the bodies of malefactors even at a distance of
one hundred yojanas; at sixty yojanas the malefactors are totally deafened, and at fifty yojanas they are completely blinded, unable to see
anything again.

201

126a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

When the bhikṣu Kaukālika slandered the [two great] elders Śāriputra
and Maudgalyāyana with malevolent intent, he fell into Padma [Hell]. At
that moment, the lord of Brahmā Heaven uttered the following verse:

Those who are born hold an ax in their mouth
And slay others with slanderous speech.
Praising someone who should be criticized
And criticizing someone who should be praised
Are equally evil deeds in speech,
And the means of acquiring [multiple] offenses.
Although acquiring wealth through treachery
Only brings a slight misfortune,
Slandering the saintly disciples
Must be counted a grave offense.
For this, one suffers in Thick Cloud [hell]
For a hundred thousand years,
Or forty-one terms in Absent Cloud [hell].
All who slander will receive this retribution
As the result of their evil thought and speech.

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

126b

The lord of Brahmā Heaven spoke the truth in his verse, and the buddhas
also regard it as true. Now, I, the Tathāgata, who has eradicated all deﬁlements and attained perfect enlightenment, give the same teaching expressed
in this verse:
Those who are born hold an ax in their mouth
And slay others with slanderous speech.
Praising someone who should be criticized
And criticizing someone who should be praised
Are equally evil deeds in speech,
And the means of acquiring [multiple] offenses.
Although acquiring wealth through treachery
Only brings a slight misfortune,
Slandering the saintly disciples
Must be counted a grave offense.

202

Sutra 30

For this, one suffers in Thick Cloud [hell]
For a hundred thousand years,
Or forty-one terms in Absent Cloud [hell].
All who slander will receive this retribution
As the result of their evil thought and speech.

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

To the south of Jambudvīpa, within the great diamond range, is the palace
of the king of the hells [Yamarāja], who rules over an area six thousand
yojanas long and wide. The castle consists of seven concentric buildings
and is ringed by seven railings, seven ornamental nets, seven lines of trees
and so forth, with innumerable rare birds singing harmoniously together,
just as in the other palatial settings. Thrice each night the king of the hells
is confronted with a great copper cauldron that automatically appears
before him. When the cauldron appears in the palace the king is terriﬁed
and ﬂees the palace grounds in order to get away from it. If he is outside
the palace when he sees [the cauldron], he is terriﬁed and returns to the
palace, but an imposing guard seizes the king, throws him down on a hot
iron, pries his mouth open with an iron hook, and pours molten copper
into it. The molten copper scalds his lips, tongue, and throat down to the
stomach, eating away at everything. When his atonement is over, the king
of the hells resumes his life and once again enjoys his royal status with
the palace ladies. The numerous ministers who also enjoy the rewards of
their station undergo the same punishment.

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

There are three messengers. What are the three? The ﬁrst is the messenger
of old age, the second is the messenger of illness, and the third is the messenger of death. Any sentient being who has committed evil deeds in
thought and speech, as well as with physical actions, falls into the hells
at the end of his or her life and the dissolution of the body. The guards in
the hells lead them before the king of the hells and report, “It has been
deemed proper by the messengers appointed by the heavens that these
people should come to this court. May Your Majesty examine them and
seek their response.”

203

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

126c

The king of the hells asks an offender, “Did you not see the initial messenger?” The offender replies, “No, sir. I did not notice him.” The king
asks again, “While you lived among other humans, you must have seen
old people whose hair had turned white, whose teeth had fallen out, who
had gone blind, whose skin had become loose and wrinkled, whose backs
were hunched, and who could walk only with a cane, uttering low moans
and groans while their bodies trembled and their spirits declined. Have
you not [seen this]?” The offender replies, “Yes, sir. I have seen them.”
The king asks again, “Did you think that you too would become like
them?” The offender says, “I was careless and indulgent and it did not
occur to me, sir.” The king replies, “Since you were careless and indulgent,
[as you admit,] you were unable to control your physical, mental, and
verbal actions; nor were you able to reform your evil habits or follow
good ones. I must inform you about the suffering that results from careless
indulgence in life.” The king goes on, “Whatever punishment you must
undergo is not due to the fault of your parents, your siblings, the lord of
the heavens, your ancestral spirits, your friends, servants, or employees.
Nor is it due to the fault of any śramaṇa or brāhmaṇa; it is solely due to
your own faults, and so you must now accept the appropriate punishment.”
After asking offenders about the ﬁrst messenger, the king of the hells
questions them in relation to the second heavenly messenger, “Didn’t you
see the second messenger?” An offender replies, “No, sir.” The king asks
again, “While you lived among other humans, you must have seen people
with illnesses so serious that they could only lie on a couch stained with
[their own] urine and excretions, unable to sit or stand, completely reliant
on the help of others for their food and drink; their hundred joints having
become so painful, they moan and groan and shed tears, unable to speak
a word. Haven’t you seen such people?” The offender replies, “Yes, sir.”
The king continues, “Why didn’t you think that you too would become
like them?” The offender says, “I was careless and indulgent and it did
not occur to me, sir.” The king replies, “Since you were careless and indulgent, you were unable to control your physical, mental, and verbal actions;
nor were you able to reform your evil habits or follow good ones. I must
inform you about the suffering that results from careless indulgence in
life.” The king goes on, “Whatever punishment you must undergo is not

204

Sutra 30

due to the fault of your parents, your siblings, the lord of the heavens,
your ancestral spirits, your friends, servants, or employees. Nor is it due
to the fault of any śramaṇa or brāhmaṇa; it is solely due to your own
faults, and so you must now accept the appropriate punishment.”
After asking offenders about the second messenger, the king of the
hells questions them in relation to the third heavenly messenger, “Didn’t
you see the third messenger?” An offender replies, “No, sir.” The king
asks again, “While you lived among other humans, you must have seen
people die and their physical bodies dissolved as their life ends; their faculties had ceased to function, their bodies as stiff as dried wood, and either
thrown onto a cemetery mound to be pecked at by birds or animals,
enclosed in a cofﬁn within an external vault, or cremated in ﬁre. Haven’t
you seen this?” The offender replies, “Yes, sir, I have.” The king continues,
“Why didn’t you think that you too would become like that?” The offender
says, “I was careless and indulgent and it did not occur to me, sir.” The
king replies, “Since you were careless and indulgent, you were unable to
control your physical, mental, and verbal actions; nor were you able to
reform your evil habits or follow good ones. I must inform you about the
suffering that results from careless indulgence in life.” The king goes on,
“Whatever punishment you must undergo is not due to the fault of your
parents, or your siblings, the lord of the heavens, your ancestral spirits,
your friends, servants, or employees. Nor is it due to the fault of any śramaṇa or brāhmaṇa; it is solely due to your own faults, and so you must
now accept the appropriate punishment.”
After taking the offenders through detailed questioning in relation to
the three heavenly messengers, the king of the hells hands them over to
the guards, who lead them down to a great hell measuring a hundred
yojanas long and wide, and an equal depth below the ground.
Then the World-honored One uttered the following verse:

Four gates are open to the four directions,
With all roads and passages leading here.
Each hell is enclosed in iron walls,
With an iron net ceiling
And an iron ﬂoor.

205

127a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

Fierce ﬂames blow [into these hells] continually,
Each a hundred yojanas in length and breadth,
Firmly set, neither tilting nor shaking.
Dark smoke rises in every part of the chamber,
Making it hard to see through the bright ﬁery glow.
Sixteen minor hells are attached,
All of them ﬁlled with ﬁerce ﬂames,
The heat of which matches the evil actions of the offenders.

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

The king of the hells thought to himself, “No sentient being in the world
is free from ignorance and delusion, and therefore he or she commits evil
deeds physically, mentally, and verbally. Having done so, when their lives
end there is no one, with few exceptions, who is not subject to these kinds
of hellish suffering. If the sentient beings in the world would reform their
evil habits, however, and control their physical, mental, and verbal actions
and thus engage in good conduct, they would enjoy happiness in a heaven
after the end of their life, like the heavenly gods. If I should be born a
human after my death and come into the presence of the Tathāgata, I would
shave my hair and beard under the guidance of the right Dharma, don the
three mendicant robes, renounce domestic life, attain pure faith, and engage
in the practice of austerity so as to accomplish what must be done [for
salvation], acquire insight into the nature of things as they really are, and
realize for myself, in this life, the direct experience that there is no more
birth for me ever again.”
Then the World-honored One uttered the following verse:

After seeing the heavenly messengers,
If one carelessly continues to indulge in life,
He or she accumulates worries and is reborn in a lower state.
If one is wise, on seeing the heavenly messengers
He or she will cleave to the Dharma of the saintly disciples
And refrain from careless indulgence in life.
Foreseeing rebirth in old age, illness, and death,
One sees that deliverance only comes when there is no rebirth.

206

Sutra 30

By exhausting the cycle of birth, old age, illness, and death,
One realizes [eternal] peace and happiness.
By [resolving to] attain the transcendent goal in this life,
One overcomes all worries and fears
And is destined to realize ﬁnal nirvana.

Article 5: Dragons
and Birds

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

There are four kinds of dragons (nāgas). What are the four? (1) Those
born from an egg, (2) those born from a womb, (3) those born from moist
heat, and (4) those born through transformation. Those are the four ways
of birth. There are also four kinds of garuḍas (mythological bird), and
they too are born from an egg, a womb, moist heat, or transformation.
At the bottom of the great ocean is the palace of the dragon lord Sāgaranāgarāja, which is eighty thousand yojanas long and wide, ringed by sevenfold walls embellished with seven railings, seven ornamental nets, and
seven lines of trees, all made from the seven kinds of treasure, and so on,
with innumerable rare birds singing harmoniously together, as in the
palaces already mentioned.
Between Mount Sumeru and Mount Khadira are two palaces belonging
to the dragon lords called Nanda and Upananda. Each palace, measuring
a thousand yojanas long and wide, is ringed by sevenfold walls embellished
with seven railings, seven ornamental nets, and seven lines of trees, all
made from the seven kinds of treasure, and so on, with innumerable rare
birds singing harmoniously together, as in the palaces already mentioned.
To the north of the great ocean is a gigantic tree, called kūṭaśālmali,
in which both the lord of the nāgas and the lord of the garuḍas reside.
The circumference of this tree is a full seven yojanas; it rises to a height
of one hundred yojanas and its branches and leaves extend out as far as
ﬁfty yojanas.
To the east of this tree are the palaces of the nāgas born from an egg
and the palaces of the garuḍas born from an egg, each measuring six thousand yojanas in length and breadth. Each palace is ringed by sevenfold

207

127b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

127c

walls embellished with seven railings, seven ornamental nets, and seven
lines of trees, all made from the seven kinds of treasure, and so on, with
innumerable rare birds singing harmoniously together, as in the other palaces
already mentioned. To the south of the kūtaśālmali tree are the palaces of
the nāgas and garuḍas born from a womb; each palace is six thousand
yojanas long and wide, ringed by sevenfold walls embellished with seven
railings, seven ornamental nets, and seven lines of trees, all made from the
seven kinds of treasure, and so on, with innumerable rare birds singing harmoniously together, as in the other palaces already mentioned. To the west
of the kūtaśālmali tree are the palaces of the nāgas and garuḍas born from
a moist heat, which measure six thousand yojanas in length and breadth.
Each palace is ringed by sevenfold walls embellished with seven railings,
seven ornamental nets, and seven lines of trees, all made from the seven
kinds of treasure, and so on, with innumerable rare birds singing harmoniously together, as in the other palaces already mentioned. To the north of
the kūtaśālmali tree are the palaces of the nāgas and garuḍas born through
transformation, each of which is six thousand yojanas long and wide. Each
palace is ringed by sevenfold walls embellished with seven railings, seven
ornamental nets, and seven lines of trees, all made from the seven kinds of
treasure, and so on, with innumerable rare birds singing harmoniously
together, as in the other palaces already mentioned.
When a garuḍa born from an egg wishes to partake of dragon meat,
it ﬂies down from an eastern branch of the kūṭaśālmali tree and strikes
the surface of the ocean with its wings, creating waves on both sides that
roll out to a distance of two hundred yojanas. In the trough [of the wave]
the garuḍa feeds on the ﬂesh of dragons born from an egg as freely as it
wishes. However, it cannot catch the other three kinds of dragons.
When a garuḍa born from a womb wishes to partake of the ﬂesh of
dragons born from an egg, it ﬂies down from an eastern branch of the
kūṭaśālmali tree and strikes the surface of the ocean with its wings, creating
waves on both sides that roll out to a distance of two hundred yojanas. In
the trough [of the wave] it feeds on the ﬂesh of dragons born from an egg,
as freely as it wishes. When a garuḍa born from a womb wishes to partake
of dragons born from a womb, it ﬂies down from a southern branch of
the kūṭaśālmali tree and strikes the surface of the ocean with its wings,

208

Sutra 30

creating waves on both sides that roll out to a distance of four hundred
yojanas. In the trough [of the wave] it feeds on dragons born from a womb,
as freely as it wishes. However, it cannot catch dragons born from moist
heat or through transformation.
When a garuḍa born from moist heat wishes to partake of the ﬂesh of
a dragon born from an egg, it ﬂies down from an eastern branch of the
kūṭaśālmali tree and strikes the surface of the ocean with its wings, creating
waves on both sides that roll out to a distance of two hundred yojanas. In
the trough [of the wave] it feeds on the ﬂesh of dragons born from an egg,
as freely as it wishes. When a garuḍa born from moist heat wishes to partake of the ﬂesh of dragons born from a womb, it ﬂies down from an
eastern branch of the kūṭaśālmali tree and strikes the surface of the ocean
with its wings, creating waves on both sides that roll out to a distance of
four hundred yojanas. In the trough [of the wave] it feeds on the ﬂesh of
dragons born from an egg as freely as it wishes. When a garuḍa born from
moist heat wishes to partake of the ﬂesh of dragons born from moist heat,
it ﬂies down from a western branch of the kūṭaśālmali tree and strikes the
surface of the ocean with its wings, creating waves on both sides that roll
out to a distance of eight hundred yojanas. In the trough [of the wave] it
feeds on the ﬂesh of dragons born from moist heat, as freely as it wishes.
However, it cannot catch dragons born through transformation.
When a garuḍa born through incarnation wishes to partake of the ﬂesh
of dragons born from an egg, it ﬂies down from an eastern branch of the
kūṭaśālmali tree and strikes the surface of the ocean with its wings, creating
waves on both sides that roll out to a distance of two hundred yojanas. In
the trough [of the wave] it feeds on dragons born from an egg, as freely
as it wishes. When a garuḍa born through transformation wishes to partake
of the ﬂesh of dragons born from a womb, it ﬂies down from a southern
branch of the kūṭaśālmali tree and strikes the surface of the ocean with
its wings, creating waves on both sides that roll out to a distance of four
hundred yojanas. In the trough [of the wave] it feeds on dragons born
from a womb, as freely as it wishes. When a garuḍa born through transformation wishes to partake of the ﬂesh of dragons born from moist heat,
it ﬂies down from a western branch of the kūṭaśālmali tree and strikes the
surface of the ocean with its wings, creating waves on both sides that roll

209

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

128a

out to a distance of eight hundred yojanas. In the trough [of the wave] it
feeds on the ﬂesh of dragons born from moist heat, as freely as it wishes.
When a garuḍa born through transformation wishes to partake of the ﬂesh
of dragons born through transformation, it ﬂies down from a northern
branch of the kūṭaśālmali tree and strikes the surface of the ocean with
its wings, creating waves on both sides that roll out to a distance of sixteen
hundred yojanas. In the trough [of the wave] it feeds on the ﬂesh of dragons
born through transformation, as freely as it wishes. The foregoing
[describes] the dragons that are eaten by the garuḍas.
There are dragons, however, on whom even the garuḍas cannot feed.
Who are these dragons? They are Sāgaranāgarāja, Nanda, Upananda, Yinapoluo, Titoulaicha, Sudṛśa, Alü, Jiejuluo, Jiapiluo, Aboluo, Jiatu, Qujiatu,
Anavatapta, Supratiṣṭhita, Yushanqiebotou, and Dechajia. These are the
dragon kings who are not subject to [being consumed by] the garuḍas, and
those under their care are free from the fate met by the other dragons.

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

If a sentient being upholds dragon norms and always observes, in mind
and volition, the importance of the rules followed by dragons, that person
will be reborn in the dragon world. If a sentient being upholds the norms
of garuḍas and always observes, in mind and volition, the importance of
the rules followed by garuḍas, that person will be reborn in the world of
the garuḍas. If a sentient being upholds the norms of the hare and owl
and always observes, in mind and volition, the importance of their rules,
that person will [be reborn] into their world. If a sentient being upholds
the norms of a dog, cow, deer, or [the norms] of a mute, of Maṇibhadra,
the sun and moon, of water, ﬁre, or sacriﬁcial ﬁre, or of various ascetic
practices, and if that person also thinks, “I have upheld the norms of a
mute, of Maṇibhadra, of the sun and moon, of water, ﬁre, and sacriﬁcial
ﬁre, and of various ascetic practices, and because of those merits I wish
to be reborn in heaven”—[what do you think?] Is this a wrong view?
The Buddha continued:

I shall explain that the kind of person who upholds the following wrong
views is bound to fall [upon rebirth] into one of two places—either in the

210

Sutra 30

hells or the four kinds of [animal] births. Some śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas
theorize that “The self and the world are permanent; this view alone is
true while the rest is false,” or “The self and the world are impermanent;
this view alone is true while the rest is false,” or “The self and the world
are both permanent and impermanent; this view alone is true while the
rest is false,” or “The self and the world are limited (i.e., come to an end);
this view alone is true while the rest is false,” or “The self and the world
are limitless (i.e., never come to an end); this view alone is true while the
rest is false,” or “The self and the world are both limited and limitless;
this view alone is true while the rest is false,” or “The self and the world
are neither limited nor limitless; this view alone is true while the rest is
false,” or “This life principle (jīva) and this corporeal body [are identical];
this view alone is true while the rest is false,” or “This life principle is
different [from the body], and the body differs [from the life principle];
this view alone is true while the rest is false,” or “There is neither a life
principle nor no life principle; this view alone is true while the rest is
false,” or “There is neither a life principle nor a corporeal body; this view
alone is true while the rest is false.”
Some assert, “There is a further death beyond this; this view alone is
true while the rest is false.” Others assert, “There is no further death
beyond this; this view alone is true while the rest is false.” A third group
asserts, “There is both a further death beyond this and no further death
beyond this; this view alone is true while the rest is false.” A fourth group
asserts, “There is neither a further death beyond this, nor no further death
beyond this.”
When a śramaṇa or brāhmaṇa says, “The world is permanent; this
view alone is true while the rest is false,” that person is afﬁrming an
assumption based on tendencies that predispose him to believe that there
is a permanent self (ātma-dṛṣṭi) and a permanent life principle (jīva), and
that the body is the self and the world is permanent. Because of this, he
asserts that the self and the world are permanent. When someone says [in
opposition], “The world is impermanent,” that person is afﬁrming a similar
assumption, in that it is also based on the predisposition to believe that
there is a permanent self and a permanent life principle, and that the body
is the self and the world is permanent. Thus such a person asserts that the

211

128b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

self and the world are impermanent. When someone asserts that the world
is both permanent and impermanent, that person is also afﬁrming an
assumption based on a predisposition to believe that there is a permanent
self and a permanent life principle, and that the body is the self and the
world is permanent. Thus such a person now asserts that the self and the
world are both permanent and impermanent. When someone asserts that
the world is neither permanent nor impermanent, this again is afﬁrming
an assumption based on a predisposition to believe that there is a permanent
self and a permanent life principle, and that the body is the self and the
world is permanent. Thus such a person maintains that the self and the
world are neither permanent nor impermanent.
When someone asserts that the self and the world are limited, he too
is afﬁrming an assumption based on a predisposition to believe that there
is a permanent self and a permanent life principle, and that the body is
the self and the world is permanent, and also that the life principle, the
physical body, and the world are limited. [In this view,] the body consisting
of the four gross elements continually transforms itself from the moment
of conception until its arrival at the cemetery, sustaining itself over a span
of seven lives. When at length the latent tendencies (i.e., predispositional
forces) of the physical body and life principle are exhausted, the self enters
into a pure state (i.e., a puriﬁed aggregate). Thus such a person maintains
that the self is limited.
When someone asserts that the self and the world are limitless, this is
again afﬁrming an assumption based on a predisposition to believe that
the life principle, the physical body, and the world are limitless. The body
consisting of the four gross elements continually transforms itself from
the moment of conception until its arrival at the cemetery, sustaining itself
over a span of seven lives. When at length the latent tendencies of the
physical body and life principle are exhausted the self enters into a pure
state. Seeing this, such a person maintains that the self is limitless.
When someone asserts that the world is both limited and limitless, this
too is afﬁrming an assumption based on their practice, the belief that there
is a permanent self and a permanent life principle, that the body is the self
and the world is permanent, and that the life principle (jīva) is both limited
and limitless. The body consisting of the four gross elements continually

212

Sutra 30

transforms itself from the moment of conception until its arrival at the
cemetery, sustaining itself over a span of seven lives. When at length the
latent tendencies of the physical body and life principle are exhausted the
self enters into a pure state. Seeing this, such a person maintains that the
self and the world are both limited and limitless.
When someone asserts that the self and the world are neither limited
nor limitless, this is afﬁrming an assumption based on a predisposition to
believe that the life principle and the physical body are limitless. The
body consisting of the four gross elements continually transforms itself
from the moment of conception until its arrival at the cemetery, sustaining
itself over a span of seven lives. When at length the latent tendencies of
the physical body and life principle are exhausted the self enters into a
pure state. Seeing this, such a person maintains that the self is neither limited nor limitless.
When someone asserts that the life principle is identical with the physical
body, this is afﬁrming the existence of the life principle in relation to this
physical body, and [also] its existence in relation to another [different] body.
Because of this, such a person maintains that the life principle is identical
with the physical body. If they assert, however, that the physical body differs
when the life principle differs, they are afﬁrming the existence of the life
principle in relation to the physical body but not its existence in relation to
another [different] body. Thus such a person maintains that when there is
a change in the life principle there is a different physical body.
When someone asserts that the body and the life principle are existent
as well as nonexistent, this is afﬁrming an assumption that there is no life
principle in relation to the body but that there is a life principle in another
body. Because of this, such a person asserts that there is a life principle
and also that there is no life principle. If someone asserts that there is
neither the body nor a life principle, this is afﬁrming a view that there is
neither a life principle in this body nor a life principle in another body.
Because of this, such a person asserts that there is neither a life principle
nor the corporeal body.
When someone asserts that there is another [different] death than this,
this is afﬁrming an assumption that there is a life principle now and [also
that] the life principle and [the] body will be active later on (i.e., in an

213

128c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

afterlife). Because of this, such a person asserts that there is a different
death than this. If someone asserts that there is not another death than
this, this is afﬁrming an assumption that there is a life principle in this
[present] life but that there is no life principle in the afterlife. Because of
this, such a person asserts that there is not another death than this. If someone asserts that there is another death than this as well as not another death
than this, this is afﬁrming an assumption that the life principle is annihilated
in this life but [other] life principles become active in the afterlife. Because
of this, such a person asserts both that there is another life principle than
this and that there is not another life principle than this. If someone asserts
that there is neither another death like this nor not another death like this,
this is afﬁrming an assumption that the present life principle and body
are annihilated and that the life principle and the body in the afterlife will
also be annihilated. Because of this, such a person asserts that there is
neither another death than this nor not another death than this.
Then the World-honored One said to the bhikṣus:

Once there was a king called Ādarśamukha (or Darpaṇamukha). It happened
that a group of blind men had gathered at one spot and the king asked them,
“O blind men, do you know what an elephant is?” They replied, “O great
king, we do not know, nor would we recognize, what an elephant is.” The
king asked again, “Would you like to know how it is shaped?” They replied,
“Yes, we would like to know that, sire.” The king instructed his attendant
to bring an elephant to them and then asked the blind men to touch it with
their hands. One of them touched the animal’s nose, and the king said,
“That is an elephant.” The second blind man touched its tusk, the third
touched its ear, the fourth touched its head, the ﬁfth touched its back, the
sixth touched its belly, the seventh touched its knee, the eighth touched its
shoulder, the ninth touched a foot, and the tenth touched the tail. Each
time, the king told each blind man, “That is an elephant.”
Then the king had the animal taken away and questioned the blind
men: “What is the elephant like?” The ﬁrst among them, who had touched
its nose, replied, “The elephant is like the twisted shaft of a cart, sire”;
the second, who had touched its tusk, replied, “It is like a pestle”; the

214

Sutra 30

third, who had touched its ear, replied, “It is like a straw raincoat”; the
fourth, who had touched its head, replied, “It is like a [large] kettle”; the
ﬁfth, who had touched its back, replied, “It is like a hilltop”; the sixth, who
had touched its belly, replied, “It is like a wall”; the seventh, who had touched
its knee, replied, “It is like a tree”; the eighth, who had touched its shoulder,
replied, “It is like a pillar”; the ninth, who had touched a foot, replied, “It
is like a mortar”; and the tenth, who had touched its tail, replied, “It is like
a rope.” Then the blind men began to argue, saying, “My description is correct” and “Your description cannot be correct,” and so on. As there was no
end to their bickering, they ﬁnally came to blows. Seeing this, Darpaṇamukha
burst into laughter. Then the king uttered the following verse:
A multitude of blind men engage in dispute,
Competing in their different views,
Yet it is the body of one and the same elephant.
Indeed, it is only due to different views that
Both afﬁrmation and negation arise
[About one and the same thing].
The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

It is just the same with the disputes among the different schools of religion
and philosophy. They do not know the truth of suffering, or of its causal
aggregation, or of the cessation of that causal aggregation, or of the path
of its cessation. Each school, entertaining its own view, disputes with
others as to what is right and wrong. Insisting that their own view is correct,
they enter into disputes. If, however, śramaṇas or brāhmaṇas understand
the truth of suffering, and of its causal aggregation, and of the cessation
of that causal aggregation, and of the essential path of that cessation, they
will reﬂect upon the nature of their own thoughts and attain harmony with
others. Receiving one and the same truth, studying under one and the
same teacher, associating in one and the same community, integrated like
water and milk and remaining ever alert to this awareness, they abide in
peace and happiness.
Then the World-honored One uttered this verse:

215

129a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

If one does not know of life’s suffering
And the causal origins of this suffering,
Or of the possible cessation of this suffering
And the path of cessation of its causal origination,
One loses the opportunity to liberate the mind,
A liberation based on insight (prajñā)
That clariﬁes the origins of birth, old age, illness, and death.
If, however, one sees the truth of life’s suffering,
And of the causal origins of this suffering,
And of the cessation of this suffering,
So will one discern the path of cessation
And deliverance of the mind,
The deliverance based on insight
That clariﬁes the causal aggregate of suffering,
Thereby exhausting the root cause of birth, old age,
Illness, death, and the [cyclic] will-to-becoming.

129b

O bhikṣus, because of this, you should contemplate the truth of suffering,
the truth of its causal aggregation, the truth of the cessation of suffering,
and the truth of the [eightfold] noble path of cessation and essential liberation from suffering.

Article 6: The Demigods
(Asuras)

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

At the bottom of the great ocean, north of Mount Sumeru, is the capital
of Rāhvasurin, a spacious city extending eighty thousand yojanas long
and wide. The city is well designed, with walls that are three thousand
yojanas high and two thousand yojanas [thick], embellished with seven
railings, seven ornamental nets, and seven lines of trees. The gateways
are one thousand yojanas in height and the same measure in length and
breadth. The golden wall is endowed with a silver gate, the silver wall
with a golden gate, and so on, with innumerable rare birds singing harmoniously together, just as before. Located within the great city is an
inner city, sixty thousand yojanas long and wide, that is occupied by the

216

Sutra 30

king of the asura demigods; it is called Lunyumobazha and it is protected
by sevenfold walls embellished with seven railings, seven ornamental
nets, and seven lines of trees, all made from the seven kinds of precious
treasure. The walls are three thousand yojanas high and two thousand
yojanas thick. The gates are two thousand yojanas high and one thousand
yojanas wide. The golden wall is endowed with a silver gate, the silver
wall with a golden gate, and so on, with innumerable rare birds singing
harmoniously together, just as before.
Within the inner city is an assembly hall called Saptaśirasā, which is
protected by sevenfold walls embellished with seven railings, seven ornamental nets, and seven lines of trees, all made from the seven kinds of
treasure. The building’s foundation is made of pure emerald, and its beams
and pillars are made from the seven kinds of treasure. The [main] pillar
is one thousand yojanas in diameter and ten thousand yojanas high.
Beneath it is the throne called the sudharma seat, heavily engraved with
inscriptions, and it measures seven hundred yojanas in length and breadth
and is made from the seven kinds of treasure. There are four doors to the
assembly hall, each protected by sevenfold walls and stairways further
embellished with seven railings, seven ornamental nets, and seven lines
of trees, all made from the seven kinds of treasure, and so on, with innumerable rare birds singing harmoniously together, just as before.
To the north of the assembly hall is the palace that belongs to the king
of the asuras, which is ten thousand yojanas long and wide. The sevenfold
palace walls are embellished with seven railings, seven ornamental nets,
and seven lines of trees, all made from the seven kinds of treasure, and so
on, with innumerable rare birds singing harmoniously together, just as
before. To the east of the assembly hall is a pleasure grove called Śāla, ten
thousand yojanas long and wide and protected by sevenfold walls embellished with seven railings, seven ornamental nets, and seven lines of trees,
all made from the seven kinds of treasure, and so on, with innumerable rare
birds singing harmoniously together, just as before. To the south of the
assembly hall is a pleasure grove called Śobhanatara, also ten thousand
yojanas long and wide. To the west of the hall is a pleasure grove called
Yāma, again ten thousand yojanas long and wide; to the north of the hall
is a pleasure grove called Abhilāṣa, which has the same dimensions.

217

129c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

Between the Śāla and Śobhanatara pleasure groves is a tree called Pārijāta; the diameter of its trunk is seven yojanas, its height is one hundred
yojanas, and its branches and leaves spread out as far as ﬁfty yojanas in
every direction. The tree is protected on all sides by sevenfold walls embellished with seven railings, seven ornamental nets, and seven lines of trees,
all made from the seven kinds of treasure, and so on, with innumerable
rare birds singing harmoniously together, just as before. Between the
Yāma and Abhilāṣa pleasure groves is a lake called Upananda, with clean,
cool, and spotlessly clear water. The seven dikes encircling the lake are
built with precious materials, with stone terraces and seven railings, seven
ornamental nets, and seven lines of trees adorned with the seven kinds of
treasure. Four kinds of ﬂowers grow there; their leaves and blossoms
extend up to one yojana in length and width, and their fragrance can be
detected as far away as one yojana. Their stalks form the hub of a wheel
and sap, as sweet as honey, ﬂows out like white milk. Innumerable rare
birds sing harmoniously there, just as before. By the shore of this lake
are pavilions seven stories high, each encircled by seven gated walls with
seven railings, seven ornamental nets, and seven lines of trees, all made
from the seven kinds of treasure, and so on, with innumerable rare birds
singing harmoniously together, just as before.
The palaces occupied by ofﬁcials serving the asura king are as large
as ten thousand yojanas in length and breadth, down to the smallest, which
are one thousand yojanas long and wide. All the palaces are protected by
sevenfold walls embellished with seven railings, seven ornamental nets,
and seven lines of trees, all made from the seven kinds of treasure, and
so on, with innumerable rare birds singing harmoniously together, just as
before. The palaces of the asuras are smaller, varying from one thousand
yojanas in length and breadth down to the smallest, which are one hundred
yojanas [long and wide]. These palaces are also protected by sevenfold
walls embellished with seven railings, seven ornamental nets, and seven
lines of trees, all made from the seven kinds of treasure, and so on, with
innumerable rare birds singing harmoniously together, just as before.
To the north of the assembly hall is a stairway made of seven precious
materials, which leads to the palace compound. There are other stairways
that lead to the Śāla, Śobhanatara, Yāma, and Abhilāṣa pleasure groves,

218

Sutra 30

and stairways that lead to the Pārijāta tree, Upananda Lake, and the palaces
occupied by ministers and minor ofﬁcials.
When the asura king wishes to make an excursion to the Śāla pleasure
grove, he merely thinks of Bhīmacitra, a member of the asura royalty,
and the latter becomes aware that “King Rāhvasurin has put this thought
in my mind.” Bhīmacitra immediately dons formal clothing, and riding
in a richly decorated carriage, surrounded by innumerable attendants,
arrives before the king and takes his position to one side. The asura king
thinks of another royal ﬁgure, Prarāhvasurin, and he too becomes aware
that “King Rāhvasurin is calling me.” Prarāhvasurin immediately dons
formal clothing, and riding in a richly decorated carriage, surrounded by
innumerable attendants, arrives before the king and takes his position to
one side. The king then thinks of another royal ﬁgure, Yāmarāhvasurin,
who too becomes aware that “King Rāhvasurin is calling me,” immediately
dons formal clothing, and riding in a richly decorated carriage, surrounded
by innumerable attendants, arrives before the king and takes his position
to one side. The king then thinks of his minister Asurin, who becomes
aware that “King Rāhvasurin is calling me,” immediately dons formal
clothing, and riding in a richly decorated carriage, surrounded by innumerable attendants, arrives before the king and takes his position to one
side. The king now thinks of a minor ofﬁcial, who also becomes aware
that “King Rāhvasurin is calling me,” immediately dons formal clothing,
and riding in a richly decorated carriage, surrounded by innumerable attendants, arrives before the king and takes his position to one side.
Now King Rāhu of the asuras (Rāhvasurin) dons a richly decorated
garment, mounts his carriage, and surrounded by innumerable attendants,
proceeds to the Śāla pleasure grove. When the procession reaches the gate
the doors are opened by a sudden gust of wind that sweeps over the grounds
within and blows down ﬂower blossoms into a knee-high mound. Rāhvasurin enters the pleasure grove and enjoys his visit for a day or two,
and so on, up to a seventh day, when he returns to his palace. When he
later visits the Śobhanatara, Yāma, and Abhilāṣa pleasure groves, he
follows the same steps that have been described here.
King Rāhu of the asuras is always accompanied by ﬁve great asuras,
who guard him closely on all sides. The ﬁrst is called Tichi, the second

219

130a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

130b

Xiongli, the third Wuyi, the fourth Touju, and the ﬁfth Cuifu. These asuras
guard him at all times. The palace of King Rāhu is not only sits on the
bottom of the great ocean, it also rises to the ocean surface and is held
[above the ocean] by the four powers of wind: a steady wind (zhufeng),
a supporting wind (chifeng), an immovable wind (budong), and a ﬁrm
wind (jiangu). These four winds hold the great ocean suspended in midair,
ten thousand yojanas above the asuras’ palace, never letting it fall, so that
it is just like a ﬂoating cloud. Indeed, such are the great fortune, merits,
and powers that have accrued to the asura king.

Article 7: The Four
Guardian Gods

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

To the east of Mount Sumeru, at a distance of a thousand yojanas, is the
abode of the guardian god Dhṛṭarāṣṭra, a city called Xianshangcheng,
which is six thousand yojanas long and wide. The ramparts around the
city are sevenfold and embellished with seven railings, seven ornamental
nets, and seven lines of trees, all made from the seven kinds of treasure,
and so on, with innumerable rare birds singing harmoniously together,
just as before.
To the south of Mount Sumeru, at a distance of a thousand yojanas, is
the abode of the guardian god Virūḍhaka, a city called Sudarśana that measures six thousand yojanas long and wide. Its ramparts are sevenfold and
embellished with seven railings, seven ornamental nets, and seven lines
of trees, all made from the seven kinds of treasure and so on, with innumerable rare birds singing harmoniously together, just as before.
To the west of Mount Sumeru, at a distance of a thousand yojanas, is
the abode of the guardian god Virūpākṣa, a city called Chūḍasudarśana,
which is six thousand yojanas long and wide. Its ramparts are sevenfold
and embellished with seven railings, seven ornamental nets, and seven
lines of trees, all made from the seven kinds of treasure and so on, with
innumerable rare birds singing harmoniously together, just as before.
To the north of Mount Sumeru, at a distance of a thousand yojanas, is
the abode of the guardian god Vaiśravaṇa. This king resides in three cities;

220

Sutra 30

the ﬁrst is called Bhaya (Heyi), the second, Tianjing, and the third, Zhonggui. Each city measures six thousand yojanas long and wide. Their ramparts
also are sevenfold and embellished with seven railings, seven ornamental
nets, and seven lines of trees, all made from the seven kinds of treasure,
and so on, with innumerable rare birds singing harmoniously together,
just as before.
To the north of Zhonggui is a pleasure grove called Jiapiyantou, four
thousand yojanas long and wide, protected by sevenfold walls embellished
with seven railings, seven ornamental nets, and seven lines of trees, all
made from the seven kinds of treasure, and so on, with innumerable rare
birds singing harmoniously together, just as before. In the middle of this
pleasure grove is a pond called Nalinni, forty yojanas long and wide, with
clean and transparent water. The dike [that forms the pond] is made from
the seven kinds of treasure, and the pond is ringed by stone terraces with
seven railings, seven ornamental nets, and seven lines of trees made from
the seven kinds of treasure. In the pond are many varieties of shining lotus
blossoms in blue, yellow, red, white, and variegated hues, whose fragrance
can be detected as far as half a yojana away. Their stalks form the hub of
a wheel and the sap, as sweet as honey, ﬂows out like white milk, and
innumerable rare birds sing harmoniously together, just as before.
Apart from the palaces of the sun and moon, those of the guardian gods
are forty yojanas long and wide, protected by sevenfold walls embellished
with seven railings, seven ornamental nets, and seven lines of trees, all
made from the seven kinds of treasure, and so on, with innumerable rare
birds singing harmoniously together, just as before. The palaces vary in
size but even the smallest measures ﬁve yojanas long and wide.
From Zhonggui a stairway leads to Xianshangcheng. Another stairway
leads to Bhaya and Tianjing. Even more stairways lead to Jiapiyantou and
Nalinni, and to the palaces of the ministers of the four guardian gods.
When Vaiśravaṇa [in the northern heaven] wishes to enjoy an excursion
to Jiapiyantou, he ﬁrst thinks of Dhṛṭarāṣṭra [in the eastern heaven], and
the latter becomes aware that “Vaiśravaṇa has put this thought in my
mind.” Dhṛṭarāṣṭra immediately dons formal clothing and rides in a richly
decorated carriage, surrounded by a host of gandharva demigods, arriving

221

130c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

131a

before Vaiśravaṇa and taking his position to one side. Vaiśravaṇa then
thinks of Virūḍhaka [in the southern heaven], who then becomes aware
that “Vaiśravaṇa is calling me.” He immediately dons formal clothing and
rides in a richly decorated carriage, surrounded by innumerable kumbhāṇḍa
deities, arriving before Vaiśravaṇa and taking his position to one side.
Vaiśravaṇa then thinks of Virūpākṣa [in the western heaven], who becomes
aware that “Vaiśravaṇa is calling me.” Virūpākṣa immediately dons formal
clothing and rides in a richly decorated carriage, surrounded by innumerable
nāga deities, arriving before Vaiśravaṇa and taking his position to one
side. Vaiśravaṇa then thinks of the ministers of the four guardian gods,
and they all become aware that “Vaiśravaṇa is calling me.” Each of them
immediately dons formal clothing and rides in a richly decorated carriage,
surrounded by innumerable deities, arriving before Vaiśravaṇa and taking
a position to one side.
The guardian god Vaiśravaṇa now dons a richly decorated garment,
mounts his carriage, and accompanied by innumerable hosts of deities
proceeds to the pleasure grove. When the procession reaches the Jiapiyantou gate the doors open by a sudden gust of wind that sweeps the ground
within and blows down ﬂower blossoms into a knee-high mound.
Vaiśravaṇa enters the pleasure grove, enjoys his visit for a day or two,
and so on, up to a seventh day, and then returns to his palace. Vaiśravaṇa
is always accompanied by ﬁve great spirits, who guard him closely on all
sides. The ﬁrst is called Pañcāla, the second Daṇḍala, the third Hemabhadra,
the fourth Dīpaṃkara, and the ﬁfth Xiuyilumo. These ﬁve spirits guard
him at all times. Indeed, such are the great fortune, merits, and powers
that have accrued to the king of the guardian gods.

Article 8: Trāyastriṃśa
Heaven

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

At the summit of Mount Sumeru is the abode of the thirty-three gods,
[Trāyastriṃśa]. This city extends eighty thousand yojanas long and wide,
with sevenfold concentric ramparts that are embellished with seven railings,
seven ornamental nets, and seven lines of trees, all made from the seven

222

Sutra 30

kinds of treasure. The ramparts are one hundred yojanas high and sixty
yojanas across at the top, with gates that are sixty yojanas high and thirty
yojanas across at the top. Every ﬁve hundred yojanas from the main gate
is another gate where ﬁve hundred spirits dwell to protect the thirty-three
gods. The golden wall is adorned with a silver gate, the silver wall is
adorned with a golden gate, and so on, with innumerable rare birds singing
harmoniously together, just as before.
Within the great city is an inner city [called Sudarśana], sixty thousand
yojanas long and wide. Its sevenfold concentric ramparts are embellished
with seven railings, seven ornamental nets, and seven lines of trees, all
made from the seven kinds of treasure. The ramparts are one hundred
yojanas high and sixty yojanas across at the top, with gates every ﬁve
hundred yojanas that are sixty yojanas high and thirty yojanas across at
the top. At each gate ﬁve hundred spirits dwell to protect the thirty-three
gods. The golden wall is adorned with silver gates, [the silver wall with
golden gates,] the quartz wall with lapis gates, the lapis wall with quartz
gates, the ruby wall with agate gates, the agate wall with ruby gates, and
the emerald wall with gates decorated with many kinds of precious stones.
The railings are decorated in a similar way: the golden railing is adorned
with ropes made of silver, the silver railing with ropes made of gold, the
quartz railing with ropes made of lapis, the lapis railing with ropes made
of quartz, the ruby railing with ropes made of agate, the agate railing with
ropes made of rubies, and the emerald railing with a variety of precious
stones. Over these railings are hung decorative nets on which various
ornaments are attached. From the golden net hangs a silver bell, from the
silver net hangs a golden bell, from the lapis net hangs a quartz bell, from
the quartz net hangs a lapis bell, from the ruby net hangs an agate bell,
from the agate net hangs a ruby bell, and from the emerald net hangs a
bell inlaid with various precious stones.
The golden trees have golden trunks and branches, with silver ﬂowers
and fruit. The silver trees have silver trunks and branches, with golden
ﬂowers and fruit. The quartz trees have quartz trunks and branches, with
lapis ﬂowers and leaves, while the lapis trees have lapis trunks and branches
and quartz ﬂowers and leaves. The ruby trees have ruby trunks and
branches, with agate ﬂowers and leaves, while the agate trees have agate

223

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

131b

trunks and branches and ﬂowers and leaves made of rubies. The emerald
trees have emerald trunks and branches, with ﬂowers and leaves made of
various precious stones.
Each of the seven walls has four gates, one on each side, protected by
barriers. Each wall is topped with a pavilion and veranda and encloses a
bathing pond and pleasure garden ﬁlled with various ﬂowers blooming in
a multitude of hues. The verdant trees are laden with abundant ﬂowers and
fruit. Exquisite fragrance arises in all directions, pleasing to human senses;
hawks, wild ducks, male and female mandarin ducks, and a host of rare
birds, numbering in the thousands of species, sing harmoniously together.
In the area outside the inner city is the palace of Irāpatra, lord of the
nāgas; it extends six thousand yojanas long and wide. Its sevenfold walls
are embellished with seven railings, seven ornamental nets, and seven
lines of trees, all made from the seven kinds of treasure, and so on, with
innumerable rare birds singing harmoniously together, just as before.
At the center of Sudarśana is Sudharma Assembly Hall, one hundred
yojanas long and wide, adorned with seven railings, seven ornamental
nets, and seven lines of trees, all made from the seven kinds of treasure.
The foundation of the hall is pure gold and its roof is made of lapis. The
pillars, ten yojanas in diameter, rise to a height of one hundred yojanas.
Centered beneath them is the throne of the lord of the [thirty-three] gods,
one yojana long and wide, reﬂecting variegated hues created by combinations of the seven kinds of treasure. The seat of the throne is delicate,
as smooth to the touch as a heavenly garment. On both sides of the throne
are sixteen seats. Four gates, adorned with railings made from the seven
kinds of treasure, provide entrance to the hall. The stairway leading to the
hall is ﬁve hundred yojanas across and the gateway is protected by sevenfold
walls embellished with seven railings, seven ornamental nets, and seven
lines of trees, all made from the seven kinds of treasure, and so on, with
innumerable rare birds singing harmoniously together, just as before.
To the north of Sudharma Hall is the palace of the lord of the gods
Indra, which is one thousand yojanas long and wide. The sevenfold palace
walls are embellished with seven railings, seven ornamental nets, and
seven lines of trees, all made from the seven kinds of treasure, and so on,
with innumerable rare birds singing harmoniously together, just as before.

224

Sutra 30

To the east of the palace is a pleasure grove called Cuse, one thousand
yojanas long and wide, which is surrounded by sevenfold walls embellished
with seven railings, seven ornamental nets, and seven lines of trees, all made
from the seven kinds of treasure, and so on, with innumerable rare birds
singing harmoniously together, just as before. Within this pleasure grove
are two stone mounds embellished with heavenly gold called Bhadra and
Subhadra, respectively; their surfaces are as smooth as a heavenly garment.
To the south of the palace is another pleasure grove, called Citraprīti,
one thousand yojanas long and wide, which is enclosed by sevenfold walls
embellished with seven railings, seven ornamental nets, and seven lines of
trees, all made from the seven kinds of treasure, and so on, with innumerable
rare birds singing harmoniously together, just as before. In this pleasure
grove are two massive stone mounds embellished with the seven kinds of
treasure; they are called Dina and Sudina, respectively, and each is ﬁfty
yojanas long and wide, with surfaces as smooth as a heavenly garment.
To the west of Sudharma Hall is another pleasure grove, called Za
(Saṃsarga?), one thousand yojanas long and wide, protected by sevenfold
walls embellished with seven railings, seven ornamental nets, and seven
lines of trees, all made from the seven kinds of treasure, and so on, with
innumerable rare birds singing harmoniously together, just as before. In this
pleasure grove are two massive stone mounds embellished with the seven
kinds of treasure, called Sudarśana (Shanjian) and Anusudarśana (Shunshanjian), respectively; each is gilded with heavenly gold, measures ﬁfty
yojanas long and wide, and has surfaces as smooth as a heavenly garment.
To the north of Sudharma Hall is another pleasure grove, called Mahāsukha, one thousand yojanas long and wide, protected by sevenfold walls
embellished with seven railings, seven ornamental nets, and seven lines
of trees, all made from the seven kinds of treasure, and so on, with innumerable rare birds singing harmoniously together, just as before. In this
pleasure grove are two massive stone mounds, called Sukha (Xi) and
Mahāsukha (Taxi), respectively, measuring ﬁfty yojanas long and wide,
embellished with the seven kinds of treasure, each gilded with heavenly
gold, and whose surfaces are as smooth as a heavenly garment.
Midway between the Cuse and Citraprīti (?) (Huale) pleasure groves
is a pond called Nanda, one hundred yojanas long and wide, with clear,

225

131c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

132a

spotless water. The dike forming the pond is made from the seven kinds
of treasure, and the pond is enclosed by stone terraces with seven railings,
seven ornamental nets, and seven lines of trees, all made from the seven
kinds of treasure. On the four sides of the pond are four stairways with
railings adorned with the seven kinds of treasure, and so on, with innumerable birds singing harmoniously together, just as before. In the pond
there are many varieties of shining lotus blossoms in blue, yellow, red,
white, and variegated hues, with a fragrance that can be detected as far
away as one yojana. The shade cast by a single leaf [of a lotus blossom]
is as wide as one yojana, and the stalks form the hub of a wheel, with sap,
sweet as honey, ﬂowing out like white milk. Four other pleasure groves
can be found on the four sides of this pond.
Midway between the Saṃsarga and Mahāsukha pleasure groves is a
tree called Pārijāta, seven yojanas in diameter and one hundred yojanas
in height, with branches and leaves spreading in all directions as far as
ﬁfty yojanas. An empty pavilion stands beside this tree, extending ﬁve
hundred yojanas in length and breadth and protected by sevenfold walls
embellished with seven railings, seven ornamental nets, and seven lines
of trees, all made from the seven kinds of treasure, and so on, with innumerable rare birds singing harmoniously together, just as before.
The rest of the palace complex occupies an area one thousand yojanas
[long and wide], protected by sevenfold walls embellished with seven
railings, seven ornamental nets, and seven lines of trees, all made from
the seven kinds of treasure, and so on, with innumerable birds singing
harmoniously together, just as before. Some of the public buildings are
as large as eight or nine hundred yojanas [long and wide], with the smallest
measuring one hundred yojanas [in length and breadth], and all are surrounded by sevenfold walls embellished with seven railings, seven ornamental nets, and seven lines of trees, all made from the seven kinds of
treasure, and so on, with innumerable birds singing harmoniously together,
just as before. Some of the small palaces are eighty to one hundred yojanas
[long and wide], and even the smallest measures twelve yojanas [in length
and breadth]. These buildings, too, are surrounded by sevenfold walls
embellished with seven railings, seven ornamental nets, and seven lines

226

Sutra 30

of trees, all made from the seven kinds of treasure, and so on, with innumerable birds singing harmoniously together, just as before.
On the north side of Sudharma Hall are two stairways that lead to the
palace of Indra, lord of the gods. To the east of the hall are two stairways
that lead to the Cuse pleasure grove. Other stairways lead to the Citraprīti,
Saṃsarga, and Mahāsukha pleasure groves, as well as to Nanda Pond,
the Pārijāta tree, and the palaces of the other gods, including that of Irāpatra,
lord of the nāgas.
When the lord of the gods Śakra (Indra) wishes to make an excursion
to the Cuse pleasure grove, he has only to think of the thirty-two gods
over whom he presides and they immediately become aware that “Lord
Śakra is calling me.” They immediately don formal clothing and ride in
richly decorated carriages, accompanied by innumerable attendants, arriving before Śakra and taking their positions to one side. Again, Indra thinks
of Irāpatra, lord of the nāgas, and he immediately becomes aware that
“Lord Śakra is calling me.” Irāpatra is immediately transformed into a
ﬁgure with thirty-three heads, each having six fangs, with seven bathing
ponds surrounding each fang. In every pond are seven gigantic lotus blossoms that are supported by one hundred leaves, where seven beautiful
maidens play, making music, singing, and dancing. Having produced this
supernatural display, the lord of the nāgas approaches Indra and takes his
position to one side.
Then Śakra, lord of the gods, puts on a necklace richly decorated with
precious stones and takes his seat on the main head of Irāpatra, lord of
the nāgas. Following him, the other gods, sixteen on each side, take their
seats on Irāpatra’s [thirty-two] other heads. Lord Indra’s procession goes
to the Cuse pleasure grove, accompanied by innumerable hosts of deities.
When the procession reaches the gate the doors open by a sudden gust of
wind that sweeps the ground within and blows down ﬂower blossoms into
a knee-high mound. Śakra, lord of the gods, then takes his seat on either
of the two stone mounds called Bhadra and Subhadra, as he pleases. The
thirty-two gods follow him, taking their seats one after another.
Some gods cannot join the procession to the pleasure grove and are
unable to satisfy their ﬁve senses. Why is this so? The merits they had

227

132b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

individually accrued from their past conduct differ. Again, some gods can
see the grove but cannot enter it, and are unable to satisfy their ﬁve senses.
Why is this so? The merits they had accrued from their past conduct differ.
Again, some gods can see and enter the grove but are unable to satisfy
their ﬁve senses. Why is this so? The merits they had accrued from their
past conduct differ. Again, some gods are able to see and enter the grove
and satisfy their ﬁve senses. Why is this so? The merits they had accrued
from their past conduct differ. After enjoying their visit for a day or two,
and so on, up to a seventh day, each god then returns to his own palace.
When Śakra, lord of the gods, wishes to visit the other pleasure groves of
Citraprīti, Saṃsarga, and Mahāsukha, he proceeds in exactly the same way.
Why is a pleasure grove called Cuse? It is because one’s body feels
coarse and rough (cuse) on entering it. Why is another pleasure grove
called Citraprīti? It is because on entering it one’s body spontaneously
takes on different colors, depending on the scene, satisfying one’s senses.
Why is another pleasure grove called Saṃsarga? On the eighth, fourteenth,
and ﬁfteenth days of each month all the palace ladies except female asuras
are released to join the gods on their excursion and mingle freely. Because
of this, it is called the pleasure-mingling grove. Why is another pleasure
grove called Mahāsukha? Because in it one is bound to experience much
pleasure and delight; hence it is [called] the grove of great acquired joy.
Why is the assembly hall called Sudharma? Because in it one is obliged
to contemplate the supreme nature of the Dharma and, through acquiring
pure happiness, one calls the hall Sudharma (“Good Dharma”). Why is
the tree called Pārijāta? Because a spirit called Manda who lives in this
tree enjoys himself by playing musical instruments at all hours, so it is
called “Passing the Day” (Zhoudu).
Śakra, the lord of the gods, is accompanied by ten great gods who
guard him closely at all times. Who are the ten? They are (1) [the guardians]
Indra, (2) Gopaka, (3) Pilou, (4) Piloupoti, (5) Dhāra, (6) Bala, (7) Jīva,
(8) Lingxidu, (9) Wuluo, and (10) Nantou. Śakra possesses great supernatural powers as lord of the gods, and the aura of his authority is as has
been described. These [guardians] are held in the highest regard by the
people of Jambudvīpa.

228

Sutra 30

The ﬂowers that grow in water are water lilies, such as the utpala,
padma, kumuda, puṇḍarīka, and sugandha; they are delicate, fragrant,
and pristine. The ﬂowers that grow on land belong to the mokṣaka, campaka, pātalī, sumanā, vārṣika, and tongnü trees. The ﬂowers that grow
in the palaces of the asuras are water lilies such as the utpala, padma,
kumuda, and puṇḍarīka, delicate, fragrant, and pristine, and tree ﬂowers
such as the shudishajiali, bimbā, mahābimbā, jiajiali, māndāra, and mahāmāndāra. All of these water lilies and tree ﬂowers are greatly appreciated
by the four guardian gods of heaven, the thirty-three Trāyastriṃśa gods,
the god Yama, the gods of Tuṣita Heaven, the Nirmāṇarati gods, and the
Paranirmitavaśavartin gods.
There are ten laws observed by all the gods: (1) the number of possible
disappearances is limitless; (2) the number of possible appearances is limitless; (3) there is no impediment to disappearance; (4) there is no impediment to appearance; (5) there is no ﬂesh and blood, no skin and bones
or sinews, in celestial bodies; (6) the impurities of urination or excretion
do not occur in celestial bodies; (7) celestial bodies experience no fatigue
or exhaustion; (8) there is no procreation in celestial female bodies; (9)
celestial eyes do not blink; and (10) celestial bodies can adopt different
hues at will, changing to blue if one likes blue, to yellow if one likes
yellow, to red if one likes red, and so on. Those are the ten rules observed
by heavenly beings. What are the seven skin colors found among human
beings? (1) Some have a golden complexion, (2) some have a ﬁery complexion, (3) some have a blue complexion, (4) some have a yellow complexion, (5) some have a red complexion, (6) some have a black complexion, and (7) some have a white complexion. These skin colors are
also found among the gods as well as the asuras.
O bhikṣus, compared to the light of the ﬁreﬂy, the light of a candle is
superior; compared to candlelight, the light of a torch is superior; compared
to torchlight, the light of a bonﬁre is superior; compared to a bonﬁre, the
illumination cast by the four guardians’ palaces, castles, necklaces, garments,
and physical bodies is superior; compared to the light of that illumination,
the light of the thirty-three gods is superior; compared to the light of the
thirty-three gods, the light of the god Yama is superior; compared to the

229

132c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

133a

light of the god Yama, the light of the Tuṣita gods is superior; compared
to the light of the Tuṣita gods, the light of the Nirmāṇarati gods is superior;
compared to the light of the Nirmāṇarati gods, the light of the Paranirmitavaśavartin gods is superior; compared to the light of the Paranirmitavaśavartin gods, the light of the Brahmakāyika gods is superior; compared
to the light of the Brahmakāyika gods, the light of the Ābhāsvara gods is
superior; compared to the light of the Ābhāsvara gods, the light of the
Śubhakṛtsna gods is superior; compared to the light of the Śubhakṛtsna
gods, the light of the Puṇyaprasava gods is superior; compared to the light
of the Puṇyaprasava gods, the light of the Asaṃjñika gods is superior;
compared to the light of the Asaṃjñika gods, the light of the Avṛha gods
is superior; compared to the light of the Avṛha gods, the light of the Atapa
gods is superior; compared to the light of the Atapa gods, the light of the
Sudṛśa gods is superior; compared to the light of the Sudṛśa gods, the
light of the Sudarśana gods is superior; compared to the light of the Sudarśana gods, the light of the Akaniṣṭha gods is superior; compared to the
light of the Akaniṣṭha gods, the light of the Bhūmivaśavartin gods is superior; compared to the light of the Bhūmivaśavartin gods, the light of the
Buddha is superior. From the ﬁreﬂy’s light up to the Buddha’s illumination,
in comparison with all of these lights, the light of the [Four Noble] Truths
of suffering (duḥkha), causal aggregation (samudaya), cessation (nirodha)
of causal aggregation, and the path (mārga) of cessation is superior.
Because of this, O bhikṣus, those who wish to acquire illumination should
seek the light of the [Four Noble] Truths of suffering, causal aggregation,
cessation of causal aggregation, and the path of cessation, engaging themselves in the practice of the path.
The people of Jambudvīpa, [south of Mount Sumeru,] are three and a
half hand-to-elbow lengths tall, and their garments should be seven handto-elbow lengths long. The people of Aparagodānīya and of Pūrvavideha,
[west and east of Mount Sumeru, respectively,] are the same, three and a
half hand-to-elbow lengths tall, with garments that are seven hand-to-elbow
lengths long and three and a half hand-to-elbow lengths wide. The people
of Uttarakuru, [north of Mount Sumeru,] are seven hand-to-elbow lengths
tall, and their garments should be fourteen hand-to-elbow lengths long and
seven hand-to-elbow lengths wide, and weigh one ounce (Ch. liang). The

230

Sutra 30

asuras are one yojana tall, and their garments should be two yojanas long
and one yojana wide, weighing six zhu (one-quarter of a liang). The four
guardian gods of heaven are half a yojana tall, and their garments should
be one yojana long and half a yojana wide, and weigh half a liang. The
the Trāyastriṃśa gods are one yojana tall, and their garments should be
two yojanas long and half a yojanas wide, weighing six zhu. The god
Yama is two yojanas tall, and his garments should be four yojanas long
and two yojanas wide, with a weight of three zhu (one-eighth of a liang).
The Tuṣita gods are four yojanas tall, and their garments should be eight
yojanas long and four yojanas wide, and weigh one and a half zhu. The
Nirmāṇarati gods are eight yojanas tall, and their garments should be sixteen yojanas long and eight yojanas wide, weighing half a zhu. All the
other gods should arrange their garments accordingly, depending on their
[differing] heights.
The people of Jambudvīpa have a life span of one hundred years, but
the majority live to less than that, while a small minority live longer. The
people of Aparagodānīya have a life span of two hundred years, but the
majority also live to less than that, while a small minority live longer. The
people of Pūrvavideha have a life span of three hundred years, but the
majority again live to less than that, while a small minority live longer.
The people of Uttarakuru have a life span of one thousand years and all
enjoy fairly equal longevity. Hungry ghosts have a life span of ten thousand
years, but the majority live to less than that, while a small minority live
longer. The nāgas and garuḍas have a life span of an eon, but some may
live to less than that. The asuras have a life span of one thousand years
in the celestial scale, but the majority live to less than that, while a small
minority live longer. The four guardian gods of the heavens have a life
span of ﬁve hundred years in the celestial scale, but most live to less than
that, while the rest live longer. The Trāyastriṃśa gods have a life span of
one thousand years in the celestial scale, but again the majority live to less
than that, while a small minority live longer. The Yama gods have a life
span of two thousand years in the celestial scale, but again the majority live
to less than that, while a small minority live longer. The Tuṣita gods have
a life span of four thousand years in the celestial scale, but again the majority
live to less than that, while a small minority live longer. The Nirmāṇarati

231

133b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

gods have a life span of eight thousand years in the celestial scale, but
again the majority live to less than that, while a small minority live longer.
The Paranirmitavaśavartin gods have a life span of sixteen thousand years
in the celestial scale, but again the majority live to less than that, while a
small minority live longer. The Brahmakāyika gods have a life span of
one eon, but some may live to less than that. The Ābhāsvara gods have a
life span of two eons, but some may live to less than that. The Śubhakṛtsna
gods have a life span of three eons, but some may live to less than that.
The Bṛhatphala gods have a life span of four eons, but some may live to
less than that. The Asaṃjñisattva gods have a life span of ﬁve hundred
eons, but some may live to less than that. The Avṛha gods have a life span
of one thousand eons, but some may live to less than that. The Atapa gods
have a life span of two thousand eons, but some may live to less than that.
The Sudṛśa gods have a life span of three thousand eons, but some may
live to less than that. The Sudarśana gods have a life span of four thousand
eons, but some may live to less than that. The Akaniṣṭha gods have a life
span of ﬁve thousand eons, but some may live to less than that. The Ākāśānantyāyatana gods have a life span of ten thousand eons, but some may
live to less than that. The Vijñānānantyāyatana gods have a life span of
twenty-one thousand eons, but some may live to less than that. The Ākiṃcanyāyatana gods have a life span of forty-two eons, but some may live
to less than that. The Naivasaṃjñānāsaṃjñāyatana gods have a life span
of eighty-four thousand eons, but some may live to less than that.
The foregoing are the [categories of] sentient beings, their life spans,
their worlds, and their respective psychophysical elements (skandhas) in
the transmigrations that remain subject to the impermanence of birth, old
age, illness, and death.
The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

All living beings subsist on four kinds of food. What are the four? They
are (1) [regular] food served by hand and with utensils with [proper]
hygiene through washing, bathing, and [wearing clean] clothing; (2) food
created by contact; (3) food created by recollection; and (4) food created
by consciousness. Because sentient beings differ the food on which they
subsist also differs. The people of Jambudvīpa eat rice, wheat, noodles,

232

Sutra 30

ﬁsh, and meat to sustain the health of their bodies and they wash, bathe,
and [wear clean] clothing to maintain hygiene and physical comfort. The
people of Aparagodānīya and Pūrvavideha also eat rice, wheat, noodles,
ﬁsh, and meat to sustain the health of their bodies and they also wash,
bathe, and [wear clean] clothing to maintain hygiene and physical comfort.
The people of Uttarakuru only eat nonglutinous rice that has been naturally
harvested, which has a heavenly ﬂavor. They eat [this kind of rice] to sustain the health of their bodies and they also wash, bathe, and [wear clean]
clothing for physical comfort. The nāgas and garuḍas eat gigantic turtles,
alligators, and ﬁsh to sustain the health of their bodies and they wash,
bathe, and [wear clean] clothing for physical comfort. The asuras eat puriﬁed food to sustain the health of their bodies and they wash, bathe, and
[wear clean] clothing for physical comfort. The four guardian gods of
heaven, the Trāyastriṃśa gods, the Yama gods, the Tuṣita gods, the Nirmāṇarati gods, and the Paranirmitavaśavartin gods also eat puriﬁed food
to sustain the health of their bodies and they wash, bathe, and [wear clean]
clothing to maintain hygiene and physical comfort. Gods other than those
already mentioned subsist in a state of concentration, with happiness and
delight as their principal food.
Who are the sentient beings that can subsist on the food created by physical contact? [These beings are] those born from eggs. Who are the sentient
beings that can subsist on conscious recollection? Some beings can sustain
their existence through conscious recollection. Who are the sentient beings
that can subsist on thoughts created by consciousness? Beings who suffer
in the hells and gods who abide in the formless realm subsist on the nourishment of thoughts created by consciousness.
The people of Jambudvīpa make their living by trading in gold, silver,
precious stones, cloth, grain, and slaves. The people of Aparagodānīya
make their living by bartering cattle, sheep, jewels, and precious stones
in the marketplace. The people of Pūrvavideha make their living by bartering pearls, cloth, and grain in the marketplace. The people of Uttarakuru
do not engage in trade and make their living by themselves. The people
of Jambudvīpa follow the custom of using negotiation to marry their
daughters to bridegrooms or to receive brides as wives for their sons. The
people of Aparagodānīya and of Pūrvavideha follow similar customs,

233

133c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

134a

sending off their daughters to marry bridegrooms and receiving brides
for their sons. The people of Uttarakuru have no marriage customs and
do not marry off daughters or receive brides for their sons. Among nāgas,
garuḍas, and asuras, males and females also follow the custom of marriage.
The same custom is observed among the four guardian gods of heaven,
the Trāyastriṃśa gods, and so on, to the Paranirmitavaśavartin gods. There
is no such custom, however, among higher gods than those already mentioned, because there is no gender difference in those of higher divinity.
The people of Jambudvīpa, male and female, require sexual union.
Through physical contact they fuse positive and negative elements. The
people of Aparagodānīya, of Pūrvavideha, and of Uttarakuru also require
physical contact to fuse positive and negative elements. The nāgas and
garuḍas are the same, but the asuras can reach the same goal [simply]
by being in close physical proximity to one another and using mutual
awareness. The four guardian gods and the Trāyastriṃśa gods also follow
this method. The Yama gods fuse positive and negative elements just by
being near each other. The Tuṣita gods accomplish the same end just by
holding each other’s hands. The Nirmāṇarati gods accomplish it by staring
at each other, while the Paranirmitavaśavartin gods accomplish it simply
by glancing at each other. Gods beyond those already mentioned do not
experience sexual desire.
When sentient beings have committed evil through thought, speech,
or action they may thus engender the nascent consciousness of a hellish
being, even though their own awareness perishes when their body dissolves
and their life ebbs away. Contingent on that consciousness, name and
form (nāmarūpa) arise. Contingent on name and form, the six bases of
cognition (ṣaḍāyatana) arise. Again, when sentient beings have committed
evil through acts of body, speech, or mind they may fall into the course
of animal life when their body dissolves and their life ebbs away. Even
though their own awareness has perished, they have engendered the nascent
consciousness of an animal. Contingent on that consciousness, name and
form arise. Contingent on name and form, the six bases of cognition arise.
Again, when sentient beings have committed evil through acts of body,
speech, or mind they may fall into the course of a [hungry] ghost (preta)
when their body dissolves and their life ebbs away. Even though their

234

Sutra 30

own awareness has perished they have engendered the nascent consciousness of a [hungry] ghost. Contingent on that consciousness, name and
form arise. Contingent on name and form, the six bases of cognition arise.
Again, when sentient beings have accomplished good through thought,
speech, or action they may be reborn in the course of a human being when
their body dissolves and their life ebbs away. Even though their own awareness has perished they have engendered the nascent consciousness of a
human being. Contingent on that consciousness, name and form arise.
Contingent on name and form, the six bases of cognition arise. Again,
when sentient beings have accomplished good through acts of body, speech,
or mind they may be reborn in the life course of the four guardian gods
when their body dissolves and their life ebbs away. Even though their own
awareness has perished they have engendered the nascent heavenly consciousness of a guardian god. Contingent on that consciousness, name and
form arise. Contingent on name and form, the six bases of cognition arise.
When entering a heaven one is like a young child of one to two years
of age. That child, having been reborn through natural transformation,
now abides on the lap of a guardian god. The god may say, “This is my
child,” but the child already possesses the wisdom of his past conduct and
thinks, “By what good conduct have I been born in this heavenly world?”
Again the child thinks, “Once, when I was human and accomplished some
good through acts of body, speech, and mind I accrued some merit, which
has enabled me to be reborn into this celestial life. If my life should end
here and I am reborn again among humans, I must work to purify the
nature of my acts (karman) of body, speech, and mind and try still harder
to accomplish some good.”
Not long after rebirth the child feels hunger. Immediately a vessel ﬁlled
with pure food containing a hundred heavenly tastes appears. If the child’s
merit is superior, the meal will consist of white rice; if the child’s merit
is average, the meal will consist of blue rice; if his or her merit is little,
the meal will consist of red rice. The food is eaten by hand, and once swallowed by the child it is immediately digested, like butter thrown into a
ﬁre. When the meal is ﬁnished the child feels thirst, and then a vessel
ﬁlled with nectar appears. If the child’s merit is superior, the juice will be
white; if the child’s merit is average, it will be blue; and if his or her merit

235

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

134b

is little, it will be red. Once the child has drunk [the juice] it is immediately
digested, like butter thrown into a ﬁre. Once the child has ﬁnished [the
food and juice] he has already grown into an adult god.
He then goes to a bathing pond to enjoy washing and bathing. Emerging
from the pond, he approaches a tree ﬁlled with many fragrances. The tree
bends down and he takes some of the fragrance in his hand and rubs it
onto his body. Then he sees a tree ﬁlled with cotton garments. As it bends
down, he takes a garment and puts it on, ﬁtting it to his body. Now he
sees a tree ﬁlled with many kinds of ornaments. As it bends down, he
takes a few [ornaments] to brighten his dress. Then he sees a tree ﬁlled
with garlands. As it bends down, he takes one and places it upon his head.
Then he sees a tree ﬁlled with many kinds of vessels. As it bends down,
he takes one and carries it to a tree ﬁlled with fruit. As [the tree of fruit]
bends down, he picks some to taste and eat later. Then he sees a tree ﬁlled
with musical instruments. As it bends down, he chooses one and plucks
its strings while singing in a clear, ﬁne voice. Entering a pleasure grove,
he encounters numerous heavenly maidens who cheerfully strum their
instruments and tap their drums to entertain him with song and laughter.
On this sort of excursion the god gives himself over to such entertainments.
When he looks east, he forgets west; when looks west, he forgets east.
Although he once wondered “By what actions have I been born into this
celestial life?” [by now] he has totally forgotten this train of thought while
engaged in the pleasures at hand, and is now surrounded by palace ladies
and retainers.
Again, when sentient beings have accomplished some good through
thought, speech, and action they may be reborn in the life course of the
Trāyastriṃśa gods when their body dissolves and their life ebbs away.
Although their own awareness has perished, they have engendered the
nascent heavenly consciousness of a Trāyastriṃśa god. Contingent on
that consciousness, name and form arise. Contingent on name and form,
the six bases of cognition arise. Entering that heaven, one is like a child
in the Jambudvīpa world, two to three years of age. That child, having
been reborn through natural transformation, now appears on the lap of a
Trāyastriṃśa god, who may say “This is my son” or “This is my daughter,”
just as before. Or, when sentient beings have accomplished some good

236

Sutra 30

through thought, speech, and action they may be reborn as a Yama god
when their body dissolves and their life ebbs away. Entering that heaven,
one is like a child of this world, three to four years of age. Or, when sentient
beings have accomplished some good through thought, speech, and action
they may be reborn as a Tuṣita god when their body dissolves and their
life ebbs away. Entering that heaven, one is like a child of this world, four
to ﬁve years of age. Or, when sentient beings have accomplished good
through thought, speech, and action they may be reborn as a Nirmāṇarati
god when their body dissolves and their life ebbs away. Entering that
heaven, one is like a child of this world, ﬁve to six years of age. Or, when
sentient beings have accomplished some good through thought, speech,
and action they may be reborn as a Paranirmitavaśavartin god when their
body dissolves and their life ebbs away. Entering that heaven, one is like
a child of this world, six to seven years of age, just as before.
The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

There are three days of religious observance in the ﬁrst half of the month.
What are the three? They are the eighth, fourteenth, and ﬁfteenth days of
the month. Why should the eighth be a day of religious observance? On
the eighth day of each month it is customary for the four guardian gods
to instruct their messengers, “May you all travel through the human world
to observe people’s conduct, so that we can be informed as to whether
they are ﬁlial to their parents, respectful to śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, and
obedient to their elders in society, and also whether they adhere religiously
to the moral precepts and offer charity to those in need of help.”
After receiving their orders the messengers travel through the human
world to investigate in detail whether the people are ﬁlial to their parents,
respectful to śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, obedient to their elders, observant
of the moral precepts, and generous to those in need of help. If they discover that some are neither ﬁlial to their parents nor respectful to śramaṇas
and brāhmaṇas, nor are they obedient to their elders, observant of the
moral precepts, or generous to those in need of help, they return to report,
“O great kings, in the world of humans it is indeed very difﬁcult to ﬁnd
any number of those who are ﬁlial to their parents, respectful to śramaṇas
and brāhmaṇas, obedient to their elders, observant of the moral precepts,

237

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

134c

and generous to those in need of help.” On hearing this report the guardian
gods reply, “A pity. So is this the real state of affairs? Humans have become
so corrupt that they diminish our prospects in this celestial life while
advancing those of our adversaries, the asuras.”
If the messengers observe that some in this world are ﬁlial to their parents, respectful to śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, obedient to their elders,
observant of the moral precepts, and generous to those in need of help,
however, they return and report, “O great kings, in the world of humans
we have witnessed many who are ﬁlial to their parents, respectful to śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, obedient to their elders, observant of moral precepts, and generous to those in need of help.” On hearing this report the
guardian gods say, “Splendid, it is a pleasure to hear this! People who are
ﬁlial to their parents, respectful to śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, obedient to
their elders, observant of the moral precepts, and generous to those in
need of help increase the sense of well-being that we enjoy in this celestial
life, while weakening that of the asuras.”
Why should the fourteenth be a day of religious observance? On the
fourteenth day of each month it is customary for the four guardian gods
to instruct their crown princes, “May you all travel through the human
world to observe people’s conduct so that we can be informed as to whether
they are ﬁlial to their parents, respectful to śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, and
obedient to their elders in society, and also whether they adhere religiously
to the moral precepts and offer charity to those in need of help.”
After receiving their orders, their crown princes travel through the
human world to investigate in detail whether people are ﬁlial to their parents, respectful to śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, obedient to their elders,
observant of the moral precepts, and generous to those in need of help.
If they discover that many are neither ﬁlial to their parents nor respectful
to śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, nor are they obedient to their elders, observant
of the moral precepts, or generous to those in need of help, the crown
princes return to report, “O great kings, in the world of humans it is indeed
very difﬁcult to ﬁnd any number of those who are ﬁlial to their parents,
respectful to śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, obedient to their elders, observant
of the moral precepts, and generous to those in need of help.” On hearing
this report the guardian gods reply, “A pity. So is this the real state of

238

Sutra 30

affairs? Humans have become so corrupt that they will diminish our
prospects in this celestial life while advancing those of our adversaries,
the asuras.”
If the crown princes observe that some in this world are ﬁlial to their
parents, respectful to śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, obedient to their elders,
observant of the moral precepts, and generous to those in need of help,
however, they return to report, “O great kings, in the world of humans
we have witnessed many who are ﬁlial to their parents, respectful to śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, obedient to their elders, observant of the moral
precepts, and generous to those in need of help.” On hearing this report
the guardian gods say, “Splendid, it is a pleasure to hear this! People who
are ﬁlial to their parents, respectful to śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, obedient
to their elders, observant of the moral precepts, and generous to those in
need of help increase the sense of well-being that we enjoy in this celestial
life, while weakening that of the asuras.” Because of this, the fourteenth
day of the month is held as a day of religious observance.
Why should the ﬁfteenth be a day of religious observance? On the ﬁfteenth day it is customary for the four guardian gods to travel themselves
through the human world to observe people’s conduct and to inform Śakra
as to whether they are ﬁlial to their parents, respectful to śramaṇas and
brāhmaṇas, and obedient to their elders in society, and also whether they
adhere religiously to the moral precepts and provide charity to those in
need of help.
If they discover, however, that not many in the human world are ﬁlial
to their parents, respectful to śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, obedient to their
elders, observant of the moral precepts, and generous to those in need of
help, the four guardian gods return to Sudharma Hall and report to Śakra,
lord of the gods, “O lord, in the world of humans it is indeed very difﬁcult
to ﬁnd any number of those who are ﬁlial to their parents, respectful to
śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, obedient to their elders, observant of the moral
precepts, and generous to those in need of help.” Hearing this report, the
Trāyastriṃśa gods exclaim, “A pity. So is this the real state of affairs?
Humans have become so corrupt that they will diminish our prospects in
this celestial life, while advancing those of our adversaries, the asuras.”

239

135a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

If the four guardian gods observe that people in this world are ﬁlial to
their parents, respectful to śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, obedient to their
elders, observant of the moral precepts, and generous to those in need of
help, however, they return to Śakra, lord of the gods, to report, “O lord,
in the world of humans we have witnessed many who are ﬁlial to their
parents, respectful to śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, obedient to their elders,
observant of the moral precepts, and generous to those in need of help.”
Hearing this report, the Trāyastriṃśa gods exclaim in delight, “Splendid!
Humans who are ﬁlial to their parents, respectful to śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas, obedient to their elders, observant of the moral precepts, and generous to those in need of help increase the sense of well-being that we
enjoy, while weakening that of the asuras.” Because of this, the ﬁfteenth
day of the month is held as a day of religious observance.
At that moment, wishing to renew the gods’ delight, Śakra uttered the
following verse:
Those who keep the eighth, fourteenth, and ﬁfteenth
As days of religious observance
Are to be considered identical to me.

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

Even though this verse was uttered by Śakra, lord of the gods, it should
not be generally accepted, nor is it a good teaching. I consider it to be
inappropriate. Why? Indra, lord of the gods, has yet to exhaust desire,
hatred, and delusion. He is not yet free from the sorrow and suffering of
birth, old age, illness, and death. I assert that he has not separated himself
from the source of suffering.
If, however, any of my disciples eliminate the destructive force of his
deﬁlements (sāsrava), perfectly terminating them, and accomplish all that
must be done to discard burdens, acquire advantage, and exhaust all attachment to the forms of existence, thus realizing complete liberation [from
the state of suffering], he would then be entitled to utter the same verse:
Those who keep the eighth, fourteenth, and ﬁfteenth
As days of religious observance
Are to be considered identical to me.

240

Sutra 30

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

When such a disciple utters the verse it should be accepted as a good
teaching, and I consider it to be appropriate. Why? Because that disciple
has exhausted desire, hatred, and delusion and is free from the sorrow
and suffering of birth, old age, illness, and death. I assert that he is liberated
from the source of suffering.
The Buddha continued his discourse to the bhikṣus:

The houses and residences where people live are all, without exception,
occupied by spirits. [Certainly] there is no house or residence where no
spirit abides. Spirits are invariably there in every street and crossroads,
in butcher shops as well as cemetery mounds, leaving no places [where
there are no spirits] at all. Now, insofar as a spirit dwells in a certain place,
its name is derived from that place of attachment. Some spirits obtain
their names from the names of individual humans. Others obtain their
names from the names of villages, cities, countries, or regions, or mountains, rivers, [and so on].
The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

All trees, even the smallest [whose trunk is only] the size of an axle, are
possessed by guardian spirits. There is no tree whatsoever that is without
a residing spirit. Each and every man or woman, from the very beginning,
has a guardian spirit who keeps watch [over them] throughout their lifetime.
When their death approaches, it is their guardian spirit who takes hold at
the end of their life.

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

If a heretic should say, “Venerables, if you suppose that every man or
woman, from the beginning of life, has a guardian spirit who keeps watch
[over them] throughout their lifetime, and when their death approaches
it is that guardian spirit who takes hold at the end of their life, I would
like to ask: Why does it happen that some people are troubled by their
[guardian] spirits, while others are not at all inﬂuenced by them?” If a
heretic should say this, you should reply as follows: “Some people commit
wrongs. Inﬂuenced by wrong, inverted views, they commit offenses against
241

135b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

the ten norms [of conduct]. Such people, whether a hundred or a thousand
of them altogether, have only a single guardian spirit to look out for all of
them. Just as a herd of sheep or cattle, a hundred or a thousand in number,
likewise has only one shepherd to guard them—it is like that. Committing
wrongs, inﬂuenced by wrong and inverted views, one has only partial protection from a guardian spirit, as one of a hundred or a thousand. On the
other hand, if one does good deeds, and if upholding right views and believing in right action he or she complies with the ten norms of conduct, that
person will be protected by a hundred or a thousand guardian spirits. Just
as the king of a country or his minister is protected by a hundred or a thousand guards, those who engage in good behavior and comply with the ten
norms of conduct are watched over by a hundred or a thousand guardian
spirits. It is because of these different causal conditions that some people
are troubled by spirits while others are not at all inﬂuenced by them.”
The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

135c

The people of Jambudvīpa people exceed [the capabilities of] the people
of [Apara]godānīya in three respects. What are the three? First, since they
are valiant and endowed with [good] memory, they are able to create
karmic actions. Second, since they are valiant and endowed with [good]
memory, they are able to concentrate on the practice of austerity. Third,
since they are valiant and endowed with [good] memory, they are able to
contribute to the appearance of the Buddha in their land. In these three
ways, the people of Jambudvīpa are considered superior to the people of
[Apara]godānīya. The people of [Apara]godānīya, however, exceed [the
capabilities of] the people of Jambudvīpa in three respects. What are the
three? First, they possess many more head of cattle. Second, they possess
many more sheep. Third, they possess many more precious jewels. In
these three ways, the people of [Apara]godānīya are considered superior
to the people of Jambudvīpa.
The people of Jambudvīpa also exceed [the capabilities of] the people
of Pūrvavideha in three respects. What are the three? First, since they are
valiant and endowed with [good] memory, they are able to create karmic
actions. Second, since they are valiant and endowed with [good] memory,
they are able to concentrate on the practice of austerity. Third, since they

242

Sutra 30

are valiant and endowed with [good] memory, they are able to contribute
to the appearance of the Buddha in their land. In these three ways, the
people of Jambudvīpa are considered superior to the people of Pūrvavideha.
The people of Pūrvavideha, however, exceed [the capabilities of] the
people of Jambudvīpa in three respects. What are the three? First, their
land is vast and expansive. Second, their land is magniﬁcent. Third, their
soil is exceedingly rich. In these three ways, the people of Pūrvavideha
are considered superior to the people of Jambudvīpa.
The people of Jambudvīpa also exceed [the capabilities of] the people
of Uttarakuru in three respects. What are the three? First, since they are
valiant and endowed with [good] memory, they are able to create karmic
actions. Second, since they are valiant and endowed with [good] memory,
they are able to concentrate on the practice of austerity. Third, since they
are valiant and endowed with [good] memory, they are able to contribute
to the appearance of the Buddha in their land. In these three ways, the
people of Jambudvīpa people are considered superior to the people of
Uttarakuru. The people of Uttarakuru, however, exceed [the capabilities
of] the people of Jambudvīpa in three respects. What are the three? First,
they have no family possessions and thus little to which to become attached.
Second, they have no personal possessions. Third, they have a life span
of precisely one thousand years. In these three ways, the people of
Uttarakuru people are considered superior to the people of Jambudvīpa.
The people of Jambudvīpa also exceed [the capabilities of] hungry
ghosts (pretas) in the same three ways, whereas the hungry ghosts [are
superior to] the people of Jambudvīpa in three ways. What are the three?
First, their life span; second, their physical stature; and third, their tolerance
of others’ actions. In these three ways, they are considered superior to the
people of Jambudvīpa. The people of Jambudvīpa also exceed [the capabilities of] nāgas and garuḍas in the same three ways, whereas the latter
[are superior to] the people of Jambudvīpa in three ways. What are the
three? First, their life span; second, their physical stature; and third, their
palaces. In these three ways, they are considered superior to the people
of Jambudvīpa. The people of Jambudvīpa also exceed [the capabilities
of] the asuras in the same three ways, whereas the asuras [are superior
to] the people of Jambudvīpa in three ways. What are the three? First,

243

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

they possess grand and lofty palaces; second, they possess [grand] palatial
furnishings and embellishments; and third, their hygiene and cleanliness.
In these three ways, they are considered superior to the people of Jambudvīpa. The people of Jambudvīpa also exceed [the capabilities of] the four
guardian gods in the same three ways, whereas the four guardian gods
[are superior to] the people of Jambudvīpa in three ways. What are the
three? First, their life span; second, their attractiveness; and third, the
variety of pleasures they experience. In these three ways, they are considered superior to the people of Jambudvīpa. The people of Jambudvīpa
also exceed [the capabilities of] the gods of the Trāyastriṃśa, Yama, Tuṣita,
Nirmāṇarati, and Paranirmitavaśavartin Heavens in the same three ways,
whereas those gods [are superior to] the people of Jambudvīpa in three
ways. What are the three? First, their life span; second, their attractiveness;
and third, the variety of pleasures they experience. In these three ways,
they are considered superior to the people of Jambudvīpa.
The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

136a

There are twelve kinds of sentient beings in the realm of desire. What are
the twelve? They are (1) hell beings, (2) animals, (3) hungry ghosts, (4)
humans, (5) asuras, (6) the guardian gods, (7) the Trāyastriṃśa gods, (8)
the Yama gods, (9) the Tuṣita gods, (10) the Nirmāṇarati gods, (11) the
Paranirmitavaśavartin gods, and (12) the evil ones (Pāpīyas). There are
twenty-two kinds of sentient beings in the realm of form: (1) the Brahmakāyika gods, (2) the Brahmapurohita gods, (3) the Brahmagaṇa gods,
(4) the Mahābrahmā gods, (5) the Ābhāsvara gods, (6) the Parīttābha gods,
(7) the Apramāṇābha gods, (8) Ābhā, (9) the Śubha gods, (10) the Parīttaśubha gods, (11) the Apramāṇaśubha gods, (12) the Śubhakṛtsna gods
(13) the Anabhraka gods, (14) the Parītta gods, (15) the Apramāṇa gods
(16) the Bṛhatphala gods, (17) the Asaṃjñi gods (18) the Avṛha gods, (19)
the Atapa gods, (20) the Sudṛśa gods, (21) the Sudarśana gods, and (22)
the Akaniṣṭha gods. There are four kinds of sentient beings in the formless
realm: (1) the Ākāśajñā gods, (2) the Vijñānajña gods, (3) the Ākiṃcanajña
gods, and (4) the Naivasaṃjñānāsaṃjñāyātana gods.
The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

244

Sutra 30

There are four great divinities. What are the four? They are the gods of (1)
earth, (2) water, (3) wind, and (4) ﬁre. The goddess of earth once mistakenly
thought, “There is no water, wind, or ﬁre in [my domain of the] earth.” I
immediately went to her and said, “Is it true that you think there is no
water, wind, or ﬁre in the earth?” The earth goddess replied, “Yes, there
is no water, wind, or ﬁre in the earth.” I then said, “You should not think
that there is no water, wind, or ﬁre in the earth and ground. Why? Because
there is water, there is wind, and there is ﬁre in the earth. It is only because
of the great number of elements in the earth and ground that it is identiﬁed
with its [own] name.”
The Buddha continued:

I continued to teach the earth goddess, gradually removing her wrong
views. She was encouraged, helped, and delighted with the doctrine of
charity, the doctrine of morality, and the doctrine of rebirth in heaven,
and learned to shun desires as temptations into foul and impure conduct.
She began to perceive the deﬁlements of passion (kāmānāṃ kleśa) as the
obstacle, and I commended the path of distancing oneself from both pleasure and suffering as the necessary and best [means to salvation]. I observed
then that her mind had become calm, open, receptive, and ready to be
educated. So, in accordance with the rule followed by all buddhas, I
expounded on her behalf the [Four] Noble Truths of suffering (āryaduḥkha-satya), the cause of suffering (ārya-duḥkha-samudaya-satya), the
cessation of suffering (ārya-duḥkha-nirodha-satya), and the necessary
path of cessation (ārya-duḥkha-nirodha-gāminī-mārga-satya). Then, with
pure and genuine faith, like white cloth that can easily be dyed any color,
the earth goddess separated herself from all her deﬁlements and acquired
indisputable insight (ārya-dharma-cakṣus-viśuddha) into the nature of
the Dharma. Realizing the Dharma as she visualized it, she resolved to
abide in the right path (niyata-vyavasthita) without any retrogression, and
realized the state of fearlessness (vaiśāradya or abhaya). She then said
to me, “Now I humbly take refuge in the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha.
May Your Holiness grant me permission to become a lay devotee. From
this moment until the end of life I will refrain from taking life, I will
refrain from taking what is not given, I will refrain from immoral sexual

245

136b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

conduct, I will refrain from speaking falsehoods, and I will refrain from
ingesting intoxicants.”

The Buddha continued:

Once, when the water goddess mistakenly thought, “There is no earth,
wind, or ﬁre in [my domain of] water,” the earth goddess immediately
went to her and said, “Is it true that you think there is no earth, wind, or
ﬁre in water?” The [water] goddess replied, “Yes, there is no earth, wind,
or ﬁre in water.” The earth goddess then said, “You should not think that
there is no earth, wind, or ﬁre in water. Why? Because there is earth, there
is wind, and there is ﬁre in water. It is only because of the great number
of elements in water that it is identiﬁed with its [own] name.”
The earth goddess then continued to teach the water goddess, gradually
removing her wrong views. She was encouraged, helped, and delighted
with the doctrine of charity, the doctrine of morality, and the doctrine of
rebirth in heaven, and learned to shun desires as temptations into foul and
impure conduct. She began to perceive the deﬁlements of passion as the
obstacle and to understand the path of distancing oneself from both pleasure
and suffering as the necessary and best [means to salvation]. The earth
goddess then observed that the mind of the water goddess had become
calm, open, receptive, and ready to be educated. Then, in accordance with
the rule followed by all buddhas, the earth goddess expounded on her
behalf the [Four] Noble Truths of suffering, the cause of suffering, the
cessation of suffering, and the necessary path of cessation. Then with pure
and genuine faith, like white cloth that can easily be dyed any color, the
water goddess separated herself from all her deﬁlements and acquired
indisputable insight into the nature of the Dharma. Realizing the Dharma
as she visualized it, she resolved to abide in the right path without any
retrogression, and realized the state of fearlessness. The water goddess
then said to the earth goddess, “Now I humbly take refuge in the Buddha,
Dharma, and Sangha. May I be permitted to become a lay devotee in the
right Dharma. From this moment until the end of life I will refrain from
taking life, I will refrain from taking that which is not given, I will refrain
from immoral sexual conduct, I will refrain from speaking falsehoods,
and I will refrain from ingesting intoxicants.”

246

Sutra 30

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

Once, when the ﬁre goddess mistakenly thought, “There is no earth, water,
or wind in [my domain of] ﬁre,” the earth and water goddesses immediately
went to her and said, “Is it true that you think there is no earth, water, or
wind in ﬁre?” The ﬁre goddess replied, “Yes, there is no earth, water, or
wind in ﬁre.” The earth and water goddesses then said, “You should not
think that there is no earth, water, or wind in ﬁre. Why? Because there is
earth, there is water, and there is wind in ﬁre. It is only because of the
great number of elements in ﬁre that it is identiﬁed with its [own] name.”
The earth and water goddesses then continued to teach the ﬁre goddess,
gradually removing her wrong views. She in turn was encouraged, helped,
and delighted with the doctrine of charity, the doctrine of morality, and
the doctrine of rebirth in heaven, and learned to shun desires as temptations
into foul and impure conduct. She began to perceive the deﬁlements of
passion as the obstacle, and to understand the path of distancing oneself
from both pleasure and suffering as the necessary and best [means to salvation]. The earth and water goddesses then observed that the mind of
the ﬁre goddess had become calm, open, and receptive, ready to be educated. Then, in accordance with the rule followed by all buddhas, they
expounded on her behalf the [Four] Noble Truths of suffering, the cause
of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the necessary path of cessation.
Then with pure and genuine faith, like white cloth that can easily be dyed
any color, the ﬁre goddess separated herself from all her deﬁlements and
acquired indisputable insight into the nature of the Dharma. Realizing the
Dharma as she visualized it, she resolved to abide in the right path without
any retrogression and realized the state of fearlessness. The ﬁre goddess
then said to the earth and water goddesses, “Now I humbly take refuge
in the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha. May I be permitted to become a lay
devotee in the right Dharma. From this moment until the end of life I will
refrain from taking life, I will refrain from taking that which is not given,
I will refrain from immoral sexual conduct, I will refrain from speaking
falsehoods, and I will refrain from ingesting intoxicants.”
The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

247

136c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

Once, when the wind goddess mistakenly thought, “There is no earth,
water, or ﬁre in [my domain of] wind,” the goddesses of earth, water, and
ﬁre immediately went to her and said, “Is it true that you think there is
no earth, water, or ﬁre in wind?” The wind goddess replied, “Yes, there
is no earth, water, or ﬁre in wind.” The three other goddesses said to the
wind goddess, “You should not think that there is no earth, water, or ﬁre
in wind. Why? Because there is earth, there is water, and there is ﬁre in
wind. It is only because of the great number of elements in wind that it
is identiﬁed with its [own] name.”
The goddesses of earth, water, and ﬁre then continued to teach the
water goddess, gradually removing her wrong views. She was encouraged,
helped, and delighted with the doctrine of charity, the doctrine of morality,
and the doctrine of rebirth in heaven, and learned to shun desires as temptations into foul and impure conduct. She began to perceive the deﬁlements
of passion as the obstacle and to understand the path of distancing oneself
from both pleasure and suffering as the necessary and best [means to salvation]. The three goddesses then observed that the mind of the wind goddess had become calm, open, and receptive, ready to be educated. Then,
in accordance with the rule followed by all buddhas, they expounded on
her behalf the [Four] Noble Truths of suffering, the cause of suffering,
the cessation of suffering, and the necessary path of cessation. Then with
pure and genuine faith, like white cloth that can easily be dyed any color,
the wind goddess separated herself from all her deﬁlements and acquired
indisputable insight into the nature of the Dharma. Realizing the Dharma
as she visualized it, she resolved to abide in the right path without any
retrogression and realized the state of fearlessness. Then the wind goddess
said to the goddesses of earth, water, and ﬁre, “Now I humbly take refuge
in the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha. May I be permitted to become a lay
devotee in the right Dharma. From this moment until the end of life I will
refrain from taking life, I will refrain from taking that which is not given,
I will refrain from immoral sexual conduct, I will refrain from speaking
falsehoods, and I will refrain from ingesting intoxicants. From this moment
I will disturb no one and will treat everyone with benevolence.”
The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

248

Sutra 30

There are four kinds of clouds. What are the four? They are (1) white, (2)
black, (3) red, and (4) pink. White clouds are permeated by earth elements;
black clouds are permeated by water; red clouds are permeated by ﬁre; and
pink clouds are permeated by wind. Clouds are found ten, twenty, thirty,
forty, or [even] four thousand li [high], except at the beginning and end of
an eon (kalpa), when they rise as high as Ābhāsvara Heaven.
There are four kinds of lightning. What are the four? The lightning of
the eastern region is called Bodily Light; that of the southern region is called
Difﬁcult to Damage; that of the western region is called Flowing Fire; and
that of the northern region is called Steady Light. How and why does lightning occur in the midair clouds? At times, Bodily Light touches Difﬁcult
to Damage. At times, Bodily Light touches Flowing Fire. At times, Bodily
Light touches Steady Light. At times, Difﬁcult to Damage touches Steady
Light. At times, Difﬁcult to Damage touches Flowing Fire. At times, Difﬁcult
to Damage touches Bodily Light. At times, Flowing Fire touches Steady
Light. Because of these occurrences, lightning arises in the midair clouds.
Again, how and why does thunder occur in the midair clouds? At times,
the earth element touches the water element in midair. At times, the earth
element touches the ﬁre element in midair. At times, the earth element
touches the wind element in midair. At times, the water element touches
the ﬁre element. At times, the water element touches the wind element.
Because of these occurrences, thunder resounds through midair.
The soothsayer of rain considers that there are ﬁve factors affecting
rainfall. This means that one cannot predict the arrival of rain with any
certainty and will likely remain troubled. What are the ﬁve factors? (1)
When thunder and lightning in the clouds lead to a prediction of rain, the
clouds are consumed by overwhelming ﬁre and no rain issues. (2) When
thunder and lightning in the clouds lead to a prediction of rain, a great
storm arises and blows all the clouds away. (3) When thunder and lightning
in the clouds lead to a prediction of rain, the asuras gather all the ﬂoating
clouds within the conﬁnes of the ocean, leaving the predictor [of rainfall]
anxious and troubled. (4) When thunder and lightning in the clouds lead
to a prediction of rain, the master of clouds and that of rain, being undisciplined, indulge in sexual conduct that does not allow the rain to fall,
leaving the predictor [of rainfall] anxious and troubled. (5) When thunder

249

137a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

137b

and lightning in the clouds lead to a prediction of rain, the heavens do not
release the rain because people are undisciplined, unrighteous, wanton,
and inﬂuenced by avarice, jealousy, misery, and wrong views. Because
of this, the predictor [of rainfall] is left anxious and troubled. These are
the ﬁve factors that allow no soothsayer to know or predict the coming
of rain with any certainty.

Article 9: Three Disasters

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

There are four kinds of events that occur over an immeasurably long
period of time, which cannot be measured in days, months, or years. What
are they? (1) When disasters [continually] occur, portending the destruction
of the world, the intervening period is immeasurably long and cannot be
enumerated in days, months, or years. (2) When this world has ﬁnally
been destroyed, the intervening period, a vast emptiness in the absence
of the world, is immeasurably long and cannot be enumerated in days,
months, or years. (3) When heaven and earth ﬁrst appear and begin to be
formed, the intervening period is immeasurably long and cannot be enumerated in days, months, or years. (4) When heaven and earth have taken
form, the period of the world’s constant, indestructible presence is immeasurably long and cannot be enumerated in days, months, or years. These
four periods are immeasurably long and cannot be enumerated in years.
The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

There are three kinds of disasters in this world. What are they? (1) Disaster
by ﬁre, (2) disaster by water, and (3) disaster by wind. With these disasters,
know that there are upper limits with respect to the regions affected, namely,
(1) Ābhāsvara Heaven, (2) Śubhakṛtsna Heaven, and (3) Bṛhatphala Heaven.
Disasters by ﬁre can reach as far as Ābhāsvara Heaven and no farther. Disasters by water can reach as far as Śubhakṛtsna Heaven and no farther.
Disasters by wind can reach as far as Bṛhatphala Heaven and no farther.
What is a disaster caused by ﬁre? Every person in the world was once
fully engaged in practicing the right Dharma, abiding therein without
deviation, and they naturally adhered to the ten norms of conduct. One

250

Sutra 30

person, while adhering to these norms, attained the second meditative
state of absorption and [suddenly] ascended in midair to continue on the
path of disciples (śrāvakayāna), the path of heaven, and the path of Brahmā.
In a distinct voice, he said, “O Venerables, you must know that there is
no awareness of an object or of any subjective action, only [overwhelming]
joy and bliss as the second state of absorption emerges—joy and bliss are
the second state of concentration!” When the others heard him, they looked
up and said, “Very well. Very well, sir. Will you expound for our sake the
path that leads to this second state of absorption in which no awareness
of an object or any subjective action remains?” The practitioner responded
to their request, expounding the path that leads to the state of absorption
without awareness of either object or subject.
Hearing this exhortation, the people of this world decided to attain the
second meditative state of absorption, and when their bodies dissolved
and their lives came to an end they were born in Ābhāsvara Heaven. Then
all the sentient beings whose transgressions had been fully expiated in
the hell realms were reborn in the human world, and they too took up the
practice leading to the second meditative state of absorption; when their
bodies dissolved and their lives came to an end they were born in Ābhāsvara Heaven. In a similar manner, sentient beings who had been in the
animal realm or in the realms of the hungry ghosts, the asuras, the four
guardian gods, the Trāyastriṃśa gods, the Yama gods, the Nirmāṇarati
gods, the Paranirmitavaśavartin gods, and [the gods of] Brahmā Heaven
all came to be reborn in the human world after their lives ended in their
respective realms. They too took up the practice leading to the second
meditative state of absorption, and upon the dissolution of their bodies
and the end of life they were born in Ābhāsvara Heaven.
Because of this causal nexus, when the hell realms ended so did the
realms of the [hungry] ghosts, the asuras, and so on, up to Brahmā Heaven.
In other words, as the end of the world approached all the residents of the
hells had already died, followed by the deaths of all the animals. When
all the animals had died, the deaths of all the hungry ghosts followed.
When all the ghosts were dead, the deaths of all the asuras followed.
When the asuras were all dead, the deaths of the four guardian gods followed. When the four guardian gods [and their retainers] were all dead,

251

137c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

the deaths of the Trāyastriṃśa gods followed. When the Trāyastriṃśa
gods were all dead, the deaths of the Yama gods followed. When the Yama
gods were all dead, the deaths of the Tuṣita gods followed. When the
Tuṣita gods were all dead, the deaths of the Nirmāṇarati gods followed.
When the Nirmāṇarati gods were all dead, the deaths of the Paranirmitavaśavartin gods followed. When the Paranirmitavaśavartin gods were
all dead, the deaths of the Brahmā gods followed. When the Brahmā gods
were all dead, only then did all the humans die, as there were no sentient
beings left. When all the humans had died, no one remained. The world
was about to be destroyed, an incipient disaster. Soon there was no rain and
each and every [blade of] grass, plant, and tree withered away.
The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

As a result, you must know that “everything impermanent is bound for
decay and destruction; hence there is nothing on which one can hold to
or rely. The psychophysical elements (skandhas) that perdure through the
inﬂuence of one’s deﬁlements are to be abhorred. You must seek the path
of transcendence out of this world and liberation from it.”
After an indeterminate length of time a great black storm blew up, violently agitating the ocean. The entire body of water, to a depth of eightyfour thousand yojanas, was pulled apart and split in two. The sun, entering
its palace on the mid-slope of Mount Sumeru, hovered at a height of fortytwo thousand yojanas above the ground for two consecutive days. Now,
when the sun heats the world by shining continuously for two days, all
the water that remains in gutters and drain spouts, small brooks and streams,
wherever it may be, bakes and evaporates without exception.
The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

Because of this, you must realize that “everything impermanent is bound
for decay and destruction; hence there is nothing on which one can hold
to or rely. The psychophysical elements that perdure through the inﬂuence
of one’s deﬁlements are to be abhorred. You must seek the path of transcendence out of this world and liberation from it.”
After some time, another great black storm blew up, violently agitating
the ocean. The entire body of water, to a depth of eighty-four thousand

252

Sutra 30

yojanas, was pulled apart and split in two. The sun, entering its palace on
the mid-slope of Mount Sumeru, hovered at a height of forty-two thousand
yojanas above the ground for three consecutive days. Now, when the sun
heats the world by shining continuously for three days, all the water in
large rivers, such as the Gaṅgā (Ganges), Yamunā, Poluo, Aciravatī, Amoqie, Sindhu, and Gushe, wherever [such rivers] may be, bakes and evaporates without exception. Because of this, you must realize that “everything
impermanent is bound for decay and destruction; hence there is nothing on
which one can hold to or rely. The psychophysical elements that perdure
through the inﬂuence of one’s deﬁlements are to be abhorred. You must
seek the path of transcendence out of this world and liberation from it.”
After some time, another great black storm blew up, violently agitating
the ocean. The entire body of water, to a depth of eighty-four thousand
yojanas, was pulled apart and split in two. The sun, entering its palace on
the mid-slope of Mount Sumeru, hovered at a height of forty-two thousand
yojanas above the ground for four consecutive days. Now, when the sun
heats the world by shining continuously for four days, all the spring-fed
water that pools in utpala, kumuda, or puṇḍarīka lotus ponds, as well as
every other pond measuring ﬁfty yojanas in length and breadth or less, and
which collects in lakes such as Sifangyan, the great Anavatapta, and the
great Sudarśana, wherever [such ponds and lakes] may be, bakes and evaporates without exception. Because of this, you must realize that “everything
impermanent is bound for decay and destruction; hence there is nothing on
which one can hold to or rely. The psychophysical elements that perdure
through the inﬂuence of one’s deﬁlements are to be abhorred. You must
seek the path of transcendence out of this world and liberation from it.”
After some time, another great black storm blew up, violently agitating
the ocean. The entire body of water, to a depth of eighty-four thousand
yojanas, was pulled apart and split in two. The sun, entering its palace on
the mid-slope of Mount Sumeru, hovered at a height of forty-two thousand
yojanas above the ground for ﬁve consecutive days. Now, when the sun
heats the world by shining continuously for ﬁve days, all the water in the
great ocean gradually shrinks, receding [from the shore] by as much as
seven hundred yojanas. Because of this, you must realize that “everything
impermanent is bound for decay and destruction; hence there is nothing on

253

138a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

which one can hold to or rely. The psychophysical elements that perdure
through the inﬂuence of one’s deﬁlements are to be abhorred. You must
seek the path of transcendence out of this world and liberation from it.”
The water in the great ocean continued to shrink and its depth dropped
from seven hundred yojanas to six hundred, four hundred, and still further,
until it reached a depth of one hundred yojanas. Because of this, you must
realize that “everything impermanent is bound for decay and destruction;
hence there is nothing on which one can hold to or rely. The psychophysical
complexes that perdure through the inﬂuence of one’s deﬁlements are to
be abhorred. You must seek the path of transcendence out of this world
and liberation from it.”
Then the water in the great ocean water evaporated even further, and
its depth went from seven yojanas to six, ﬁve, and on down, until it was
only one yojana deep.
The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

Because of this, you must realize that “everything impermanent is bound
for decay and destruction; hence there is nothing on which one can hold
to or rely. The psychophysical complexes that perdure through the inﬂuence
of one’s deﬁlements are to be abhorred. You must seek the path of transcendence out of this world and liberation from it.”
After that, the water in the great ocean continued to evaporate, going
from a depth of seven tāla trees, to six, ﬁve, and on down, until it was
only as deep [as the height] of a single tāla tree.

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

Because of this, you must realize that “everything impermanent is bound
for decay and destruction; hence there is nothing on which one can hold
to or rely. The psychophysical elements that perdure through the inﬂuence
of one’s deﬁlements are to be abhorred. You must seek the path of transcendence out of this world and liberation from it.”
Then the ocean water became rapidly shallower, going from the height
of seven human beings to six, ﬁve, four, three, two, one, and then it dropped
to the level of a person’s waist, then the knee, and ﬁnally the ankle.

254

Sutra 30

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

Because of this, you must realize that “everything impermanent is bound
for decay and destruction; hence there is nothing on which one can hold
to or rely. The psychophysical elements that perdure through the inﬂuence
of one’s deﬁlements are to be abhorred. You must seek the path of transcendence out of this world and liberation from it.”
Finally the ocean became only a wet patch on the ground, as if dampened by a spring rainshower. That shrank to a few tiny puddles, like those
left by a cow urinating, until all the water evaporated, leaving nothing
into which one could even dip a ﬁnger.

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

Because of this, you must realize that “everything impermanent is bound
for decay and destruction; hence there is nothing on which one can hold
to or rely. The psychophysical complexes that perdure through the inﬂuence
of one’s deﬁlements are to be abhorred. You must seek the path of transcendence out of this world and liberation from it.”
After an indeterminate length of time, another great black storm arose,
violently churning up the ocean ﬂoor down to a depth of eighty-four thousand yojanas. All of the sandy [ocean ﬂoor] was blown apart and split in
two. The sun, entering its palace on the mid-slope of Mount Sumeru, hovered at a height of forty-two thousand yojanas above the ground for six
consecutive days. Now, when the sun heats the world by continuously
shining for six days, the four continents and the eighty thousand mountains
and mountain ranges, along with Mount Sumeru, all begin to smolder.
Just as when a potter stokes a ﬁre to heat the clay, so does the sun’s heat
build up over six days.
The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

Because of this, you must realize that “everything impermanent is bound
for decay and destruction; hence there is nothing on which one can hold
to or rely. The psychophysical elements that perdure through the inﬂuence
of one’s deﬁlements are to be abhorred. You must seek the path of transcendence out of this world and liberation from it.”

255

138b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

After some time, another great black storm arose, violently churning
up the ocean ﬂoor down to a depth of eighty-four thousand yojanas. The
sandy sea ﬂoor was all blown apart and split in two. The sun, entering its
palace on the mid-slope of Mount Sumeru, hovered at a height of fortytwo thousand yojanas for seven consecutive days. Now, when the sun
heats the world by shining continuously for seven days, the four continents
and the eighty thousand mountains and mountain ranges, along with Mount
Sumeru, all catch ﬁre. Just as when a potter heats the kiln [by stoking a
ﬁre into] intense ﬂames, so does the sun’s heat build up over seven days.

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

Because of this, you must realize that “everything impermanent is bound
for decay and destruction; hence there is nothing on which one can hold
to or rely. The psychophysical elements that perdure through the inﬂuence
of one’s deﬁlements are to be abhorred. You must seek the path of transcendence out of this world and liberation from it.”
The four continents and the eighty thousand mountains and mountain
ranges, along with Mount Sumeru, were all consumed in ﬁery ﬂames. In
the same way, the celestial palaces of the four guardian gods, the Trāyastriṃśa
gods, the Yama gods, the Tuṣita gods, the Nirmāṇarati gods, the Paranirmitavaśavartin gods, and the Brahmā gods were all consumed by ﬁery ﬂames.”
The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

Because of this, you must realize that “everything impermanent is bound
for decay and destruction; hence there is nothing on which one can hold
to or rely. The psychophysical elements that perdure through the inﬂuence
of one’s deﬁlements are to be abhorred. You must seek the path of transcendence out of this world and liberation from it.”
With the four continents and everything up to [the world of] the Brahmā
gods in ﬂames, the ﬁre was caught by the wind and blown higher toward
Ābhāsvara Heaven. Terriﬁed by the sight of the ﬂames, the offspring of
the Ābhāsvara gods clamored, “Ah, what is that?” The older gods explained
to the young ones, “Don’t be afraid. A ﬁre like that was blown this way
once before but it stopped short before reaching us.” It is also because

256

Sutra 30

they recall having seen the ﬁre approaching that they are called the Ābhāsvarasmṛti gods.
With the four continents and everything up to [the world of] the Brahmā
gods in ﬂames, Mount Sumeru steadily shrank as it burned, losing hundreds
and thousands of yojanas from its lofty height until it ﬁnally completely
collapsed, with nothing remaining.
The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

Because of this, you must understand that “everything impermanent is
bound for decay and destruction; hence there is nothing on which one can
hold to or rely. The psychophysical elements that perdure through the
inﬂuence of one’s deﬁlements are to be abhorred. You must seek the path
of transcendence out of this world and liberation from it.”
When the destruction of the earth, the four continents, Mount Sumeru,
and everything up to [the world of] the Brahmā gods was ﬁnished, not
even a single bit of ash remained. Because of this, you must understand
that “everything impermanent is bound for decay and destruction; hence
there is nothing on which one can hold to or rely. The psychophysical
complexes that perdure through the inﬂuence of one’s deﬁlements are to
be abhorred. You must seek the path of transcendence out of this world
and liberation from it.”
When you see the earth [completely] consumed by ﬁre and all the water
dispersed by the wind, you will understand that “everything impermanent
is bound for decay and destruction; hence there is nothing on which one
can hold to or rely. The psychophysical complexes that perdure through
the inﬂuence of one’s deﬁlements are to be abhorred. You must seek the
path of transcendence out of this world and liberation from it.”

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

During the disaster by ﬁre, hundreds of varieties of plants, grasses, and trees
withered and died because there was no rainfall. Only those who have personally witnessed this and known these events can believe it. All the water,
not only on the surface of the earth but also the groundwater, had been
exhausted as has been described, as was the layer of wind below the water.

257

138c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

139a

Only those who have personally witnessed this and known these events can
believe it. The foregoing is [an account of] the disaster caused by ﬁre.
How is it possible to recover from ﬁre? After some time, a great black
cloud appeared in the sky. As it rose to Ābhāsvara Heaven, rain poured
down like drops from a spinning wheel for incalculable hundreds of thousands of years. The water gradually accumulated, its volume expanding
for incalculable hundreds of thousands of yojanas. When it reached Ābhāsvara Heaven the four powers of wind arose to hold up that mass of water.
What are the four winds? They are steady wind, supporting wind, immovable wind, and ﬁrm wind. In time, as the water level gradually diminished
by hundreds of thousands of yojanas and retreated further by incalculable
hundreds of millions of yojanas [from the previous level], four great gusts
of wind, called sāṃkhya, blew from the four corners of the mass of water,
shaking it violently and creating great thunderous waves that cascaded
and broke in towering sheets of whitewater. The sparkling foam that shot
into the air instantly solidiﬁed into the forms and structures of celestial
palaces richly adorned with the seven kinds of treasure. Thus the residential
palaces of the Brahmakāyika gods came into being.
[Now] as the water level continued to diminish by incalculable hundreds
of millions of yojanas, four great gusts of wind, called sāṃkhya, blew
from the four corners of that mass of water, shaking it violently and creating
great thunderous waves that cascaded and broke in towering sheets of
whitewater. The sparkling foam that shot into the air instantly solidiﬁed
into the forms and structures of celestial palaces richly adorned with the
seven kinds of treasure. Thus the residential palaces of the Paranirmitavaśavartin gods came into being.
[Again,] as the water level continued to diminish by incalculable hundreds of thousands of yojanas, four great gusts of wind, called sāṃkhya,
blew from the four corners of that mass of water, shaking it violently and
creating great thunderous waves that cascaded and broke in towering
sheets of white water. The sparkling foam that shot into the air instantly
solidiﬁed into the forms and structures of celestial palaces richly adorned
with the seven kinds of treasure. Thus the residential palaces of the Nirmāṇarati gods came into being.

258

Sutra 30

[Again,] as the water level continued to diminish by incalculable hundreds of thousands of yojanas, four great gusts of wind, called sāṃkhya,
blew from the four corners of that mass of water, shaking it violently and
creating great thunderous waves that cascaded and broke in towering
sheets of whitewater. The sparkling foam that shot into the air instantly
solidiﬁed into the forms and structures of celestial palaces richly adorned
with the seven kinds of treasure. Thus the residential palaces of the Tuṣita
gods came into being.
[Again,] as the water level continued to diminish by incalculable hundreds of thousands of yojanas, four great gusts of wind, called sāṃkhya,
blew from the four corners of that mass of water, shaking it violently and
creating great thunderous waves that cascaded and broke in towering
sheets of whitewater. The sparkling foam that shot into the air instantly
solidiﬁed into the forms and structures of celestial palaces richly adorned
with the seven kinds of treasure. Thus the residential palaces of the Yama
gods came into being.
[Again,] as the water level continued to diminish by incalculable hundreds of thousands of yojanas, the sparkling foam on the surface of the
water was six hundred eight thousand yojanas deep and the vastness of
that body of water was limitless. Just as springwater ﬂows out with bits
of foam on its surface, that vast body of water carried [potential] forms
and structures on its surface.
How did Mount Sumeru come into being? Sudden gusts of wind blew
the sparkling foam into piles, creating a mountain six hundred eight thousand
yojanas high and eighty-four thousand yojanas long and wide, consisting
entirely of the four precious materials of gold, silver, quartz, and lapis.
How did the palaces of the asuras come into being? After the creation
of Mount Sumeru, [similar] gusts of wind blew over the great ocean and
from out of the sparkling foam around the mountain great palatial structures
came into being on all four sides, each extending eighty thousand yojanas
long and wide. These structures instantly became palatial buildings richly
adorned with the seven kinds of treasure.
Again, how did the palaces of the four guardian gods come into being?
[Similar] gusts of wind blew the water of the great ocean halfway up the

259

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

139b

side of Mount Sumeru, forty-two thousand yojanas high, and out of that
mass of sparkling foam came palaces richly adorned with the seven kinds
of treasure. This is how the palaces of the four guardian gods came into
being.
Again, how did the palaces of the Trāyastriṃśa gods come into being?
[Similar] gusts of wind blew the sparkling foam over the summit of Mount
Sumeru, instantly forming celestial palaces richly adorned with the seven
kinds of treasure.
Again, how did Mount Khadira come into being? [Similar] gusts of
wind blew the sparkling foam into a mound not far from Mount Sumeru,
and it instantly became a mountain composed of precious materials. That
mountain reached down to a depth of forty-two thousand yojanas beneath
the ground and was forty-two thousand yojanas long and wide, of limitless
vastness, and its variegated colors came from combinations of the seven
kinds of treasure. This is how Mount Khadira came into being.
Again, how did Mount Yisha come into being? [Similar] gusts of wind
blew the sparkling foam into a mound not far from Mount Khadira, and
it instantly became a mountain composed of precious materials that was
twenty-one thousand yojanas high and twenty-one thousand yojanas long
and wide, of limitless vastness, with variegated colors created by combinations of the seven kinds of treasure.
From similar causes, a mound of sparkling foam not far from Mount
Yisha became Mount Shuchen, twelve thousand yojanas high and twelve
thousand yojanas long and wide, of limitless vastness, with variegated
colors created by combinations of the seven kinds of treasure. This is how
Mount Shuchen came into being.
Then [similar] gusts of wind blew the sparkling foam into a mound
not far from Mount Shuchen, and it became Mount Abanni, six thousand
yojanas high and six thousand yojanas long and wide, of limitless vastness,
with variegated colors created by combinations of the seven kinds of treasure. This is how Mount Abanni came into being.
Then [similar] gusts of wind blew the sparkling foam into a mound not
far from Mount Abanni, and it became Mount Milin, three thousand yojanas
high and three thousand yojanas long and wide, of limitless vastness, with

260

Sutra 30

variegated colors created by combinations of the seven kinds of treasure.
This is how Mount Milin came into being.
Then [similar] gusts of wind blew the sparkling foam into a mound not
far from Mount Milin, and it became Mount Binito, twelve hundred yojanas
high and twelve hundred yojanas long and wide, of limitless vastness, with
variegated colors created by combinations of the seven kinds of treasure.
This is how Mount Binito came into being.
Then [similar] gusts of wind blew the sparkling foam into a mound
not far from Mount Binito, and it became Mount Diaofu, six hundred
yojanas high and six hundred yojanas long and wide, of limitless vastness,
with variegated colors created by combinations of the seven kinds of treasure. This is how Mount Diaofu came into being.
Then [similar] gusts of wind blew the sparkling foam into a mound
not far from Mount Binito, and it became Mount Jinganglun, three hundred
yojanas high and three hundred yojanas long and wide, of limitless vastness, with variegated colors created by combinations of the seven kinds
of treasure. This is how Mount Jinganglun came into being.
How did the single lunar palace and the seven palaces of the sun appear?
[Similar] gusts of wind blew the sparkling foam into piles that instantly
became the single palace of the moon and the seven palaces of the sun.
Blown by a dark cloud, they returned to their original locations [in the
sky]. Thus the palaces of the sun and the moon came into being.
Then [similar] gusts of wind blew on the sparkling foam to instantly
create the four continents and the eighty thousand territories under heaven.
This how the four continents and eighty thousand territories came into being.
Then [similar] gusts of wind blew the sparkling foam to instantly create
Mount Dajinganglun, one hundred sixty-eight thousand yojanas in height,
length, and width, of limitless vastness, composed of solid diamond that
cannot be shattered. This is how the great diamond mountain came into
being.
Now after some time, clouds began to appear and spread in the sky.
Rain poured down like drops from a spinning wheel, and the water inundated the four continents to a depth equal to the height of Mount Sumeru.
Then gusts of wind blew and created deep depressions in the ground,

261

139c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

which ﬁlled with salty water and became the oceans. This is how the four
great oceans came into being.
There are three reasons given for the saltiness of seawater. What are
the three? First, clouds spontaneously appeared and ﬁlled the sky as far
as Ābhāsvara Heaven, pouring down rain all around. The rain washed
over the celestial palaces and thoroughly cleansed everything under the
sky, from the palaces of the Brahmakāyika gods, the Paranirmitavaśavartin
gods, and the Yama gods to the four continents and the eighty thousand
mountains and mountain ranges, including Mount Sumeru. This water
collected all the dirty, pungent, and briny scum from the cleansing and
washed it downstream to the ocean, forming a single uniform saltiness.
This is how seawater became salty. Second, there was once a great sage
who cast a spell over the ocean to make its water salty enough for humans
to be unable to drink. Because of this, seawater is salty. Third, many creatures live in the ocean, some as large as one or two hundred yojanas in
size, a few up to seven hundred yojanas, and all of these creatures take
in and expel the same water, which contains all the waste material from
their bodies. Because of this, seawater is salty. The foregoing is [an account
of] the disaster caused by ﬁre.
The Buddha spoke to the bhikṣus:

What is the disaster caused by water? Once every person in the world was
fully engaged in practicing the right Dharma, abiding therein without
deviation, and they naturally adhered to the ten norms of conduct. One
person, while adhering to these norms, attained the third meditative state
of absorption and [suddenly] ascended in midair to continue on the path
of disciples, the path of heaven, and the path of Brahmā. In a distinct
voice, he said, “O venerables, you must know that joy disappears in the
third state of concentration, leaving only overwhelming bliss—bliss alone
is the third state of concentration!” When the others heard him, they looked
up and said, “Very well. Very well, sir. Will you expound for our sake the
path that leads to the state of absorption where there is no joy but bliss
alone?” The practitioner responded to their request, expounding the path
that leads to the third meditative state of absorption that transcends the
feeling of joy.

262

Sutra 30

Hearing this exhortation, all the people of the world decided to attain
the third meditative state of absorption, and when their bodies dissolved
and their lives came to an end they were born in Śubhakṛtsna Heaven.
Then all the sentient beings whose transgressions had been fully expiated
in the hell realms were reborn in the human world, and they too took up
the practice leading to the third meditative state of absorption, and when
their bodies dissolved and their lives came to an end, they were born in
Śubhakṛtsna Heaven. In like manner, sentient beings who had been in the
animal realm or the realms of the hungry ghosts, the asuras, the four
guardian gods, the Trāyastriṃśa gods, the Yama gods, the Nirmāṇarati
gods, the Paranirmitavaśavartin gods, and the [gods of the] Brahmā and
Ābhāsvara Heavens all came to be born in the human world after their
lives came to an end in their respective realms. They too took up the practice leading to the third meditative state of absorption, and upon the dissolution of their bodies at the end of their lives, they were born in Śubhakṛtsna Heaven. In this manner, no one remained in the hell realms, or in
the animal realm, or in the realms of the hungry ghosts, the asuras, the
four guardian gods, and so on up to the world of the Ābhāsvara gods.
In other words, as the end of the world approached all the residents of
the hells had already died, followed by the deaths of all the animals. When
the animals were all dead, the deaths of all the hungry ghosts followed.
When the ghosts were all dead, the deaths of all the asuras followed. When
the asuras were all dead, the deaths of the four guardian gods followed.
When the four guardian gods [and their retainers] were all dead, the deaths
of the Trāyastriṃśa gods followed. When the Trāyastriṃśa gods were all
dead, the deaths of the Yama gods followed. When the Yama gods were
all dead, the deaths of the Tuṣita gods followed. When the Tuṣita gods
were all dead, the deaths of the Nirmāṇarati gods followed. When the Nirmāṇarati gods were all dead, the deaths of the Paranirmitavaśavartin gods
followed. When the Paranirmitavaśavartin gods were all dead, the deaths
of the Brahmā gods followed. When the Brahmā gods were all dead, only
then did the deaths of the Ābhāsvara gods occur, followed by the deaths
of all the humans. And when the humans were all dead no one remained.
The world was about to be destroyed, an incipient disaster.

263

140a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

140b

After an indeterminate length of time, a great black cloud loomed in
the sky. As it rose to Śubhakṛtsna Heaven hot rain began to fall all around.
The steaming water fell on the heavenly worlds and boiled them away,
leaving no residue. The palaces of the Ābhāsvara gods were totally
destroyed, just as when ghee is thrown into a ﬁre nothing remains. Because
of this, you must know that “everything impermanent is bound for decay
and destruction; hence there is nothing that one can hold to or rely on.
The psychophysical elements that perdure through the inﬂuence of one’s
deﬁlements are to be abhorred. You must seek the path of transcendence
out of this world and deliverance from it.”
Then the [steaming] rain fell on the palaces of the Brahmakāyika gods
and boiled them away, leaving no residue. Next, the rain drenched the
palaces of the Paranirmitavaśavartin gods, the Nirmāṇarati gods, the Tuṣita
gods, and the Yama gods, one after another, boiling them all away and
leaving no residue, like ghee thrown into a ﬁre. Then the deluge fell on
the four continents as well as all the mountains and mountain ranges of
the eighty thousand territories, together with Mount Sumeru, boiling them
away and leaving no residue, like ghee thrown into a ﬁre. Because of this,
you must know that “everything impermanent is bound for decay and
destruction; hence there is nothing that one can hold to or rely on. The
psychophysical elements that perdure through the inﬂuence of one’s deﬁlements are to be abhorred. You must seek the path of transcendence out of
this world and deliverance from it.”
Then the [steaming] water boiled away the earth, leaving no residue.
The layer of water beneath the ground was gone and the wind below that
water was gone too. Because of this, you must know that “everything
impermanent is bound for decay and destruction; hence there is nothing
that one can hold to or rely on. The psychophysical elements that perdure
through the inﬂuence of one’s deﬁlements are to be abhorred. You must
seek the path of transcendence out of this world and deliverance from it.”
The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

[You have heard that] the celestial palaces of the Śubhakṛtsna gods were
boiled away, leaving no residue. Only those who have witnessed it and
known these events themselves can believe it. The celestial palaces of the

264

Sutra 30

Brahmakāyika gods, too, were boiled away, totally extinguished, and so
on, down to the water beneath the ground and the wind below it, all gone,
as has been described. Only those who have witnessed it and known these
events themselves can believe it. The foregoing is [an account of] the disaster caused by water.
How is it possible to recover from water? After some time, a great
black cloud appeared in the sky, spreading through space. As it rose to
Śubhakṛtsna Heaven, rain poured down like drops from a spinning wheel
for uncountable hundreds of millions of years. The water gradually accumulated, eventually reaching Śubhakṛtsna Heaven. Now the four powers
of wind arose to hold up that mass of water. What are the four winds?
They are a steady wind, a supporting wind, an immovable wind, and a
ﬁrm wind. In time, as the water level gradually diminished by uncountable
hundreds of thousands of yojanas, four great gusts of wind, called sāṃkhya,
blew up from the four corners of the mass of water, agitating it violently
and creating great thunderous waves that cascaded and broke in towering
sheets of whitewater. The sparkling foam that shot into the air instantly
solidiﬁed into the forms and structures of the palaces of the Ābhāsvara
gods, richly adorned with the seven kinds of treasure. Thus the celestial
palaces of the Ābhāsvara gods came into being.
[Now] as the water level continued to diminish by uncountable hundreds
of thousands of yojanas, four great gusts of wind, called sāṃkhya, blew
up from the four corners of the mass of water, agitating it violently and
creating great thunderous waves that cascaded and broke in towering
sheets of whitewater. The sparkling foam that shot into the air instantly
solidiﬁed into the forms and structures of the palaces of the Brahmakāyika
gods, richly adorned with the seven kinds of treasure. In this manner, [the
process of creation] proceeded down to the appearance of ocean water
with its uniform saltiness, exactly like the recovery after the disaster
caused by ﬁre.
The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

What is the disaster caused by wind? Once every person in the world was
fully engaged in practicing the right Dharma, abiding therein without
deviation, and they naturally adhered to the ten norms of conduct. One

265

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

140c

person, adhering to these norms, attained the fourth meditative state of
absorption, a pure and genuine consolidation of mindfulness, and [suddenly] ascended in midair to continue on the path of disciples, the path
of heaven, and the path of Brahmā. In a distinct voice, he said, “O venerables, you must know that the fourth state of absorption is a pure and
genuine consolidation of mindfulness.” When the others heard him, they
looked up and said, “Very well. Very well, sir. Will you expound for our
sake the path that leads to the state of absorption where a pure and genuine
mindfulness is consolidated?” The practitioner responded to their request,
expounding the path that leads to the fourth meditative state of absorption
where a pure and genuine mindfulness is consolidated.
Hearing this exhortation, the people of this world decided to attain the
fourth meditative state of absorption, and when their bodies dissolved
and their lives came to an end they were born in Bṛhatphala Heaven. Then
all the sentient beings whose transgressions had been fully expiated in
the hell realms were born again in the human world, and they too took
up the practice leading to the fourth meditative state of absorption, and
when their bodies dissolved and their lives came to an end they were born
in Bṛhatphala Heaven. In a similar manner, sentient beings who had been
in the animal realm or in the realms of the hungry ghosts, the asuras, the
four guardian gods, and so on, up to the Śubhakṛtsna gods, all vacated
their respective worlds and were reborn in the human world.
All the residents of the hells had already died, followed by the deaths
of all the animals. When the animals were all dead, the deaths of all the
hungry ghosts followed. When the ghosts were all dead, the deaths of all
the asuras followed. When the asuras were all dead, the deaths of the
four guardian gods followed. When the four guardian gods [and their
retainers] were all dead, one after another followed in the same manner,
all the way to the deaths of the Śubhakṛtsna gods. When these gods were
all dead, the deaths of all the humans followed. And when the humans
were all dead no one remained. The world was about to be destroyed, an
incipient disaster.
After an indeterminate length of time, a great wind called mahāsāṃkhya
gathered, reaching as far as Bṛhatphala Heaven. It stormed in all directions
and blew down the palaces of the Śubhakṛtsna and Ābhāsvara gods. Those

266

Sutra 30

celestial structures were hurled together and blown into bits, just as if a
strongman had seized two implements made of copper and smashed them
together, producing an explosion. Because of this, you must know that “everything impermanent is bound for decay and destruction; hence there is nothing
that one can hold to or rely on. The psychophysical elements that perdure
through the inﬂuence of one’s deﬁlements are to be abhorred. You must seek
the path of transcendence out of this world and deliverance from it.”
Then the wind assaulted the palaces of the Brahmakāyika and the
Paranirmitavaśavartin gods. Those celestial structures too were hurled
together and blown into bits, just as if a strongman had seized two implements made of copper and smashed them together, producing an explosion.
Because of this, you must know that “everything impermanent is bound
for decay and destruction; hence, there is nothing that one can hold to or
rely on. The psychophysical elements that perdure through the inﬂuence
of one’s deﬁlements are to be abhorred. You must seek the path of transcendence out of this world and deliverance from it.”
Next, the wind assaulted the palaces of the Nirmāṇarati, the Tuṣita,
and the Yama gods. Those celestial structures were also hurled together
and blown into bits, just as if a strongman had seized two implements
made of copper and smashed them together, producing an explosion.
Because of this, you must know that “everything impermanent is bound
for decay and destruction; hence there is nothing that one can hold to or
rely on. The psychophysical elements that perdure through the inﬂuence
of one’s deﬁlements are to be abhorred. You must seek the path of transcendence out of this world and deliverance from it.”
After that, the wind ravaged the four continents and the eighty thousand
territories, blowing the mountains and maintain ranges, together with
Mount Sumeru, one hundred thousand yojanas into space. Those mountains
were hurled together and blown into bits, just as if a strongman had picked
up rice bran and scattered it in the air. Because of this, you must know
that “everything impermanent is bound for decay and destruction; hence
there is nothing that one can hold to or rely on. The psychophysical elements that perdure through the inﬂuence of one’s deﬁlement are to be
abhorred. You must seek the path of transcendence out of this world and
deliverance from it.”

267

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

141a

Then the wind blew away the ground and drained the water beneath
the ground and depleted the wind below the water. Because of this, you
must know that “everything impermanent is bound for decay and destruction; hence there is nothing that one can hold to or rely on. The psychophysical elements that perdure through the inﬂuence of one’s deﬁlements are to be abhorred. You must seek the path of transcendence out of
this world and deliverance from it.”
The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

[You have heard that] the celestial palaces of the Śubhakṛtsna and the
Ābhāsvara gods were hurled together and blown into bits. Only those
who have witnessed it and known these events themselves can believe
it. If anyone wishes to believe that the water beneath the ground was
drained and the wind below the water depleted, he must himself witness
it and know it directly. The foregoing is [an account of] the disaster
caused by wind.
How is it possible to recover from wind? After some time, a great black
cloud appeared in the sky, spreading through space. As it rose to Bṛhatphala
Heaven, rain poured down like drops from a spinning wheel for uncountable hundreds of millions of years. The water gradually accumulated,
eventually reaching Bṛhatphala Heaven. Now the four powers of wind
arose to hold up that mass of water. What are the four winds? They are a
steady wind, a supporting wind, an immovable wind, and a ﬁrm wind. In
time, as the water level gradually diminished by uncountable hundreds
of thousands of yojanas, four great gusts of wind, called sāṃkhya, blew
up from the four corners of the mass of water, agitating it violently and
creating great thunderous waves that cascaded and broke in towering
sheets of whitewater. The sparkling foam that shot into the air instantly
solidiﬁed into the forms and structures of the palaces of the Śubhakṛtsna
gods, richly adorned with the seven kinds of treasure. Thus the celestial
palaces of the Śubhakṛtsna gods came into being.
[Now] as the water level continued to diminish by uncountable hundreds
of thousands of yojanas, four great gusts of wind, called sāṃkhya, blew
up from the four corners of the mass of water, agitating it violently and
creating great thunderous waves that cascaded and broke in towering

268

Sutra 30

sheets of whitewater. The sparkling foam that shot into the air instantly
solidiﬁed into the forms and structures of the palaces of the Ābhāsvara
gods, richly adorned with the seven kinds of treasure. In this manner, [the
process of creation] proceeded down to the appearance of ocean water
with its uniform saltiness, exactly like the recovery after the disaster
caused by water. The foregoing is [an account of] the disaster caused by
wind. Altogether, the three disasters are called the threefold cycle.

Article 10: Celestial Wars

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

In ancient times, the heavenly gods engaged in armed battles with the
asuras. Śakra, lord of the gods, assembled the Trāyastriṃśa gods and said,
“Let us go to ﬁght the asuras. If we are victorious, make sure to capture
Vimalacitra, the asura general, bind him in ﬁve chains and bring him to
Sudharma Hall. I want to see him.”
After receiving these commands, the Trāyastriṃśa gods readied their
armor. At the same time, the leader of the asuras, Vimalacitra, gave his
orders, “Now let us go to ﬁght them. If we are victorious, capture Śakra,
bind him in ﬁve chains, and bring him to Saptaparṇa Hall. I want to see
him.” After receiving these commands, the asuras readied their armor.
Then the gods and the asuras met on the battleﬁeld and fought each other.
The gods were victorious and the asuras withdrew.
The leader of the asuras, Vimalacitra, was captured, and the Trāyastriṃśa gods bound him in chains and brought him to Sudharma Hall,
where he was given to Śakra, lord of the gods. As he looked around him,
the asura general saw the attractions of a celestial life and reﬂected, “This
place is so extraordinary. What would be the point of returning to the
asuras’ palace?” As soon as he formulated this thought, the ﬁve chains
fell away and images of the pleasures to be gained through the ﬁve senses
appeared before him. Whenever his thoughts returned to his palace among
the asuras, however, the ﬁve chains reappeared, the objects of his pleasure
disappeared at once, and he found himself back in bondage.
In effect, the leader of the asuras was more tightly bound than he would
have been by the devil’s own spell. Those who become obsessed with

269

141b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

themselves are likely bound by the devil. Those who never become caught
up in themselves are likely free of the devil’s bondage. To consider sensation (vedanā) as proof that one exists is bondage. Being attached to sensation is bondage. Believing that the self exists is bondage. Believing that
the self does not exist is bondage. Believing that material objects (sarūpa)
exist is bondage. Believing that material objects do not exist is bondage.
Believing that material objects both exist and do not exist is bondage.
Believing that the self forms ideas is bondage. Believing that the self does
not form ideas is bondage. Believing that the self forms and does not form
ideas is bondage. The self is the main issue, the thorn and the infection.
Therefore, wise and saintly disciples (śrāvakas) realize that the self has
become the main problem, the thorn and the infection. One must abandon
the idea of a self and adhere to practicing non-self in order to see that the
habitual discriminations that one makes between oneself and others are
caused by a lack of discipline and constitute the greatest burden. Whether
one views a contingent phenomenon (i.e., causally produced) as having a
reality of its own (self) or no reality, or a material form (sarūpa) of its own
or no form, or its own concept or no concept—in all cases, the conviction
that a contingent phenomenon exists is the main problem, the thorn and the
infection. Because of this, wise and saintly disciples regard the compounding
of phenomena as the chief difﬁculty, the thorn and the infection. Hence,
forsaking the realm of phenomena, they adopt the transcendent practice.
The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

141c

Once, when the heavenly gods were at war with the asuras, Śakra, lord of
the gods, assembled the Trāyastriṃśa gods and said, “Let us go ﬁght the
asuras. If we are victorious, make sure to capture Vimalacitra, the asura
general, bind him in ﬁve chains, and bring him to Sudharma Hall. I want
to see him.” After receiving these commands, the Trāyastriṃśa gods readied
their armor. At the same time, the leader of the asuras, Vimalacitra, gave
his orders, “Now let us go ﬁght them. If we are victorious, capture Śakra,
bind him with ﬁve chains, and bring him to Saptaparṇa Hall. I want to see
him.” After receiving these commands, the asuras readied their armor.
Then the gods and the asuras met on the battleﬁeld and fought each other.
The gods were victorious and the asuras withdrew.

270

Sutra 30

The leader of the asuras, Vimalacitra, was captured, and the Trāyastriṃśa gods bound him in chains and brought him to Sudharma Hall,
where he was given to Śakra, lord of the gods. When Indra, lord of the
gods, appeared and made his way to the central platform in the hall, the
asura general shouted at him with many abusive terms. Indra’s attendant
looked at his lord and asked:
Lord of the gods, what are you afraid of?
Does your hesitation show
Condescension or weakness [to the asura]?
How can you listen to the foul words
That the asura general says
To your face directly?

Śakra, lord of the gods, immediately composed a verse in reply:

The asura is helpless and powerless,
I have no reason to fear him.
How can one who possesses wisdom
Argue with anyone so unworthy?
The attendant responded:
If you don’t punish that fool’s stupidity now,
You will face more insults later
That will only become harder to abide.
You should let him taste your cudgel
And then correct his own insolence.
The lord of the gods again composed a verse in reply:
As I say, a wise person should never dispute with a fool.
While the foolish aim words of abuse,
Still the wise tolerate them in silence
And thereby win them over.
Then the attendant said to Śakra, lord of the gods:
Your lordship’s silence seems to come from a fear
Of besmirching the digniﬁed attitude of the wise,
Yet that stupid one assumes it is from weakness.
Unable to measure his own strength,

271

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

That fool believes he is your equal.
Already as good as dead, he demands a ﬁght to the death,
Hoping you will ﬂinch like a bull withdrawing.
Śakra then composed a verse in reply:
That fool, with no knowledge or insight,
Imagines that I am terriﬁed
When I consider the object of highest importance
Is expressing the virtue of silent patience.
The worst vice of all is to pile anger upon anger
When the best ﬁght is to control oneself,
Instead of inﬂaming anger with anger.
There are two grounds for one’s conduct,
Either for oneself or for the sake of others.
Many who dispute over a suit
Will consider they have won the case
When one refrains from responding.
[Again,] there are two grounds for one’s conduct,
Either for oneself or for the sake of others.
Those who refrain from dispute
May be regarded as ignorant and foolish,
But one who is endowed with real strength
Can tolerate those with the least strength.
That strength is the highest and best part of patience.
While fools think they are strong,
Their strength is not at all real.
Those who possess the strength of patience,
Understanding how it must be expressed,
Have strength indeed that no one can counter.

142a

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

You must not think that the lord of the gods of that time was someone
else. The Śakra of that time was indeed myself. I was engaged in practicing
patience then and refrained from intemperate acts. I also was sure to praise
those who could hold fast and persevere. If those who are endowed with

272

Sutra 30

knowledge and insight wish to propagate the path I teach, they must practice the virtue of silent patience and not engage in any form of dispute.

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

Once, long ago, when the Trāyastriṃśa gods fought with the asuras, Śakra,
lord of the gods, said to the king of the asuras, “Why must we always
keep our weapons ready for further belligerence and hostility? Why must
we argue and ﬁght? Now, let us conduct our arguments on the grounds
of ethics and morality and thereby determine who has won and who has
lost.” Citra, the leader of the asuras, replied, “Then we will set our weapons
aside and stop our disputes. But who will determine which side has won
or lost?” The lord of the gods said, “Let us just engage in debate. There
are some on your side, as well as those on mine, who are endowed with
the wisdom to know who has won and lost.”
The leader of the asuras then said, “Please go ﬁrst and state your position in verse.” The lord of the gods replied, “You are a former resident of
heaven. You should speak ﬁrst.” Then the asura Citra at once composed
a verse:
If you don’t punish the fool’s stupidity now,
You will face more insults later
That will only become harder to abide.
You should let him taste your cudgel
And then correct his own insolence.

When Citra ﬁnished his verse, the asuras in attendance were greatly
delighted and loudly proclaimed that the statement was good. The gods
in attendance all remained silent. Then the asura leader said to Śakra,
“Please compose your verse now.” At once, the lord of the gods gave his
verse for the sake of the asuras:
As I say, a wise person should never dispute with a fool.
While the foolish aim words of abuse,
Still the wise tolerate them in silence.
And thereby win them over.

273

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III
142b

When Śakra ﬁnished his verse, all the Trāyastriṃśa gods were delighted
and proclaimed in loud voices that the statement was good. The asuras,
however, remained silent. Then the lord of the gods said to Citra, “Please
compose your next verse.” The asura leader composed the following verse:
Your lordship’s silence seems to come from a fear
Of besmirching the digniﬁed attitude of the wise.
Yet that stupid one assumes that it is from weakness.
Unable to measure his own strength,
That fool believes he is your equal.
Already as good as dead, he demands a ﬁght to the death,
Hoping you will ﬂinch like a bull withdrawing.

When Citra ﬁnished his verse, the asuras leapt and danced in delight,
proclaiming that the statement was excellent. The Trāyastriṃśa gods all
remained silent. The asura leader then said to Śakra, “Please compose
your next verse.” The lord of the gods uttered this verse:
That fool, with no knowledge or insight,
Imagines that I am terriﬁed
When I consider the object of highest importance
Is expressing the virtue of silent patience.
The worst vice of all is to pile anger upon anger
When the best ﬁght is to control oneself,
Instead of inﬂaming anger with anger.
There are two grounds for one’s conduct,
Either for oneself or for the sake of others.
Many who dispute over a suit
Will consider they have won the case
When one refrains from responding.
[Again,] there are two grounds for one’s conduct,
Either for oneself or for the sake of others.
Those who refrain from dispute
May be regarded as ignorant and foolish,
But one who is endowed with real strength
Can tolerate those with the least strength.

274

Sutra 30

That strength is the highest and best part of patience.
While fools think they are strong,
Their strength is not at all real,
Those who possess the strength of patience,
Understanding how it must be expressed,
Have strength indeed that no one can counter.

When Śakra ﬁnished his verse, the Trāyastriṃśa gods all leapt and
danced in delight, loudly proclaiming that it was good. The asuras who
were present remained silent. The two groups, gods and asuras, withdrew
after a while and conversed among themselves, “The verses of the asura
leader constitute an offense because they harp on ﬁghting and arguing,
reinforce feelings of injury and resentment, and stir up an appetite for
revenge by any means; thus they further embed the root cause of existence
in the three spheres. On the other hand, the verses of the lord of the gods
do not convey anything offensive. His teaching does not harp on ﬁghting
and arguing, or reinforce feelings of injury and resentment, or stir up an
appetite for revenge by any means; thus they tend to terminate the root
cause of existence in the three spheres. The teaching of the lord of the
gods can therefore be deemed good, whereas that of the asura leader must
be deemed deﬁcient.” This is how the Trāyastriṃśa gods were victorious
and the asuras defeated.
The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

You must not think that the lord of the gods of that time was someone
else. The Śakra of that time was indeed myself. It was at that time that I
won over the band of asuras through gentle words.
The Buddha continued:

Once long ago, when the Trāyastriṃśa gods fought with the asuras, things
turned such that the asuras were victorious and the gods defeated. Śakra,
lord of the gods, ﬂed in haste, riding a chariot endowed with thousandspoked wheels. During his escape he saw a bird’s nest on top of an anpoluo
tree with two chicks in it. At once, he said to his charioteer:

275

142c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

I see two chicks on that tree,
Turn around to avoid colliding with it.
I might have to pay the consequences,
But we must not injure those birds.

Upon hearing his command, the charioteer stopped at once. The chariot
was now exposed to the oncoming asuras. Seeing the chariot stop, the
asuras said to each other, “It is Śakra who is in the chariot with the thousand-spoked wheels. He has turned around to face us. He must want to
ﬁght. Don’t attack him.” The asuras withdrew. On that day, the Trāyastriṃśa gods were victorious when the asuras withdrew.
The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

You must not think that the lord of the gods of that time was someone
else. The Śakra of that time was indeed myself. I was then extending compassion to as many sentient beings as I could. O bhikṣus, since you have
all renounced domestic life and begun practicing the truths of my religion,
you must elevate your sense of compassion and extend it to everyone.

The Buddha continued:

143a

Once long ago, when the Trāyastriṃśa gods fought with the asuras, the
gods were victorious when the asuras withdrew. Śakra, lord of the gods,
returned to his palace from the campaign and built an additional pavilion
that extended one hundred yojanas from east to west in length and sixty
yojanas wide from north to south. He named it Paramārtha. The pavilion
contained one hundred halls, and in each hall were seven raised platforms
for seven maidens, each with her own attendant. Śakra, lord of the gods,
did not worry about the cost. The maidens were amply provided with garments, food and drink, and jewels. The cost of the hall, along with that
of its construction, was borne through the merit earned by his triumphant
campaign against the asuras, and as the pavilion was built after a joyous
victory, it was also given the name Pavilion of the Supreme Victor. No
building could equal it in grandeur in all the thousand worlds, so it was
called the Paramount Pavilion.
The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

276

Sutra 30

Once long ago, the king of the asuras was seized by jealousy: “I wield
the power of command and my supernormal powers are not few in number.
Yet the sun and the moon and the Trāyastriṃśa gods always abide above
me, freely moving over my head. How can I conquer the sun and moon
and make them my earrings, revolving as I wish?” His anger was intense.
He thought of the asura general Chuida, and at once the latter became
aware, “Rāhu is calling me. We must ready our armor.” He ordered his
attendants to gather their weapons and rode out in his chariot accompanied
before and after by the asura legions. When he reached the king of the
asuras, he took his place to one side.
Again, the king of the asuras thought of the asura general Shemoli,
and at once the latter became aware, “Rāhu is calling me. We must ready
our armor.” He ordered his attendants to gather their weapons and rode
out in his chariot accompanied before and after by the asura legions.
When he reached the king of the asuras, he took his place to one side.
Again, the king of the asuras thought of the asura general Vimalacitra,
and at once the latter became aware, “Rāhu is calling me. We must ready
our armor.” He ordered his attendants to gather their weapons and rode
out in his chariot accompanied before and after by the asura legions.
When he reached the king of the asuras, he took his place to one side.
Again, the king of the asuras thought of his minister Asurin, and at
once the latter became aware, “Rāhu is calling me. We must ready our
armor.” He too ordered his attendants to gather their weapons and rode
out in his chariot accompanied before and after by the asura legions.
When he reached the king of the asuras, he took his place to one side.
Again, the king of the asuras thought of the minor asura leaders, and
at once the latter became aware, “Rāhu is calling me. We must ready our
armor.” They immediately gathered their weapons and led their legions
to the king of the asuras, where they took their places to one side.
Then Rāhu, king of the asuras, prepared his weapons, donned his
armor, and rode out in his chariot to lead the hundreds of thousands of
asura legions to battle. By this time, the nāga kings Nanda and Upananda
had encircled Mount Sumeru with their bodies seven times for defense,
shaking the hills and valleys, unleashing rain from an increasingly overcast
sky, and slapping the ocean surface with their tails to send the water high

277

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

143b

over the top of Mount Sumeru. The Trāyastriṃśa gods thought, “The
clouds are growing, rain is falling, the ocean is stirring, and the waves
are reaching us here. This can only mean that the asuras are coming.”
Now the asuras met a host of nāgas from the ocean, innumerable myriads in heavy armor and carrying pikes, bows and arrows, spears and
lances, and daggers and swords. When the battle commenced the nāga
soldiers pursued the enemy as far as the grounds of the asura palace when
they had the advantage, but when they were obliged to withdraw they did
not return to their own palace but proceeded at once to report to the
garuḍas: “The asuras are on their way to ﬁght the gods. When we tried
to block them, they continued to push through. Now you must sharpen
your weapons and get ready to ﬁght with us against the asuras.”
Hearing this report, the garuḍas gathered their weapons, donned heavy
armor, and joined the nāgas to battle against the asuras. When they had
the advantage they pursued the asuras as far as the grounds of the enemy
palace, but when they were obliged to withdraw they did not return to
their own palace but proceeded at once to report to the Chihua demigods:
“The asuras are on their way to ﬁght the gods. When we tried to block
them, they continued to push through. Now you must sharpen your
weapons and get ready to ﬁght with us against the asuras.”
Hearing this report, the Chihua demigods gathered their weapons,
donned heavy armor, and joined the garuḍas and nāgas to battle against
the asuras. When they had the advantage they pursued the asuras as far
as the grounds of the enemy palace, but when they were obliged to withdraw they did not return to their own palace but proceeded at once to
report to the Changle demigods, “The asuras are on their way to ﬁght the
gods. Although we tried to block them, they continued to push through.
Now you must sharpen your weapons and ﬁght with us against the asuras.”
Hearing this report, the Changle demigods gathered their weapons,
donned heavy armor, and joined the Chihua [demigods], garuḍas, and
nāgas to battle against the asuras. When they had the advantage they pursued the asuras as far as the grounds of the enemy palace, but when they
were obliged to withdraw they did not return to their own palace but proceeded at once to report to the four guardian gods: “The asuras are on
their way to ﬁght the gods. Although we tried to block them, they continued

278

Sutra 30

to push through. Now you must sharpen your weapons and get ready to
ﬁght with us against the asuras.”
Hearing this report, the four guardian gods gathered their weapons,
donned heavy armor, and joined the innumerable hosts battling the asuras.
When they had the advantage they pursued the asuras as far as the grounds
of the enemy palace, but when they were obliged to withdraw they did
not return to their own palace but proceeded at once to Sudharma Hall to
report to Śakra and the Trāyastriṃśa gods, “The asuras are on their way
to ﬁght you. Although we tried to block their way, they have had the advantage. Now, sirs, you must gather your weapons and join us in ﬁghting the
asuras.”
Now the lord of the gods called one of his attendants and told him,
“Carry this message to the gods of the Yama, Tuṣita, Nirmāṇarati, and
Paranirmitavaśavartin Heavens. Tell them, ‘The asuras, with innumerable
legions, have come to ﬁght. The gods of all the heavens must now gather
their weapons and join us in ﬁghting the asuras.’”
The attendant conveyed the message from Śakra to the Yama gods and
so on, as far as the gods of Paranirmitavaśavartin Heaven. Hearing the
message, the Yama gods gathered their weapons, donned heavy armor,
and rode out in their chariots, accompanied by innumerable myriads of
hosts, to establish their camp on the east side of Mount Sumeru. The Tuṣita
gods gathered their weapons, donned heavy armor, and rode out in their
chariots, accompanied by innumerable myriads of hosts, to establish camp
on the south side of Mount Sumeru. The Nirmāṇarati gods, meanwhile,
assembled their armies and established camp on the west side of Mount
Sumeru, while the Paranirmitavaśavartin gods assembled their armies and
established camp on the north side of Mount Sumeru.
Then Śakra, lord of the gods, thought of the Trāyastriṃśa gods, and at
once the latter became aware, “Śakra is calling us. We must prepare ourselves as quickly as possible.” Accordingly, they ordered their armies to
ready their weapons and rode in their chariots, accompanied before and
after by innumerable myriads of gods, to the palace of the lord of the gods
and took their places to one side. Śakra then thought of the remaining
gods of Trāyastriṃśa Heaven, and at once the latter became aware, “Lord
Śakra is calling us. We must prepare ourselves as quickly as possible.”

279

143c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

144a

They ordered their armies to ready their weapons and rode in their chariots,
accompanied before and after by innumerable myriads of gods, to the
palace of the lord of the gods and took their places to one side.
Then the lord of the gods thought of Viśvakarman and at once the latter
became aware, “The lord of the gods is calling me. I must present myself
before him.” Immediately he stood before Śakra.
Finally, the lord of the gods gathered his weapons and put on his armor.
He rode on the head of Viśvakarman, accompanied before and after by
innumerable gods, demigods, and spirits, out from his celestial palace to
do battle with the asuras. His armies were armored and well equipped with
axes and hatchets, pikes and swords, bows and arrows, halberds and longhandled halberds, lassos, and other weapons, all embellished with the seven
kinds of treasure. They attacked the asuras ﬁercely, but the sharp points
and edges of their weapons only touched [the asuras’] bodies without injuring them. The asura armies also wielded axes and hatchets, pikes and
swords, bows and arrows, halberds and long-handled halberds, throw nets
and other weapons, and they attacked the gods ﬁercely without injuring
them. The heavenly gods and the asuras battled out of desire, and their
actions were expressed in this manner because of the cause of their desire.

Article 11: Three
Medium-length Eons

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

There are three medium-length eons. What are they? The ﬁrst is the eon of
warfare. The second is the eon of famine. The third is the eon of pestilence.
What is the eon of warfare? People of these times originally have a
life span of forty thousand years. This later decreases to twenty thousand
years, and again to ten thousand years. It further becomes one thousand
years, then ﬁve hundred years, three hundred, then two hundred. Now
people live to be around one hundred years of age. After this, human life
spans will further decrease, down to ten years. Young women will be
betrothed ﬁve months after being born.
All the delicacies of the age, such as ghee, honey, sugar, sorghum, and
so forth, will naturally disappear. The ﬁve grains will not grow; instead

280

Sutra 30

all there will be is tares. In these times such luxurious fabrics as brocade,
ﬁne silk, cotton, and linen will all become unavailable. All there will be
is rough textiles and straw clothes.
In these times the earth will produce nothing but thorns, horseﬂies,
hornets, vipers, and venomous insects. Gold, silver, beryl, the seven precious
metals, gems, and jewels will naturally be buried underground. The only
thing there will be is rocks and sand; the world will be teeming with ﬁlth.
In these times sentient beings will do nothing but exacerbate the ten kinds
of unwholesome behavior. No one will ever even hear mention of the ten
kinds of wholesome behavior. There won’t even be mention of the word
“wholesome”; how could there be such a thing as wholesome behavior?
During these times people do not respect their parents, nor do they
respect their teachers. Those who do evil are allowed to make offerings.
Their respect [for unwholesome behavior] is like the way present-day
people love and obey their parents and respect their teachers, and those
who do good are the ones who are able to make offerings. The respect of
the people [of this eon] is such that those who do evil are able to make
offerings. When the people of these times die they fall into rebirth as animals, the same way that present-day people are able to be reborn in a
heaven. When they see each other the people of these times harbor venomous thoughts, thinking only of killing each other. They are just like a
hunter who on seeing a herd of deer thinks only of killing them, without
one wholesome thought. These people are like this. Desiring only to kill
each other, they give rise to not a single wholesome thought.
During these times the earth is covered with ravines, valleys, mountains,
and hills—there is no level ground. In these times, people cower in fear
and their hair stands on end when others approach them. In these times,
people are menaced by swords seven days a week. They grasp hold of
plants and trees, tiles and stones, trying to fashion anything into a sword.
The swords are so sharp that they cut anything they brush up against, and
so people continuously injure each other. Living among them the wise
see this continual warfare and run away in fear, hiding in the mountains
among steep precipices where there are no other people. Hiding themselves
away for seven days, they spontaneously say, “I do not harm others, so

281

144b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

others should not harm me.” During those seven days they survive on
grasses and roots. After seven days, they return from the mountains.
Then a person happens to see someone else. Elated, he says, “I see a
living person! I see a living person!” Just like parents who have been long
separated from their only child, they jump with joy, unable to control themselves. The person [who has just emerged from the mountain hideout] is
the same way—jumping for joy, unable to control himself. During these
times the people cry with each other seven days of the week, and then for
another seven days they amuse each other with games, joyfully congratulating
each other. When these people die they all fall into the hells. Why? Because
they have always harbored anger and have inﬂicted harm upon each other.
They lack compassion and kindness. This is the eon of warfare.
The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

144c

What is the eon of famine? During these times people move around lawlessly. Under the inﬂuence of wrong views and cognitive distortions they
carry out the ten kinds of unwholesome behavior. Because of this unwholesome behavior, the heavens offer no rain and all the plants wither and die.
The ﬁve grains do not mature, remaining as mere stalks. What is famine?
In these times, just to survive, people scrape the ﬁelds, roads, and highways
for garbage and chaff. This is famine. Furthermore, in times of famine
people survive by collecting skeletons in the roads, the markets, the
slaughterhouses, and burial grounds; they boil them down and drink the
broth. This is called famine of starvation.
Furthermore, during an eon of famine the ﬁve cultvated grains become
extinct, changing into ordinary plants. During these times people gather
the blossoms [of these ordinary plants], boil them down, and drink the
broth. Furthermore, in times of famine, when the blossoms of plants drop
off they become buried under the ground. People survive in these times
by digging up the ground to get these blossoms and boiling them down
for consumption. This is called the “famine of [surviving on nothing but]
plants.” During these times, when people die they fall into rebirth as
hungry ghosts. Why? Because people who live during the eon of famine
continually harbor avarice, having no inclinations toward generosity. They

282

Sutra 30

do not care to share, nor do they think about the trouble they cause for
others. This is the eon of famine.
The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

What is the eon of pestilence? During these times people cultivate the
right Dharma and right views, not mistaken views. While the people are
fully carrying out the ten kinds of wholesome behavior, spirits come from
other realms. These spirits are unruly and debauched, and they are unable
to protect people. These spirits from other realms harass the people of
this world. They beat them and ﬂog them, sapping their vitality, causing
them to be confused, harassing them and chasing them. It is as if a king
had directed his generals to allow brigands from other regions to invade
and harass those they are supposed to protect, and the unruly brigands
menace towns throughout the country. The spirits from these other realms
come and snatch the people of this world, beat them and ﬂog them, sap
their vitality, and harass and chase them.
The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

Even if the spirits of this world are not unruly and debauched, mighty spirits
will come from other realms and the spirits of this world will be scared and
ﬂee. These powerful spirits will harass the people. They will beat them and
ﬂog them, sap their vitality, slaughter them, and drive them away.
It is as if a king had banished the generals charged with protecting his
citizens. The generals, being pure and honest, are not at all self-indulgent.
In another land, however, there are ferocious generals who lead their huge
armies to attack the towns and cities, plundering with impunity. Even if
the spirits in this world do not dare to be self-indulgent, mighty spirits
will come from other realms and the spirits of this realm will ﬂee in fright.
Those mighty spirits will harass the people, beat them and ﬂog them, sap
their vitality, slaughter them, and drive them away.
People who live during an eon of pestilence are reborn into a heavenly
realm when they die. Why? Because people who live during these times
have compassion for each other. They continually ask each other, “Are
you sick? Are you well? Are you alright? Are you troubled?” Because of

283

145a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

this, one is able to be reborn into the heavens. Hence it is called the eon
of pestilence.
These are the three medium-length eons.

Article 12: The Original
Conditions of the World

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

At the beginning, when this eon began to evolve after the destruction of
the previous eon by ﬁre, the remaining sentient beings, having exhausted
their predispositional forces, merits, and life spans, died in Ābhāsvara
Heaven (i.e., the highest attainable heaven in the second meditative state
of absorption) and were reborn in the vast empty space of Brahmā Heaven.
They became fond of that abode and wished to be born there again together
with other sentient beings. In this way, the [ﬁrst generation] of sentient
beings there had already become attached to that abode. As other sentient
beings ended their life in Ābhāsvara Heaven and were reborn in the vast
empty space of Brahmā Heaven, those who were already there thought
to themselves, “I am Brahmā, the great Brahmā. By nature I exist, and
there is no one who can create me. I am omniscient and control a thousand
worlds in which I am the absolutely free presider, for I have the miraculous
power of changing forms and bringing them into being. I am the father
and mother of all sentient beings.”
Those who came after the ﬁrst generation thought to themselves, “Our
predecessor, the ﬁrst Brahmā, is the king of the Brahmā gods, the great
king Brahmā. He has created himself and no one else could create him.
He is omniscient and controls a thousand worlds where he is the absolutely
free and most honorable presider, receiving no orders from anyone, for
he has the miraculous power of changing forms and bringing them into
being. He is the father and mother of all sentient beings and we were created by him.” The countenance of the king of the Brahmā gods always
resembled that of a youth, so he has been called a youth. When this world
was evolving, many sentient beings who had been born in it were reborn
in Ābhāsvara Heaven. Once there, they ﬂew in the air using supernormal
power, their bodies were luminous, and they naturally subsisted on joy.

284

Sutra 30

They enjoyed a life of happiness and ease, free from all obstructions, and
their life span was eternal.
Then this world was engulfed in a great ﬂood and totally inundated.
Total darkness in heaven and earth prevailed; neither the sun, moon, or
stars shone, and there were no days or nights, no months or years, only
total darkness. Later, when the water had changed into solid ground, the
heavenly beings who had exhausted their predispositional forces, merits,
and life spans died in Ābhāsvara Heaven and were reborn in this new
world. Yet they still ﬂew in the air with a supernormal power, their bodies
remained luminous, and they continued to subsist on joy and to exist in
this new world for some time. Though there were distinctions between
male and female, noble and ignoble, and those of higher and lower rank,
they had no names to distinguish themselves, and since they were born
along with other beings they simply called themselves sentient beings.
At that time, out of the compassion of nature, an edible form of clay
began to well up and congeal on the ground, like cream turning into butter.
The outﬂow of the edible clay with the texture of raw cheese and a honeylike taste was exactly like that. The second-born sentient beings used their
ﬁngers to taste it and once they came to know its taste, they were addicted
to its sweetness. The habit spread from one to another with no letup in sight,
and soon they were openhandedly partaking of it, scooping it up in big
lumps. Other sentient beings observed their behavior and they too began
to imitate it; soon their indulgence also turned into addiction. [Before long]
the food they were consuming caused their bodies to turn coarse and their
luminosity became intermittent. No longer could they ﬂy through the air.
There was still no sun or moon, but now the light the sentient beings had
brought with them was lost and heaven and earth were as dark as they had
been previously. It was no different from how it had been after the ﬂood.
After an indeterminate length of time, a great storm blew in, ripping
the great ocean apart to a depth of eighty-four thousand yojanas and creating a palace for the sun on the mid-slope of Mount Sumeru. Now the
passage of the sun, arising in the east and setting in the west, rotating over
heaven and earth, was set. On the second day, when the sun rose in the
east and set in the west, some of the sentient beings said, “This is yesterday.” Others said, “No, this is not yesterday.” On the third day, after going

285

145b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

145c

around Mount Sumeru, the sun arose in the east and set in the west. The
sentient beings then said, “Deﬁnitely, this has been one whole day.” Thus
the length of a day is marked by the reappearance of the previous [sun]light.
Because of this, it is called “day.”
We think of the sun in two ways: (1) as abiding and perpetually traversing, and (2) as the palace [where it abides]. From the palace, all four directions are observable to the farthest distance; hence the palace has a circular
shape. The sun is composed, in part, of heavenly gold in which warmth
and coldness are mixed, and in part, of glass: (1) the gold is genuine, without
admixture, transparent both within and without, and shines its light on the
farthest objects; (2) the glass is also genuine, without admixture, transparent
within and without, and shines its light on the farthest objects.
The palace of the sun is ﬁfty yojanas long and wide. The palace walls,
like the thin surface of the ground beneath, resemble the surrounding
[seven] lines of trees. The walls are sevenfold and concentric, embellished
with seven railings, seven ornamental nets from which seven bells are
suspended, and seven lines of trees, all adorned with seven kinds of treasure. The golden wall is endowed with silver gates, the silver wall with
golden gates, the quartz wall with lapis gates, the lapis wall with quartz
gates, the ruby wall with agate gates, the agate wall with gates made of
rubies, and the emerald wall with gates adorned with a variety of precious
stones. The railings are decorated in a similar way: the golden railing is
decorated with silver ropes, the silver railing with golden ropes, the quartz
railing with lapis ropes, the lapis railing with quartz ropes, the ruby railing
with agate ropes, the agate railing with ropes made of rubies, and the
emerald railing with a variety of precious stones. Over these railings are
draped ornamental nets, on which various treasures are attached. From
the golden net hangs a silver bell; from the silver net hangs a golden bell;
from the lapis net hangs a quartz bell; from the quartz net hangs a lapis
bell; from the ruby net hangs an agate bell; from the agate net hangs a
bell made of rubies; and from the emerald net hangs a bell inlaid with
various precious stones. The golden trees have silver ﬂowers and fruit.
The silver trees have golden ﬂowers and fruit. The quartz trees have lapis
ﬂowers and leaves, and the lapis tree has quartz ﬂowers and leaves. The
ruby tree has agate ﬂowers and leaves, and the agate tree has ﬂowers and

286

Sutra 30

leaves made of rubies. The emerald tree has ﬂowers and leaves made of
various precious stones. Each of the seven walls has four gates, one on
each side, and each gateway stands seven stories high and is protected by
railings. On top of each wall is a pavilion with a veranda, and each wall
encloses a bathing pond and pleasure garden ﬁlled with ﬂowers made of
precious materials. The walls are surrounded by fruit trees with ﬂowers
and leaves shining in variegated hues, exquisite fragrances waft in all
directions, and innumerable rare birds sing harmoniously together.
The palace of the sun is upheld by ﬁve kinds of wind: (1) a wind that
maintains, (2) a wind that nurtures, (3) a wind that receives, (4) a wind that
changes, and (5) a wind that adjusts. The main pavilion, where the sun god
dwells, is composed of genuine gold. It is ﬁfteen yojanas high and endowed
with four gates, one on each side, protected by railings. The throne of the
sun god, half a yojana long and wide, is made from the seven kinds of treasure. The seat is pure and as soft to the touch as a heavenly garment. From
it the sun god shines his light to illumine the golden pavilion. The light
reﬂecting from this pavilion illumines the entire palace of the sun, and the
light reﬂecting from this palace illumines the four heavens and earths of
this world. The life span of the sun god is ﬁve hundred years in the celestial
scale, and there is no gap in the succession of generations. The palace cannot
be destroyed by any event, except at the end of each eon.
When the palace of the sun traverses the sky, the sun god makes no
effort to accomplish its movement. “Ever progressing on this steady passage,” he says, “I enjoy it as an expression of the ﬁve kinds of desire.”
As the palace of the sun continues on its journey, innumerable hundreds
of thousands of great heavenly spirits participate in the procession before
it. There is no end to pleasure, and the sun relishes its swiftness and
urgency. Because of this, the sun god is called Swift and Urgent. From
his body one thousand lights emanate, ﬁve hundred of which illuminate
the world below while the other ﬁve hundred shine around him in every
direction. Being in possession of an array of one thousand lights is his
reward for merit accumulated in past lives. Because of this, the sun god
is also called Thousand Lights.
What kind of merit accumulates in one’s past? One example is the
charity people provide by serving food to śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas or

287

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

146a

by rescuing people from destitution with food and drink, articles of clothing, perhaps some medicine or transportation on a vehicle, horse, or elephant, or offering a room to stay in, perhaps in a hotel, or a lamp to see
or even mere candlelight. In providing charity, one gives things to others
in accordance with their needs, and one should not do it hastily but strive
to give what is needed without offending the person, serving in this way
as a representative of the saintly disciples who adhere to moral discipline
(śīla). Thus, because of innumerable causes and conditions related to
experiences of delight in the Dharma and illumination by the light of wisdom, one’s mind gradually becomes imbued with a feeling of joy and a
spirit of goodness. It is like the kṣatriya king whose head is anointed with
water when he ascends the throne for the ﬁrst time, ﬁlling his mind with
supreme joy and a spirit of goodwill. Upon his death, based on these
causes and conditions, he is reborn as the sun god and accedes to the
palace of the sun, endowed with an array of one thousand lights. Thus the
proverb says, “Good karma results in the acquisition of a thousand lights.”
Why is the sun regarded as the lights of past karma? Suppose that people
adhere to the precepts, such as refraining from taking life, refraining from
taking that which is not given, refraining from sexual misconduct, refraining
from prevarication, refraining from abusive speech, refraining from speaking
falsehoods, refraining from ﬂattery, refraining from avarice, refraining
from anger, and refraining from holding wrong views. Based on their causes
and conditions, they may acquire a mind of joy and goodness. It is like a
great bathing pond at the crossroads of a highway: since it is pure and
clean, those who have traveled a long distance and who have become
extremely tired and thirsty will come to bathe in it, and they will delight
in its coolness that brings happiness and joy. It is exactly like the mind of
joy and goodness experienced by those who adhere to the ten norms of
conduct. After death, they are reborn as the sun god and reside in the palace
of the sun, endowed with an array of a thousand lights. Because of this,
the sun god is called the Thousand Lights that result from good karma.
Sixty kṣaṇas (moments) make up a single laya; thirty layas make up
a single muhūrta, and one hundred muhūrtas make up a single upamā.
The palace of the sun god goes through the southern sky for six months,
each day proceeding thirty li. The most southerly course does not go

288

Sutra 30

beyond the limits of the continent of Jambudvīpa. The course of the sun
through the northern sky is exactly parallel to its southern course.
Why does the [warmth from the] sun feel hot enough to burn? There
are ten reasons. What are the ten? (1) Not far from Mount Sumeru is
Mount Khadira, forty-two thousand yojanas high and forty-two thousand
yojanas long and wide, with foothills that are limitless in extent, all containing the seven kinds of treasure. When the sun illumines this mountain,
heat is created by that contact. This is the ﬁrst reason the sun is burning
hot. (2) In front of Mount Khadira is Mount Yisha, twenty-one thousand
yojanas high and twenty-one thousand yojanas long and wide, with
foothills that are limitless in extent, all containing the seven kinds of treasure. When the sun illumines this mountain, heat is created by that contact.
This is the second reason the sun is burning hot. (3) In front of Mount
Yisha lies Mount Shuti, twelve thousand yojanas high and twelve thousand
yojanas long and wide, possessing foothills that are limitless in extent,
all containing the seven kinds of treasure. When the sun illumines this
mountain, heat is created by that contact. This is the third reason the sun
is burning hot. (4) In front of Mount Shuti lies Mount Sudṛśa, six thousand
yojanas high and all of six thousand yojanas long and wide, possessing
foothills that are limitless in extent, all containing the seven kinds of treasure. When the sun illumines this mountain, heat is created by that contact.
This is the fourth reason the sun is burning hot. (5) In front of Mount
Sudṛśa lies Mount Masi, three thousand yojanas high and three thousand
yojanas long and wide, possessing foothills that are limitless in extent,
all containing the seven kinds of treasure. When the sun illumines this
mountain, heat is created by that contact. This is the ﬁfth reason the sun
is burning hot. (6) In front of Mount Masi lies Mount Nimi, twelve hundred
yojanas high and twelve hundred yojanas long and wide, possessing
foothills that are limitless in extent, all containing the seven kinds of treasure. When the sun illumines this mountain, heat is created by that contact.
This is the sixth reason the sun is burning hot. (7) In front of Mount Nimin
lies Mount Diaofu, six hundred yojanas high and six hundred yojanas
long and wide, with foothills that are limitless in extent, all containing
the seven kinds of treasure. When the sun illumines this mountain, heat
is created by that contact. This is the seventh reason the sun is burning

289

146b

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

hot. (8) In front of Mount Diaofu lies Mount Jinganglun, three hundred
yojanas high and three hundred yojanas long and wide, with foothills that
are limitless in extent, all containing the seven kinds of treasure. When
the sun illumines this mountain, heat is created by that contact. This is
the eighth reason the sun is burning hot. (9) Again, ten thousand yojanas
out in space is a celestial palace called the “constellation,” [make endnote
and give more information on this] made entirely from lapis lazuli. When
the sun illumines this palace, heat is created by that contact. This is the
ninth reason the sun is burning hot. (10) Again, light from the palace of
the sun illumines the earth and heat is created by its contact with the
ground. This is the tenth reason the sun is burning hot.
Then the World-honored One uttered the following verse:

On the basis of these ten reasons,
The sun is called Thousand Lights.
The radiance of the sun’s shining
Heats [everything upon contact].
This is the Buddha’s discourse on the sun.

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

Why is the winter palace of the sun so cold and difﬁcult to be near?
Though the sun is shining, why is [the temperature] cool? There are thirteen reasons it is cool in winter even though the sun shines. What are the
thirteen? (1) There is water between Mount Sumeru and Mount Khadira,
an expanse as great as eighty-four thousand yojanas long and wide but
of limitless extent. In this lake grow many varieties of water lilies, including
the utpala, kumuda, padma, puṇḍarīka, and sugandha. When the sun
shines on the ﬂowers, coolness is created by that contact. This is the ﬁrst
reason the sun’s light is cool [in winter]. (2) There is water between Mount
Khadira and Mount Yisha, an expanse as great as forty-two thousand
yojanas long and wide but of limitless extent. In this lake grow many
varieties of water plants. When the sun shines on the ﬂowers, coolness is
created by that contact. This is the second reason the sun’s light is cool
[in winter]. (3) There is water between Mount Yisha and Mount Shuti, an
expanse as great as twenty-one thousand yojanas long and wide but of

290

Sutra 30

limitless extent. In this lake grow many varieties of water plants. When
the sun shines on the ﬂowers, coolness is created by that contact. This is
the third reason the sun’s light is cool [in winter]. (4) There is water
between Mount Shuti and Mount Sudṛśa, an expanse as great as twelve
thousand yojanas long and wide but of limitless extent. In this lake grow
many varieties of water plants. When the sun shines on the ﬂowers, coolness is created by that contact. This is the fourth reason the sun’s light is
cool [in winter]. (5) There is water between Mount Sudṛśa and Mount
Massu, an expanse as great as six thousand yojanas long and wide but of
limitless extent. In this lake grow many varieties of water plants. When
the sun shines on the ﬂowers, coolness is created by that contact. This is
the ﬁfth reason the sun’s light is cool [in winter]. (6) There is water between
Mount Massu and Mount Nimin, an expanse as great as twelve hundred
yojanas long and wide but of limitless extent. In this lake grow many
varieties of water plants. When the sun shines on the ﬂowers, coolness is
created by that contact. This is the sixth reason the sun’s light is cool [in
winter]. (7) There is water between Mount Nimin and Mount Diaofu, an
expanse as great as six hundred yojanas in length and breadth but with
limitless extent. In this lake grow many varieties of water plants. When
the sun shines on the ﬂowers, coolness is created by that contact. This is
the seventh reason the sun’s light is cool [in winter]. (8) There is water
between Mount Diaofu and Mount Jinganglun, an expanse as great as
three hundred yojanas long and wide but of limitless extent. In this lake
grow many varieties of water plants. When the sun shines on the ﬂowers,
coolness is created by that contact. This is the eighth reason the sun’s light
is cool [in winter]. (9) Again, there are great oceans, rivers, and streams
on the continent of Jambudvīpa. When the sun shines on them, coolness
is created by its contact with those waters. This is the ninth reason the
sun’s light is cool [in winter]. (10) Although the continent of [Apara-]
godānīya has fewer rivers than Jambudvīpa, it contains many water-related
objects. When the sun shines on them, coolness is created by that contact.
This is the tenth reason the sun’s light is cool [in winter]. (11) Although
the continent of Pūrvavideha has fewer rivers than [Apara]godānīya, there
are many more bodies of water there. When the sun shines on them, coolness is created by that contact. This is the eleventh reason the sun’s light

291

146c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

is cool [in winter]. (12) Although the continent of Uttarakuru has fewer
rivers than Pūrvavideha, there are many more bodies of water there. When
the sun shines on them, coolness is created by that contact. This is the
twelfth reason the sun’s light is cool [in winter]. (13) Again, light from
the palace of the sun shines on the great ocean, and when the sun shines
on it coolness is created by that contact. This is the thirteenth reason the
sun’s light is cool [in winter].
Then the World-honored One uttered the following verse:

On the basis of these thirteen reasons,
The sun is called Thousand Lights.
The sun’s shining is clean and cool.
This is the Buddha’s discourse on the sun.

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

147a

The moon has but a single palace, its roundness waxes and wanes, and
its light increases and diminishes. Because of this, the palace of the moon
is called Juan. We think of the moon in two ways: (1) as abiding and perpetually traversing, and (2) as the palace [where it abides]. From the
palace, all four directions are observable to the farthest distance; hence
the palace has a circular shape. The moon is composed, in part, of heavenly
silver in which coldness and warmth are mixed, and in part, of lapis lazuli:
(1) the silver is genuine, without admixture, transparent both within and
without, and shines its light on the farthest objects; (2) the lapis is also
genuine, without admixture, transparent within and without, and shines
its light on the farthest objects.
The palace of the moon is forty-nine yojanas long and wide. The palace
walls, like the thin surface of the ground beneath, resemble the surrounding
lines of trees. The walls are sevenfold and concentric, embellished with
seven railings, seven ornamental nets from which seven bells are suspended, and seven lines of trees, all adorned with the seven kinds of treasure, with innumerable rare birds singing harmoniously together.
The palace of the moon is upheld by ﬁve kinds of wind: (1) a wind
that maintains, (2) a wind that nurtures, (3) a wind that receives, (4) a
wind that changes, and (5) a wind that adjusts. The main pavilion, where

292

Sutra 30

the moon god dwells, is made of genuine lapis. It is sixteen yojanas high
and endowed with four gates, one on each side, protected by railings. The
throne of the moon god, half a yojana long and wide, is made from the
seven kinds of treasure. The seat is pure and as soft to the touch as a heavenly garment. From it the moon god shines his light to illumine the lapis
pavilion. The light shining from this pavilion illumines the entire palace
of the moon, and the light shining from this palace illumines the four
heavens and earths of this world. The life span of the moon god is ﬁve
hundred years in the celestial scale, and there is no gap in the succession
of generations. The palace cannot be destroyed by any event, except at
the end of each eon.
When the palace of the moon traverses the sky, the moon god makes
no effort to accomplish its movement. “Ever progressing on this steady
passage,” he says, “I enjoy it as an expression of the ﬁve kinds of desire.”
As the palace of the moon continues on its journey, innumerable hundreds
of thousands of great heavenly spirits participate in the procession before
it. There is no end to pleasure, and the moon relishes its swiftness and
urgency. Because of this, the moon god is called Swift and Urgent. From
his body one thousand lights emanate, ﬁve hundred of which illuminate
the world below while the other ﬁve hundred shine around him in every
direction. Being in possession of an array of one thousand lights is his
reward for merit accumulated in past lives. Because of this, the moon god
is also called Thousand Lights.
What kind of merit accumulates in one’s past? One example is the
charity people provide by serving food to śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas or
by rescuing people from destitution with food and drink, articles of clothing,
perhaps some medicine or transportation on a vehicle, horse, or elephant,
or a room to stay in, perhaps in a hotel, or a lamp to see or even mere candlelight. In providing charity, one gives things to others in accordance
with their needs, and one should not do it hastily but strive to give what
is needed without offending the person, serving in that way as a representative of the saintly disciples who adhere to moral discipline. Thus,
because of innumerable causes and conditions related to experiences of
delight in the Dharma and illumination by the light of wisdom, one’s mind
gradually becomes imbued with a feeling of joy and a spirit of goodness.

293

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

147b

It is like the kṣatriya king whose head is anointed with water when he
ascends the throne for the ﬁrst time, ﬁlling his mind with supreme joy
and a spirit of goodwill. Upon his death, based on these causes and conditions, he is reborn as the moon god and ascends to the palace of the
moon, endowed with an array of one thousand lights. Thus the proverb
says, “Good karma results in the acquisition of a thousand lights.”
Why is the moon regarded as the lights of past karma? Suppose that
people adhere to the precepts, such as refraining from taking life, refraining
from taking that which is not given, refraining from sexual misconduct,
refraining from prevarication, refraining from abusive spech, refraining
from speaking falsehoods, refraining from ﬂattering, refraining from avarice,
refraining from anger, and refraining from taking wrong views. Based on
their causes and conditions, they may acquire a mind of joyful goodness.
It is like a great bathing pond at the crossroads of a highway crossroad:
since it is pure and clean, those who have traveled a long distance and who
have become extremely tired and thirsty will come to bathe in it and delight
in its coolness that brings happiness and joy. It is exactly like the mind of
joy and goodness that those who adhere to the ten norms of conduct experience. After death, they are reborn as the moon god and reside in the palace
of the moon, endowed with an array of a thousand lights. Because of this,
the moon god is called the Thousand Lights resulting from good karma.
Sixty kṣaṇas (moments) make up a single laya; thirty layas make up
a single muhūrta, and one hundred muhūrtas make up a single upamā.
The palace of the moon god goes through the southern sky for six months,
each day proceeding thirty li. The most southerly course does not go
beyond the limits of the continent of Jambudvīpa. The course of the moon
through the northern sky is exactly parallel to its southern course.
Why does the palace of the moon appear to gradually wane? There are
three reasons. What are the three? (1) The moon gets out of “Wei.”28 This
is the ﬁrst reason that it wanes. (2) Again, there are ministers in the palace
of the moon who wear blue garments in proper order, with the garments
of each higher position being a deeper blue. Each day, [the number of the
ministers in attendance] diminishes, causing it to wane. (3) Again, the
palace of the sun illumines the moon’s palace with sixty lights. Because
of the way light reﬂects, some portion of the moon does not appear. Since

294

Sutra 30

the moon’s appearance depends on the degree of reﬂection, it wanes.
These are the three reasons the moon’s light diminishes.
Again, why does the palace of the moon gradually increase? Again,
there are three reasons the moon’s light increases. What are the three? (1)
The moon gradually turns to face us directly. This is the ﬁrst reason it
waxes. (2) All the ministers in the palace of the moon wear blue garments.
On the ﬁfteenth day, when the moon god takes his seat at the center to
enjoy his meeting with them, his light illumines [the entire palace], outshining the other lunar gods just as a large bonﬁre [overpowers the light
of nearby] candles. This is the second reason it waxes. (3) The sun illumines
the moon’s palace with sixty lights but on the ﬁfteenth day the moon god
illumines his entire palace with his own light, letting no portion fall under
a shadow from the sun’s illumination. This is the third reason the moon
waxes to its full extent.
Again, why does the moon have dark spots? The dark shadows on the
moon are caused by shadows cast by Jambu trees.
The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

The mind should be as clean and cool as the heatless moon. When visiting
donors’ houses your mind must be kept in concentration, so as not to be
disturbed. Again, why are there so many great rivers and streams? Temperatures rise because of the sun and moon, and because of their heat,
moxa is burned. Burning moxa produces sweat, and from the sweat great
rivers and streams are created. Hence there are great rivers and streams
in this world.
Why are there ﬁve kinds of seeds in this world? Because a great storm
blows seeds to this world from the world where everything is preserved
without deterioration, we have (1) roots as seeds, (2) stalks as seeds, (3)
nodes as seeds, (4) seeds that are hollow inside, and (5) offspring as seeds.
Hence there are ﬁve kinds of seed forms in this world.
When it is midday on the continent of Jambudvīpa, the sun is setting
on the continent of Pūrvavideha in the east and rising above the continent
of [Apara]godānīya in the west, while it is midnight on the continent of
Uttarakuru in the north. When it is midday in [Apara]godānīya, the sun
is setting in Jambudvīpa and rising in Uttarakuru, while it is midnight in

295

147c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

[Pūrva]videha. When it is midday in Uttarakuru, the sun is setting in
[Apara]godānīya and rising in [Pūrva]videha, while it is midnight in
Jambudvīpa. When it is midday in [Pūrva]videha, the sun is setting in
Uttarakuru and rising in Jambudvīpa, while it is midnight in [Apara]godānīya. Here when Jambudvīpa is in the east [at sunrise], [Pūrva]videha
is in the west. If Jambudvīpa is in the west [at sunset], [Pūrva]videha is
in the east. If [Apara]godānīya is in the west, Uttarakuru is in the east. If
Uttarakuru is in the west, [Apara]godānīya is in the east.
The reason the southern continent is called Jambu[dvīpa] is because
there is a large gold mine below ground that is thirty yojanas deep. Since
there are Jambu trees growing on this continent, the gold there is called
jambu gold. The fruit of the Jambu tree is like a mushroom and tastes as
sweet as honey. Each Jambu tree has ﬁve clusters of fruit; four are attached
on the four sides of the tree while the ﬁfth is on top. The fruit facing east
is eaten by the gandharva demigods. The fruit facing south is eaten by
the people of the seven countries: (1) Kuru, (2) Kurupa (?), (3) Videha,
(4) Śveta (?), (5) Maṇḍa, (6) Bala, and (7) Bali. The fruit facing west is
eaten by the creatures of the ocean. The fruit facing north is eaten by birds
and animals. The fruit on top is eaten by the gods of the stars and constellations. To the north of the seven countries are seven great dark hills:
(1) Luotu, (2) Baihe, (3) Shougong, (4) Xianshan, (5) Gaoshan, (6) Chanshan, and (7) Tushan. On these seven hills live seven brāhmaṇa sages
and their abodes are called (1) Shanti, (2) Shanguang, (3) Shougong, (4)
Xianren, (5) Hegong, (6) Jiana, and (7) Zengyi.

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

148a

At the outset of the present eon, sentient beings survived by subsisting
on a type of mud cake. Those who ate large quantities lost their complexions, while those who ate less retained good complexions. As they began
to recognize differences between facial features and complexions, they
started to argue about whose was superior, and whose was inferior. “I am
superior to you,” they would think. “You do not look like me.” Thus they
became aware of differences between themselves and others, and this
gave rise to feelings of competition and conﬂict. As the mud cakes began

296

Sutra 30

to disappear, a new kind of growth in the soil, like a thin rice cake,
appeared, and it was fragrant and appetizing.
Since the previous type of food was no longer available, the sentient
beings gathered together to beat their breasts and lament, “What a disaster!”
This is like people today who enjoy a meal and praise it as good food,
and later on, when it is no longer available, they are distressed by the fact
that it is no longer available. These cases are exactly alike. The sentient
beings reﬁned their taste by eating the new growth in the soil, but those
who ate large quantities lost their complexions, while those who ate less
retained good complexions. As they began to recognize more differences
between facial features and complexions, they argued about whose was
superior, and whose was inferior. “I am superior to you,” they thought.
“You are not like me.” Thus they became aware of differences between
themselves and others, giving rise to feelings of competition and conﬂict.
Then the new food growing in the soil disappeared.
A new kind of product began to grow from the soil, rather thick in
appearance but as delicate as a heavenly garment inside, with a color like
a celestial lotus blossom and its taste was as sweet as honey. All the sentient
beings were able to survive on this food for some length of time, but those
who ate large quantities lost their complexions, while those who ate less
retained good complexions. Then they began to recognize still more differences between facial features and complexions and features, saying, “I
am superior to you” and “You are not like me.” They began to ﬁxate on
the differences between themselves and others, accelerating feelings of
competition and conﬂict. Then the new food growing in the soil disappeared.
Again, a form of rice without gluten or chaff began to grow, providing
the sentient beings with a new food that could be eaten without seasoning.
Still, however, the people gathered together to beat their breasts and lament,
“What a disaster!” since the old food could no longer be found. It is like
people today who regard as a disaster when a favorite food is no longer
available. It is just like that. So the sentient beings began to harvest the
new form of rice and subsist on it.
Then their physical forms became coarse and crude, with the advent
of male and female sexual organs. Staring at each other, some felt desire

297

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

148b

and sought hidden places to engage in sexual intercourse. Observing this,
the other sentient beings deplored it: “This is wrong. When we were all
born in the same place, how can some of us behave like that?” Seeing
their disapproval, the one they condemned regretted his conduct and admitted, “What I have done is wrong.” He threw himself to the ground and
remained there. [Now] seeing that he would not get up, the woman decided
to bring him food. The others asked, “What will you do with this food
you have taken?” She replied, “I shall give it to that man who is regretting
his fall into wrongdoing.” Because of her reply, the term “no-good husband’
came into this world, and also the name “wife,” from the fact that she
brought cooked rice to [the man].
After that, the sentient beings became increasingly indulgent in sexual
behavior, and to hide their conduct they began to build private shelters.
Because of this, the term “house” came into use for the ﬁrst time. Later generations found their sexual desires increasing, and eventually the institution
of marriage between husband and wife was introduced. When sentient
beings who had exhausted their predispositional forces, merits, and life
spans died in Ābhāsvara Heaven, they came to the human world to enter
a mother’s womb. Because of this, we have the term “fetus” [in which
the individual person resides].
The city of Campā was built at that time. Then the city of Vārāṇasī
was built in the country of Kāśī. Next, the city of Rājagṛha was built, and
it was completed at sunrise. Because of this, we have names for all the
cities, towns, villages, and territories the kings ruled.
When the sentient beings of that time harvested rice in the morning
for breakfast, the rice grains that remained would ripen again by evening.
Even when [the rice] was harvested in the evening, it would be ripe again
the next morning, and all the rice would grow without any stalks or stubble.
Then some [lazy] people began to think, “Harvesting rice every day
is too much work. Why don’t we harvest enough rice for two days?” So
they harvested enough to serve two days of meals and put some of it away
in storage. Later, when friends would say, “Let us go harvest some rice
together,” they would reply, “I have already harvested enough for two
days. If you wish to go, why don’t you go without me?” The friend would
then think, “He harvested enough rice for two days and stored the amount

298

Sutra 30

needed. Why don’t I harvest and store up enough for three days?” So that
man did so, and when another friend came along to ask him to harvest
rice together, he replied, “I have already harvested and stored what I need
for three days. If you wish to go, why don’t you go without me?” That
friend also thought, “He has harvested enough rice for three days and
stored the amount needed. Why don’t I harvest and store enough for ﬁve
days?” He did so, and soon all the sentient beings were trying to outdo
each other in harvesting rice. Thus the rice crop was overharvested and
became barren and weed-ridden, and ﬁnally it began to produce only
husks. Once cut, it would not grow again, leaving only withered stubble.
So the sentient beings gathered together to beat their breasts and lament,
“What a series of disasters! Originally, we were superhuman beings, subsisting on thoughts. Our bodies were luminous and we ﬂew through the
air and were able to enjoy happiness without any obstacles whatsoever.
Then, when food from the ground grew for the ﬁrst time, we were attracted
by its color and taste and we ate it, and it kept us in this world for some
time. Those who ate large quantities [of the food], however, saw their
skin turn rough and ugly, while those who ate less retained good complexions. This caused us to begin to discriminate between ourselves and
others. Those [who appeared handsome] became conceited, saying, ‘I am
superior to you. Your skin is not like mine.’ While we argued about these
things our food disappeared.
“New food began to grow, and it was fragrant and pleasing to the eye
and had a good taste. We harvested it and continued to survive in this
world by subsisting on it. Those who ate large quantities [of the food],
however, lost their complexions, while those who ate less retained good
complexions. Because of this, some of us became conceited and thought,
‘I am superior to you. Your skin is not like mine.’ While we argued about
these things, the new food disappeared and only something coarse and
thick would grow, some of which we could eat, but in much less quantity.
“We harvested the new food and continued to live. Those who ate too
much lost their complexions, while those who ate less retained theirs.
Again, we became conceited and thought, ‘I am superior to you. Your
skin is not like mine.’ While we argued about these things the food disappeared. What grew after it was nonglutinous rice that had an attractive

299

148c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

color, scent, and taste. We ate it and began to harvest it. When it was harvested in the morning for breakfast, the remaining rice grains would ripen
by evening. When it was harvested in the evening, it would ripen again
by morning. The best thing was that it grew without stalks or stubble. But
we competed to harvest the crop and put it in storage. Overharvested, the
rice became barren and began to form husks. Once cut, it would not grow
again, leaving only withered stubble.”
[The sentient beings said to each other,] “Let us divide the land between
us.” They created plots belonging to different owners, and once again
they began to discriminate between themselves and others. Some began
to store their own rice and to steal crops from ﬁelds belonging to others.
Observing this behavior, the others deplored it: “What you have done is
wrong. Since you have your own land, how can you steal crops from the
others?” Having reprimanded such a person, they warned him, “You must
never do it again.” Yet they could not leave the scandal of the theft behind.
Again, they reprimanded the thief, “Your conduct is wrong. You must
stop it.” Then they beat him with their ﬁsts and with a cane. Then they
led him out before an audience and said, “This man, while putting his
own rice away, has stolen it from ﬁelds belonging to others.” The accused
shouted back, “They struck me!”
Distressed, the audience beat their breasts and said, “Sentient beings
have become morally degenerate. Because of these crimes, turmoil and
ﬁlth have afﬂicted this society. This is why we suffer from birth, old age,
illness, and death, and why we have fallen into the three evil courses of
life. These disputes arose because the land was divided into separate
parcels and because of disagreements over the boundaries. Now, since
there is so much animosity between us, none of the disputes can be
resolved. We should select a leader [and let him deal with the disputes].
He will protect those worthy of protection, commend those worthy of
praise, and punish those in need of punishment. Each member of the community must advance a portion of their rice harvest in payment for the
services the appointed person will undertake to deal with our disputes.”
So they chose a person who was tall and physically impressive, handsome, and who carried an aura of authority. They said to him, “We want
you to become our elected leader to protect those in need of protection,

300

Sutra 30

commend those worthy of praise, and also to punish those who should be
punished. Each of us will collect a portion of our rice harvest to make up
your stipend.” Then the person chosen by the community assumed the
role of chieftain and began to dispense praise to those worthy of praise
and punishment to those in need of punishment. Thus the word nāyaka
(“people’s guide”) came into being.
In the beginning, the leader Mahāsammata had a son, Ratna by name;
Ratna had a son, Surasa by name; Surasa had a son, Jingji by name; Jingji
had a son, Sucarita by name; Sucarita had a son, Zhexing by name; Zhexing
had a son, Miaomi by name; Miaomi had a son, Miti by name; Miti had
a son, Shuixian by name; Shuixian had a son, Śatajña by name; Śatajña
had a son, Shiyü by name; Shiyü had a son, Shanyü by name; Shanyü had
a son, Duanjie by name; Duanjie had a son, Daduanjie by name; Daduanjie
had a son, Ratnākara by name; Ratnākara had a son, Mahāratnākara by
name; Mahāratnākara had a son, Sudarśana by name; Sudarśana had a
son, Mahāsudarśana by name; Mahāsudarśana had a son, Aśoka by name;
Aśoka had a son, Zhouzhu by name; Zhouzhu had a son, Zhisheng by
name; Zhisheng had a son, Shanyue by name; Shanyue had a son, Shentian
by name; Shentian had a son, Yili by name; Yili had a son, Dṛṣharatha
(Laoche) by name; Dṛṣharatha had a son, Daśaratha by name; Daśaratha
had a son, Śataratha by name; Śataratha had a son, Dṛṣhadhanu by name;
Dṛṣhadhanu had a son, Śatadhanu by name; Śatadhanu had a son, Yangmu
by name; Yangmu had a son, Shansi by name.
From Shansi descended ten tribal clans ruled by cakravartins in succession without any gap. The names of the ten clans were (1) Kaṇṇagoccha,
(2) Doluopo, (3) Aśvajit, (4) Gandhāra, (5) Kaliṅga, (6) Campā, (7) Kaurava, (8) Pañcāla, (9) Mithila, and (10) Ikṣvāku. From King Kaṇṇagoccha
ﬁve cakravartins descended; from King Doluopo ﬁve cakravartins also
descended; from King Aśvajit seven cakravartins descended; from King
Gandhāra seven cakravartins also descended; from King Kaliṅga nine
cakravartins descended; from King Campā fourteen cakravartins
descended; from King Kaurava thirty-one cakravartins descended; from
King Pañcāla thirty-two cakravartins descended; from King Mithila eightyfour cakravartins descended; and from King Ikṣvāku one hundred and
one cakravartins descended. The last king was named Anumahā Sujāta

301

149a

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

149b

(Dashan Shengzong). King Ikṣvāku had a son, Wuluopo by name; King
Wuluopo had a son, Kula (Quluo) by name; King Kula had a son, Nikula
(Niquluo) by name; this King Nikula had a son, Siṃhahanu by name; King
Siṃhahanu had a son, Śuddhodana by name; King Śuddhodana had a son,
Bodhisattva (i.e., the Buddha) by name; this Bodhisattva had a son, Rāhula
by name. On the basis of the foregoing genealogy, the name kṣatriya came
into being.
Once, a sentient being said to himself, “Myriad living species have all
been afﬂicted by thorns and infections. I should now forsake all domestic
concerns to go off into the mountains to practice meditation.” So he
renounced his domestic life, went into the mountains, and practiced meditation, sheltered under various trees, and every day he went into a village
for alms. When the villagers saw him they willingly offered food out of
respect, and he praised their good conduct. The fact that this man renounced
his domestic ties and sought to follow the path by entering the mountains
meant that he was freed from involvement in wrong and evil actions.
Because of this, he could be called brāhmaṇa.
Some brāhmaṇas were unable to continue practicing meditation. They
came out of the mountains and traveled among human communities,
claiming, “I cannot practice meditation.” They called themselves “brāhmaṇas without the practice of meditation.” They came down to villages,
got involved in wrong practices, and engaged in activities inconsistent
with their original aspiration. Because of this, their means of livelihood
may be termed “poisonous.” For this reason, a class of brāhmaṇas came
into being in society who depend on various means of livelihood and make
their living among sentient beings. For similar reasons, a social class of
householders (vaiśya) came into being who learn different arts and skills
and in that way make their living among sentient beings. For similar reasons,
a social class of those in servitude (śūdra) came into being.
Śramaṇa practitioners came into being after the appearance of the
Śākya clan in society. Originally a kṣatriya, one of them thought to himself,
“All worldly love and affection in this society is inevitably deﬁled and
unclean. Why should I be attached to this kind of relationship? I will
renounce domestic life, shave my hair and beard, don mendicant robes,
and seek the path of religion. I am a śramaṇa, I am a śramaṇa!” [Now]

302

Sutra 21

among the brāhmaṇas, vaiśyas, and śūdras, some thought to themselves,
“All worldly love and affection in this society is inevitably deﬁled and
unclean. Why should I be attached to this kind of relationship? I will
renounce domestic life, shave my hair and beard, don mendicant robes,
and seek the path of religion. I am a śramaṇa, I am a śramaṇa!”
If a kṣatriya commits wrongful actions in mind, speech, or conduct,
he receives appropriate retribution when his body dissolves and his life
comes to an end. If brāhmaṇas, vaiśyas, and śūdras commit wrongful
actions in mind, speech, or conduct, they likewise receive appropriate retribution when their bodies dissolve and their lives end. On the other hand,
if a kṣatriya adheres to the norms of conduct and does good in mind,
speech, or physical action, he is rewarded with absolute happiness when
his body dissolves and his life comes to an end. Likewise, if brāhmaṇas,
vaiśyas, or śūdras adhere to the norms of conduct and do good in thought,
speech, or physical action, they are rewarded with absolute happiness
when their bodies dissolve and their lives end. If a kṣatriya commits both
good and bad actions in mind, speech, or conduct, he receives appropriate
retribution when his body dissolves and his life comes to an end. Likewise,
if brāhmaṇas, vaiśyas, or śūdras commit both good and bad actions in
mind, speech, or conduct they receive appropriate retribution when their
bodies dissolve and their lives come to an end.
If a kṣatriya shaves his hair and beard, dons the three mendicant robes,
renounces domestic life, and practices the seven auxiliary disciplines in
order to seek the path of religion, and if his faith and determination are
ﬁrm, he should be able to transcend worldly matters, maintain the unsurpassed practice of austerity, and directly experience in this life that the
cause of birth and death has been exhausted; the practice of austerity has
been accomplished; that which must be done [for religious salvation] has
been accomplished; and there is no more birth to suffer ever again. Likewise, if one from the brāhmaṇa, vaiśya, or śūdra classes shaves his hair
and beard, dons the three mendicant robes, renounces domestic life, and
practices the sevenfold auxiliary disciplines in order to seek the path of
religion, and if his faith and determination are ﬁrm, he should be able to
transcend worldly matters, maintain the unsurpassed practice of austerity,
and directly experience in this life that the cause of birth and death has

303

149c

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

been exhausted; the practice of austerity has been accomplished; that
which must be done [for religious salvation] has been accomplished; and
there is no more birth to suffer ever again.
Among the four classes of society, those who have perfected themselves
with harmonious practice and insight and realized the state of arhatship
(total liberation from attachment) are supreme. At that moment, the god
Brahmā utters the following verse:
One born in the kṣatriya family is highest,
He can assemble all the races for the practice of religion,
Having perfected himself with harmonious practice and insight,
He is the highest among humans and gods.

The Buddha said to the bhikṣus:

The god Brahmā has well uttered this verse. It is not said wrongly but is
appropriate. His understanding is not wrong but is good. I approve his
statement. Why? Because I also utter the same verse as the Tathāgata,
totally liberated from deﬁlement and perfectly enlightened:
One born in the kṣatriya family is highest,
He can assemble all the classes for the practice of religion.
Having perfected himself with harmonious practice and insight,
He is the highest among humans and gods.

Then, having heard the Buddha’s teaching, the bhikṣus were delighted to
receive it and reverentially carried out what the Buddha taught.

The Canonical Book of Lengthy Discourses has been completed in assemblage. Homage to the Omniscient [One]. May all beings abide in peace and
happiness. Let all sentient beings abide in the state of transcendence, and
may I myself also be in that realm with them.
[End of Sutra 30: Buddhist Cosmology]

304

Notes

Notes
1
2

3
4

5

6
7
8

9
10

Étienne Lamotte, History of Indian Buddhism from the Origins to the Śaka Era, trans.
Sara Webb-Boin (Louvain-la-Neue: Institut Orientaliste, 1988), p. 272.

The ninefold or twelvefold categories of scriptures in which the Buddha’s discourses
were grouped as an aid for memorization. The Tripiṭaka categories of Sutra, Vinaya,
and Abhidharma were a later development.
Cf. Dīpavaṃsa VII, 34–43; Mahāvaṃsa V, 267–282.

The Abhidharmamahāvibhāṣā-śāśtra; the Sanskrit original is lost, and there is no
Tibetan translation of this text. There is a Chinese translation by Xuanzang, the Apidamo da pibosha lun in two hundred fascicles (Taishō 1545). Xuanzang concludes
his epilogue: “Four hundred years after [the Buddha’s] nirvana, King Kaniṣka called
an assembly of ﬁve hundred arhats and Kāśmīri Tripiṭaka masters to discuss the analyses of Abhidharma study.” Canonical revision was accomplished on all three divisions
in chapter 3 of Xuanzang’s Xi you ji (Record of the Western Regions, Taishō 2087);
see Lamotte, History of Indian Buddhism, p. 586. An English translation of Xuanzang’s
text by Li Rongxi is published under the title The Great Tang Dynasty Record of the
Western Regions (Moraga, CA: BDK America, 2016, reprint.).

According to Satis Chandra Vidyabhusana, in his renowned work A History of Indian
Logic: Ancient, Mediaeval, and Modern Schools (Calcutta: Calcutta University Press,
1931), pp. 49–50; p. 49, n. 2, the Hindu literary works, the Purāṇas and Śāstras, were
compiled by the brāhmaṇa assemblies in the region of Vidarbha under the leadership
of Jātūkarṇya Vyāsa. This movement was inspired by the Fourth Buddhist Council
that had been held in Kāśmīra half a century earlier.

See Franklin Edgerton, Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit Grammar and Dictionary (New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1953), esp. Ch. 1, Introduction.

Chizen Akanuma, Kanpashibushi agon goshōroku (The Comparative Catalogue of
Chinese Āgamas and Pāli Nikāyas) (Nagoya: Hajinkaku-shobō, 1929), pp. 3–6.

The missing seven texts are: DN 6, Mahalī Suttanta; DN 7, Jāliya Suttanta; DN 10,
Subha Suttanta; DN 22, Mahā-Satīpaṭṭhāna Suttanta; DN 30, Lakkhaṇa Suttanta;
and DN 32, Āṭānāṭiya Suttanta; and “The Sutra on Buddhist Cosmology,” not found
in the Dīgha Nikāya (Sutra 30 in this volume).
See Kaijō Ishikawa, Agon-kyō seiritsu no kenkyū (A Study on the Establishment of
Āgama Sūtras (Tokyo: Gendaisha, 1982), especially the Conclusion, pp. 246–247.

Kumārajīva had been the king’s counselor in his native land, Kuccha. General Lüguang
destroyed the state in 383 C.E. and brought Kumārajīva as a captive to the neighboring

305

The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses, Volume III

11

12

13

14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28

city of Liangzhou. In 401 Kumārajīva was invited to Chang’an to serve as the religious
counselor to Yaoxing.

Genmyō Ono, et al., eds., Bussho kaisetsu daijiten (The Expositional Dictionary of
Buddhist Texts in the Chinese Tripiṭaka Collection) (Tokyo: Daitō Shuppansha, 1933),
Fascicle 6, pp. 45–46.

Faxian left Chang’an with a few co-travelers in 399 and returned alone by the sea
route in 413, bringing with him copies of the Mahāsāṃghika-vinaya, the Saṃyukta
Āgama, and the Mahāparinirvāṇa-sūtra, among other texts.

The section of doctrinal commentaries: vols. 33–39; the section of Vinaya commentaries,
vol. 40; the section of treatise commentaries, partially sectarian: vols. 41–44; the
section of Chinese and Japanese sectarian schools, vols. 45–48; the section of historical
traditions, vols. 49–52; the section of incidental and non-Buddhist texts, vols. 53–54
(which comprises both); and the section of textual catalogues, vol. 55.
T. W. and C. A. F. Rhys Davids, The Dialogues of the Buddha, 3 vols. (London: Pali
Text Society, 1899, 1910, 1921).
King Bimbisāra of Magadha in the Pāli text.

The ﬁve kinds of deﬁlement are belief in a self, attachment to practices and observances
other than those approved by the Buddha, doubt, sexual desire, and malice.

Videha (Pāli: Vaidehī) was the queen of King Ajātaśatru’s father, Bimbisāra (Skt. Vidmisāra).
Maskarin Gośālīputra: Pāli Makkhali-gosāla.

“That affair” refers to King Ajātaśatru’s patricide of his father, King Bimbisāra.

The three kinds of supernormal knowledge are that derived from knowledge of past
lives, from supernormal vision, and from awareness of total freedom from deﬁlements.
Vidmisāra is Sanskrit for the Pāli Bimbisāra.

I.e., the ﬁve fundamental precepts undertaken by all Buddhists on entering the path.

A yojana is an ancient Indian unit of measuring distance, roughly equal to seven miles.
A xin is a Chinese unit of measure roughly equal to eight feet.

A li is a Chinese unit of measure roughly equal to one-quarter mile.
A youyingdao is an oil-coated blade or knife.

A hu is a Chinese unit of measure roughly equivalent to a bushel (about eighty pounds
of grain).

“The moon gets out of ‘Wei’” means that the moon appears to grow smaller, i.e., a
waning moon.

306

Bibliography
Primary Sources

Abhidharmamahāvibhāṣā-śāstra (nonextant Sanskrit original; no Tibetan translation);
Apidamo dapibosha lun (T. 1545), in two hundred fascicles. Translated by Xuanzang.
Chu sanzang ji ji (Collection of the Tripiṭaka Textual Records) (T. 405) by Sengyou
(445–518). An expanded version of Dao’an’s Zhongjing mulu.
Datang Xi yu ji (T. 2087). Translated by Xuanzang. English translation in Li Rongxi,
The Great Tang Dynasty Record of the Western Regions (Berkeley: Numata Center
for Buddhist Translation and Research, 1996).
Dharmaguptaka-vinaya; Sifen lü (Vinaya in Four Divisions) (T. 1428), in sixty fascicles.
Translated by Buddhayaśas and Zhu Fonian.
Dīrgha Āgama (Pāli: Dīgha Nikāya); Chang ahan jing (Canonical Collection of Lengthy
Discourses) (T. 1), in twenty-two fascicles. Translated by Buddhayaśas and Zhu
Fonian. English translation in T. W. and C. A. F. Rhys Davids, The Dialogues of
the Buddha, 3 vols. (London: Pali Text Society, 1899, 1910, 1921).
Dīpavaṃsa (Chronicle of the Island). English translation in B. C. Law, “Chronicle of
the Island of Ceylon or the Dīpavaṃsa,” Ceylon Historical Journal 7 (1958): 1–266.
Dvādaśamukha-śāstra; Shiermun lun (T. 1568), in one fascicle. Translated by Kumārajīva
in 409.
Fochui ban lüeshuo jiaojie jing (T. 389), in one fascicle. Translated by Kumārajīva in
402–412.
Gaoseng faxian zhuan (Biography of Faxian) (T. 2085), in one fascicle. English translatiion
in Li Rongxi, The Journey of the Eminent Monk Faxian, in Lives of Great Monks
and Nuns (Berkeley: Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research, 2002),
pp. 155–214.
Gezhong qinding zhongjing mulu (Buddhist Canonical Textual Catalogues) compiled
by four northern dynasties: (1) Liang in 519, (2) Northern Wei in 532; (3) Northern
Qi in 570–578, and (4) Northern Chou in 563.
Jātakas (Birth Stories), e.g., Bhaddasālajātaka no. 465, IV, 144–153.
Kaiyuan shijiao mulu (Kaiyuan Record of Buddhist Textual Catalogues) (T. 2154). Compiled in 731.
Mahāprajñāpāramitōpadeśa-śāstra; Dazhidu lun (T. 1509), in one hundred fascicles,
by Nāgārjuna (ca. 50–150). Translated by Kumārajīva.

307

Bibliography
Mahāvaṃsa (Great Chronicle). English translation in Wilhelm Geiger and Mabel Haynes
Bode, The Mahāvaṃsa, Or, the Great Chronicle of Ceylon (London: Published for
the Pali Text Society by Luzac & Co, 1964).
Mūlamadhyamakākarikā-śāstra; Zhong lun (T. 1564), in four fascicles. By Nāgārjuna
with commentary by Piṅgala. Translated by Kumārajīva in 409.
Pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikā-prajñāpāramitā-sutra; Mohe banruo boluomi jing (Sutra of the
Perfection of Wisdom in Twenty-ﬁve Thousand Verses) (T. 221), in twenty-seven
fascicles. Translated by Kumārajīva in 404. Generally known in China as the Dapin
banruo jing (Larger Prajñāpāramitā Sutra) together with its voluminous commentary.
Renshou zhongjing mulu (Renshou Record of Textual Catalogues), revised upon the
Kaiyuan shijiao mulu in 602.
Saddharmapuṇḍarīka-sūtra; Miaofa lianhuajing (Sutra of the Lotus Blossom of the Fine
Dharma) (T. 262), in seven fascicles. Translated by Kumārajīva in 408–409. Commonly known as the Lotus Sutra; English translation in Tsugunari Kubo and Akira
Yuyama, The Lotus Sutra (Berkeley: Numata Center For Buddhist Translation and
Research, 2007, rev. second ed.)
Sui Kaihuang lidai sanbao ji (Sui Kaiyuan Record of the Threefold Buddhist Treasures
of the Successive Dynasties) (T. 2034), 598.
Vimalakīrtinirdeśa-sūtra; Weimojie suoshuo jing (T. 475), in three fascicles. Translated
by Kumārajīva. English translation in John R. McRae in The Sutra of Queen Srimala
of the Lion’s Roar/The Vimalakirti Sutra (Berkeley: Numata Center For Buddhist
Translation and Research, 2004), pp. 63–199.
Xiaopin banruo boluomi jing (Smaller Prajñāpāramitā-sutra) (T. 227), in ten fascicles.
Translated by Kumārajīva in 406.
Zhaolun (T. 1858), by Sengzhao (374–414), comprising four essays and two epistles.
Zhongjing mulu (Comprehensive Record of the Textual Catalogues) (T. 2145) by Dao’an
(314–385), included in Sengyou’s Chu sanzang ji.

Secondary Sources

Akanuma, Chizen. Kanpashibushi agon goshōroku (Comparative Catalogue of Chinese
Āgamas and Pāli Nikāyas). Nagoya: Hajinkaku shobō, 1929.
Edgerton, Franklin. Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit Grammar and Dictionary. New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press, 1953.
Ichimura, Shohei. “Revisiting the Times of Śākyamuni Buddha,” in Radhavallabh Tripathi
ed., Srutimahati Glory of Sanskrit Tradition: Prof. Ram Karan Sharma Felicitation
Volume, vol. 2. Delhi: Pratibha Prakashan, 2008.
—. “Śākyamuni’s Critical Spirituality and India’s Crisis” and “The Chinese Mādhyamika
Sengzhao’s Paradoxical Method of Argument,” in Shohei Ichimura, Buddhist Critical
Spirituality: Prajñā and Śūnyatā. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 2001.
Ishikawa, Kaijō. Agon-kyō seiritsu no kenkyū (A Study on How Sutras were Assembled
into the Āgama Collections). Tokyo: Gendaisha, 1982.

308

Bibliography
Lamotte, Étienne. History of Indian Buddhism from the Origins to the Śaka Era. Sara
Webb-Boin, trans. Louvain-la-Neue: Institut Orientaliste, 1988.
Malalasekera, G. P. Dictionary of Pāli Proper Names, 2 vols. London and Boston: Pali
Text Society, 1974.
Mettanando Bhikkhu. “After the Buddha.” Unpublished monograph.
Ono, Gemmyō, et al., eds. Bussho kaisetsu daijiten (Expositional Dictionary of Buddhist
Texts in the Chinese Tripiṭaka Collection). Tokyo: Daitō Shuppansha, 1933.
Toynbee, Arnold, and Jane Caplan. A Study of History: The First Abridged One-Volume
Edition. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1972.
Vidyabhusana, Satis Chandra. A History of Indian Logic: Ancient, Mediaeval, and Modern
Schools. Calcutta: Calcutta University Press, 1931.
Weber, Max. The Sociology of Religion. Ephraim Fischoff, trans. Boston: Beacon Press,
1863. See especially the Introduction by Talcott Parsons, pp. xlvi–lii.

309

Index
A

Abhaya, Prince, 110
Abhidharma, 305n3
categorized in the Tripiṭaka, xiv, xx–
xxiii, 305n2
Mahayana and Hinayana, xx, xxii
See also commentaries/treatises,
Abhidharmamahāvibhāṣā-śāśtra;
Tripiṭaka
Ādarśamukha, 214
Āgama(s), xiii, xv, xxiv
four/fourfold, xiv, xv, xxiii,
Hinayana, xxiv
See also Dīrgha Āgama; Ekkotarīka
Āgama; Madhyama Āgama;
Saṃyukta Āgama
Ajātaśatru, King, 107–122, 306nn17, 19
Ajita-keśakambalin, 109, 115
alms/almsfood, 71, 73, 85, 142, 173, 302
almsbowl, 6, 72, 121, 123, 142
almsround(s), 3, 4, 123, 151
anāgāmin. See nonreturner
Ānanda, 32
Anāthapiṇḍika Monastery, 81, 123, 151
Kareri-kuṭika cloister, 151
Anavatapta Palace, 162
Aṅgamāṇava, 45
Aṅgirasa, 96
Aṅguttara Nikāya, xv
See also Ekottarika Āgama; Nikāyas,
ﬁvefold

animal(s)/creature(s), 6, 8, 31, 160, 165,
179, 205, 211, 214, 244, 251, 263,
266, 281, 296
bird(s), xvii, 6, 76, 81, 99, 152, 154,
155, 160, 161, 162, 164, 165, 166,
168, 175, 182, 203, 205, 207, 208,
216, 217, 218, 220, 221, 223, 224,
225, 226, 227, 262, 275, 276, 287,
292, 296
hummingbird, 165, 166, 169, 170, 180
iron, 188, 190
ravens, 99
youweichanjia, 172
boar(s), 6, 8
bulls/calves/cattle/cows, 49, 51, 52, 58,
59, 61, 67, 71, 86, 156, 162, 171,
180, 210, 233, 242, 272, 274, 275
deer, 61, 210, 281
dog(s), 6, 8, 85, 210
donkey, 9
elephant(s), 6, 9, 40, 56, 61, 62, 111,
112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118,
160, 162, 163, 164, 165, 176, 182,
192, 214–215, 288, 293
king, Shanju, 163–165
royal/white, 111, 160, 163, 164, 173,
176
ewes/rams/sheep, 6, 49, 52, 58, 67, 71,
233, 242
goats, 8
hens/roosters, 6, 8

311

Index
animal(s)/creature(s) (continued):
horse(s), 6, 7, 40, 56, 61, 62, 113, 114,
115, 116, 117, 118, 162, 173, 176,
182, 288, 293
leopards, 166, 170
lion, 89, 90, 112, 162
realm, 251, 263, 266
rat, 9
snake(s)/vipers, 160, 166, 179, 281
tigers, 166, 170
water lizards, 166, 170, 179
See also insect(s)
Anumahā Sujāta, 301
anuttara samyaksaṃbodhi. See enlightenment, perfect
arhat(s), 87, 146, 305n4
arhatship, 92, 140, 304
Aruṇa, 96
ārūpyadhātu. See realm(s), formless
ascetic(s)/asceticism, xvii, 3, 83–84, 85–88
brāhmaṇa, 3, 4, 83, 88, 92, 123–135,
139
feats/practice(s), 9, 83, 85, 86, 87, 88,
210
See also austerity, practice of
Ashiyi, 82
Aśoka, xiv, 301
Aṣṭaka, 96, 97
asura(s), xvii, 157, 217, 218–220, 228,
229, 231, 233, 234, 238, 239, 240,
243, 244, 249, 251, 259, 263, 266
ﬁve great, 219–220
Cuifu, 220
Tichi, 219
Touju, 220
Wuyi, 220
Xiongli, 220
warring with demigods, garuḍas,
gods, and nāgas, 269–280
See also Asurin; Citra/Vimakacitra;
Rāhu; Shemoli

312

Asurin, 219, 277
See also asura(s)
Aśvajit, King, 298
austerity, practice of, 5, 34, 47, 50, 51,
74, 78, 89, 90, 91–92, 95, 100, 113,
124, 130, 131, 133, 139–140, 142,
143, 144, 145, 206, 242, 243, 300
four kinds of, 68
See also ascetic(s)/asceticism

B

Bhāradvāja
bhikṣu(s), xix, 3–4, 10, 31, 46–48, 69,
72, 73–74, 75–82, 83–85, 87–90,
93, 100, 104–105, 107, 111, 119–
121, 123, 141, 142, 151–156, 162,
165–166, 173, 182, 190, 191, 193–
195, 197, 199–203, 206, 207, 210,
214–220, 22, 229, 230, 232, 237,
240–242, 244–248, 250, 252, 254–
257, 262, 264, 265, 268–270, 272,
273, 275, 276, 280, 282, 283, 284,
290, 292, 295, 296, 304
See also disciple(s); monk(s); śramaṇa(s); śrāvaka(s)
Bimbisāra, King, 37, 39, 53, 55,
306nn15, 17, 19, 21
See also Vidmisāra, King
birth, 22, 43, 44, 128, 140, 156, 172, 206,
207, 216, 232, 240, 241, 300, 303,
304
cause of, 29, 31, 125, 216
four ways of, 207, 211
See also birth and death, cause of;
rebirth
birth and death, cause of, 31, 91, 139, 303
Boboxi, 96
bodhisattva, xxiii
Bodhisattva, 302
See also Buddha
Brahmā, xvii, 13, 14, 36, 39, 41, 52, 55,

Index
56, 80–81, 95, 96–97, 100–102,
103, 104–105, 284, 304
net, 3, 32
path of, 96, 251, 262, 266
See also Heavens, named: Brahmā
Brahmadatta, 3, 4
Brahmā Hall, 123
brāhmaṇa(s), xvii, 6–31, 33–37, 39, 41–
48, 49–53, 55, 57–58, 61–62, 64–
73, 75–76, 78, 84–88, 93–102, 109–
111, 113, 114, 123–133, 134, 135,
141–143, 149, 173, 204, 205, 211,
215, 232–240, 287, 293, 302–303,
305n5
ascetic(s), xvii, 3, 4, 83, 88, 92, 123–
135, 139
lineage, 43, 44
sages, seven, abodes of, 296
Hegong, 296
Jiana, 296
Shanguang, 296
Shanti, 296
Shougong, 296
Xianren, 296
Zengyi, 296
scriptures, 33, 36, 43, 49, 52, 61, 64,
93, 141
village, 93, 141
See also class(es), four
brahmavihāras. See four immeasurables/
four kinds of immeasurable mind
Buddha, xix, 3–5, 6, 10, 22, 25–28, 30–
34, 42, 49, 74, 75, 83, 84, 91, 93,
95, 107, 111, 112, 118, 123, 124,
141, 151, 152–154, 156, 162, 165,
173, 182, 190, 191, 193–195, 197,
199, 201–203, 206, 207, 210, 215,
216, 220, 222, 230, 232, 237, 240–
248, 250, 252, 254, 255–257, 262,
264, 265, 268–270, 272, 273, 275,

276, 280, 287, 288, 292, 293, 298,
300, 301, 304n16
demise/nirvana, xiii, 305n4
discourses/teaching(s) of, xiv, xvi,
290, 292, 304, 305n2
and Hastiśāriputra, 136–139
and Kāśyapa, 83–92
and Kevaddha, 75–82
and King Ajātaśatru, 112–122
and Kūṭadanta, 57–73
and Lohitya, 142–149
and Poṭṭhapāda, 123–135, 139–140
and Soṇadaṇḍa, 42–48
and Vāseṭṭha, 95–105
See also Buddha, Dharma, and
Sangha; Gautama; Śākyamuni;
Tathāgata; World-honored One
Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha, 3, 4, 39,
48, 70, 71, 73, 120, 122, 138, 149,
245, 246, 247, 248
See also Three Treasures
buddha land, 153
buddhas, 202, 245, 246, 247, 248
Buddhayaśas, xvii–xviii, xix, xxi
Buddhist(s), xiii, xiv, xv, xvi, xviii, xx,
xxi, xxiv, 71, 306n22
canon/canonical tradition, xiv, xx
Chinese, xviii, xix
communities, xiii, xx, xxiv
cosmology, 151–304
Japanese, xx, xxiv
literature/scriptures/texts, xiv, xvi, xx,
xxi, xxii, xxv
studies, xviii, xxiv
Tripiṭaka, xxi, xxii, xxiv
Buddhist councils, four, xiii–xiv
First Council, xiii
Second Council, xiii
Third Council, xiii, xiv, xv
Fourth Council, xiv, 305n5

313

Index
Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit, xv
See also Sanskrit

C

cakravartin(s), 40, 56, 160, 173–182, 301
See also universal ruler
Campā, King, 301
catalogues/collections, xiii, xv, xvi, xx,
xxi–xxii, xxiv, 306n13
Chu sanzang ji ji (Collection of the
Tripiṭaka Textual Records), xx
Gezhong qinding zhongjing mulu
(Buddhist Canonical Textual Catalogues/Complete Buddhist Tripiṭaka
Library), xxi
Kaiyuan shijiao lu (Kaiyuan Record of
Buddhist Textual Catalogues), xxi
Renshou zhongjing mulu (Renshou
Record of Textual Catalogues), xxi
Sui Kaihuang lidai sanbao ji (Sui
Kaihuang Record of the Threefold
Buddhist Treasures of the Successive Dynasties), xxi
Taishō shinshū daizōkyō (Taishō New
Tripiṭaka Edition), xx
Zhongjing mulu (Comprehensive
Record of the Textual Catalogues), xx
See also scriptures/sutras/texts
causal/causality, xvi, xxiii, 19, 127, 251
aggregate(s)/aggregation, 131, 133,
215, 216, 230
concatenation of sensation/six sense
objects, 16, 18, 21, 31
condition(s), 30, 242
dependence, 124, 125–126
origination/origins, 5, 216
cave(s), 160, 163, 197, 199
Forenoon, 163
Noon, 163
Saptaparvata, 88

314

Chang ahan jing (Canonical Collection
of Lengthy Discourses), xiii, xxi,
xxiii–xxv
categorized in the Taishō shinshū
daizōkyō, xx–xxi
and the Dharmaguptaka school, xix
“Sutra on Buddhist Cosmology,” xv,
xvii, xix, 151–304, 305n8
sutras of, correlated to the Pāli Dīgha
Nikāya suttantas, xv–xvii
See also Dīgha Nikāya; Dīrgha Āgama
Changxiao, 75, 76
See also Kevaddha
China, xiv, xviii, xx, xxiv,
dynasty/period:
Han/Late Han, xiv, xviii
Jing, xxii
Ming, xxii
Northern Song/Song, xxii
Sixteen States, xviii
Sui, xxi
Tang, xviii, xxii
Yuan, xxii
Chinese, xix, xx, xxii, 306nn13, 24, 25, 27
Buddhists, xviii, xix
language, xxiv, xxv, xviii, 162
texts/translations, xv, xx, xxv, 305n4
Citra/Vimalacitra, 269, 270–271, 273–274,
277
See also asura(s)
city(ies)/town(s)/village(s), 33, 34, 40,
49, 50, 51, 55, 57, 75, 93, 94, 96,
97, 134, 141, 142, 163, 175, 177,
216–217, 220–221, 222, 223, 224,
241, 283, 298, 305–306n10
Anupiya, xvii
Bhaya (Heyi), 221
Campā, 33, 34, 35, 41, 42, 298
Chang’an, xviii, xix, xx, xxi, xxiv,
305–306n10, 306n12

Index
Chūḍasudarśana, 220
Icchānaṅkala, 93
Kaṇṇakaṭṭha, 83
Khānumata, 49, 57
Liangzhou, xviii, xx, 305–306n10
Louyang, xviii
Lushan, xix
Nālandā, 75, 76
Pāṭaliputra (Patna), xiv
Rāhvasurin, 216
Rājagṛha (Rājgīr), xiii, 88, 107, 111,
298
Sālavatikā, 141, 148
Śrāvastī, 81, 123, 151
Sudarśana, 220, 223, 224
Tianjing, 221
Vaiśālī (Vesālī), xiii, 163
Vārāṇasī, 298
Xianshangcheng, 220, 221
Zhonggui, 221
clans:
Aśvajit, 301
Campā, 301
Doluopo, 301
Gandhāra, 301
Ikṣvāku, 301
Kaliṅga, 301
Kaṇṇagoccha, 301
Kaulya, 39, 55
Kaurava, 301
Malla, 39, 55
Mithila, 301
Pañcāla, 301
Śākya, 33, 34, 39, 49, 50, 51, 55, 94,
141, 302
Somanā, 39, 55
Uttarakā, 39, 55
Vṛji, 39, 55
class(es), four, 302, 303, 304
See also brāhmaṇa(s); kṣatriya(s);
śūdra(s); vaiśya(s)

commemorative tower(s), xix, 173, 181
commentaries/treatises, xviii, xxiii, xxxii,
306n13
Abhidharmamahāvibhāṣā-śāśtra, xiv,
305n4
Apidamo da pibosha lun, 305n4
Satyasiddhi-śāstra (Cheng shi lun;
Treatise on the Establishment of
Truth), xix
See also scriptures/sutras/texts
Confucian, xviii, xx
contemplation/contemplative recollection, xix, xxiv, 103
country(ies)/region(s), xviii, 10, 41, 49,
50, 51, 57, 58, 59, 60, 67, 68, 69,
102, 103, 108, 109, 110, 156, 172,
174, 175, 178, 182, 241, 242, 249,
250
Aṅga, 33, 34, 35
Bala, 296
Bali, 296
Central Asia(n), xvii, xviii, xix
India, vii, xix
Northern/north-central, xv
Kāśī, 298
Kāśmīra, xiv, xviii, xviii, xix, 305n5
Kauśala, 33, 37, 49, 50, 51, 53, 93, 94,
141
Khotan, xviii, xix
Kuccha (Eastern Turkestan), xviii,
304n10
Kuru, 296
Kurupa, 296
Kuṣāṇa, xiv
Magadha, 3, 37, 53, 120, 121, 306n15
Maṇḍa, 296
Manasākaṭa, 102
Southeast Asia, xiv
Burma, xiv
Indochina, xiv
Thailand, xiv

315

Index
country(ies)/region(s) (continued):
Sri Lanka, xiv
Śveta, 296
Ujuññā, 83
Vidarbha, 305n5
Videha, 296

D

Daduanjie, 301
Dao’an, xx–xxi
Daoist, xviii, xx, xxi
deﬁlement(s), 47, 71, 72, 73, 87, 88, 89,
103, 105, 119, 120, 135, 143, 144,
145, 146, 16, 170, 177, 179, 202,
240, 245, 246, 247, 248, 304, 306n20
ﬁve kinds of, 74, 306n16
inﬂuence of, 252, 253, 254, 255, 256,
257, 264, 267, 268
of passion, 245, 246, 247, 248
Daśaratha, 301
deity(ies), 154, 222, 227
Mālādhāra, 154
Sadāmatta, 155
See also god(s)
delusion, 71, 88, 120, 146, 206
See also desire, hatred, and delusion;
ignorance
demigod(s), 216, 217, 221, 280, 292
Changle, 278
Chihua, 278
See also asura(s); gandharva(s); god(s)
desire(s), 5, 20, 29, 30, 38, 54, 72, 124,
125, 130, 131, 133, 245, 246, 247,
248, 280, 297
carnal/sexual, 5, 124, 177, 234, 298,
306n16
ﬁve kinds of, 99, 120, 122, 287, 293
See also realm(s), desire
desire, hatred, and delusion, 240, 241
devas. See god(s)

316

dhāraṇī. See contemplation/contemplative recollection; magical incantations/spells
Dharma, xvi, 5, 10, 73, 74, 76, 83, 87,
89–90, 91, 105, 120, 121, 122, 131,
132, 139, 141, 142, 146, 147, 148,
149, 206, 228, 245, 246, 247, 248,
288, 293
right, 47, 48, 71, 73, 120, 122, 138, 149,
175, 206, 246, 247, 248, 250, 262,
265, 283
See also Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha
Dharmaguptaka school, xiii, xiv, xv, xix
See also Vinaya, texts, Dharmaguptakavinaya
dhyāna. See meditative absorption, four
states of
Dīgha Nikāya (Lengthy Discourses), xix,
xxv, 305n8
and the Dīrgha Āgama, xiv–xvii
suttantas of, correlated with Dīrgha
Āgama sutras, xv–xvi
and the “Sutra of Buddhist Cosmology”
in the Chang ahan jing, xvi, xix
See also Chang ahan jing; Dīrgha
Āgama; Nikāyas, ﬁvefold
Dīrgha Āgama (Lengthy Discourses),
xiii, xviii
and the Dīgha Nikāya, xiv–xvii
See also Āgamas, four/fourfold;
Chang ahan jing; Dīgha Nikāya
disciple(s), xiii, xix, xxi, 3, 4, 33, 36, 38,
39, 45, 49, 54, 55, 75, 76, 84, 85,
108, 109, 110, 118, 240, 241, 270
path of, 251, 262, 266
saintly, 10, 13, 16, 18, 21, 29, 39, 55,
120, 122, 127, 144, 145, 146, 152,
198, 202, 206, 270, 287, 293
student, 33, 35, 49, 52, 68, 93, 94
See also bhikṣu(s); monk(s); śrāvaka(s)

Index
discipline(s), 78, 84, 87, 88, 103, 270
moral, 4, 5, 6, 46, 288, 293
seven auxiliary, 303
Vinaya, 5, 47, 48, 144, 145, 146
See also practice(s); precept(s)
dragon(s), 152, 207, 208–210
lords/kings:
Aboluo, 210
Alü, 210
Anavatapta, 210
Dechajia, 210
Jiapiluo, 210
Jiatu, 210
Jiejuluo, 210
Nanda, 207
Qujiatu, 210
Sāgaranāgarāja, 207
Sudṛśa, 210
Supratiṣṭhita, 210
Titoulaicha, 210
Upananda, 207
Yinapoluo, 210
Yushanqiebotou, 210
See also nāga(s)
Doluopo, King, 301
Dṛṣhadhanu, 301
Dṛṣharatha (Laoche), 301
Duanjie, 301

E

eightfold noble path, 216
Ekkotarika Āgama (Gradually Increased
Discourses), xv
emptiness, xxi, 250
enlightenment, 34, 35, 47, 50, 51, 78, 94,
141
perfect, 131, 133, 202
eon(s), xiii, 11, 13, 231, 232, 249, 284,
287, 293, 296
evolving and devolving, 11, 12

ﬁnal, 10, 22, 23, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30,
31
initial, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18,
19, 21, 22, 30, 31
major, 201
median, 201
three medium-length, 280–284
eon of famine, 280, 282–283
eon of pestilence, 280, 283–284
eon of warfare, 280–282
evil(s), 5, 6, 9, 29, 45, 84, 113, 162, 198,
199, 202, 203, 234, 281
action(s)/deeds, 198, 199, 202, 203,
206, 302
course of life/destiny/paths, 146, 147,
148, 152, 172, 173, 300
habits, 204, 205, 206
mind, 146, 147, 148
evil ones, 32, 33, 34, 35, 50, 51, 78, 94,
141, 155, 244
See also Māra; Pāpīyas
expediency/expedient means, 6, 116

F

Faxian, xix, 306n12
ﬂower(s), 6, 154, 160, 161, 162, 163,
164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 170, 171,
180, 182, 218, 219, 222, 223, 224,
227, 229, 286–287, 290, 291
bimbā, 229
garland(s), 7, 168, 169, 173, 180
jasmine, 165, 166, 167, 169, 170, 180
jiajiali, 229
mahābimbā, 229
mahāmāndāra, 229
māndāra, 229
shudishajiali, 229
See also lotus(es)/lotus blossom(s);
trees; water lilies
forest(s)/grove(s), 3, 49, 50, 51, 57, 94,
95, 96, 107, 112, 123, 141, 142, 153,

317

Index
forest(s)/grove(s) (continued);
159, 160, 163, 165, 169, 170, 175,
179, 188, 200, 228
Deer Forest, 83
Prince Jeta’s Grove, 81, 123, 151
Pāvārikamba, 75
See also pleasure garden(s)/grove(s);
trees
four guardian gods/princes, xvii, 79, 152,
155, 221–222, 229, 231, 233, 234,
235, 237, 238, 239, 240, 244, 251,
256, 259, 260, 263, 266, 278, 279
Dhṛṭarāṣṭra, 220, 221
Vaiśravaṇa, 220, 221–222
Virūḍhaka, 220, 222
Virūpākṣa, 220, 222
four continents, 152, 182, 199, 255, 256,
257, 261, 262, 264, 267
Aparagodānīya, 156, 230, 231, 233,
234, 242, 291, 295–296
Jambudvīpa, 151, 156, 160, 162, 171,
173, 174, 175, 179, 181, 203, 228,
230, 231, 232, 233, 234, 236, 242–
244, 289, 291, 294, 295, 296
Pūrvavideha, 156, 230, 231, 233, 234,
242–243, 291–292, 295–296
Uttarakuru, 156, 165, 166, 172–173,
230, 231, 233–234, 243, 292,
295–296
See also four quarters of the earth
four immeasurables/four kinds of
immeasurable mind, 68, 103
Four Noble Truths, 73, 131, 133, 230
four quarters of the earth, 40, 56
See also four continents
Fujian, xviii, xx, xxi

G

Gandhāra, King, 301
gandharva(s), 163, 221, 296

318

garuḍa(s), 152, 154, 157, 162, 208–210,
233, 234, 243, 278
Gautama, 5–10, 33–45, 49–52, 54–58,
68, 71, 83–89, 91, 94–96, 98, 102–
103, 123–124, 129–133, 141–142
See also Buddha; Śākyamuni; Tathāgata
god(s), 21, 31, 33–35, 39, 47, 50, 51, 55,
72, 78–80, 94, 96, 114, 133, 141,
155, 174, 221, 222, 224, 227–236,
238–240, 244, 256–257, 269–276,
278–280, 295, 304
Ābhāsvara, 230, 232, 244, 256, 263,
264, 265, 266, 268, 269
Ābhāsvarasmṛti, 257
Akaniṣṭha, 230, 232, 244
Ākāśajñā, 244
Ākāśānantyāyatana, 155, 232
Ākiṃcanajña, 244
Ākiṃcanyāyatana, 155
Anabhraka, 244
Apramāṇa, 244
Apramāṇābha, 244
Apramāṇaśubha, 244
Asaṃjñi, 244
Asaṃjñika, 230
Asaṃjñisattva, 232
Atapa, 230, 232, 244
Avṛha, 230, 232, 244
Bhūmivaśavartin, 230
Brahmā, 14, 15, 80, 251, 252, 256, 257,
263, 284
Brahmagaṇa, 244
Brahmakāyika, 80, 230, 232, 244, 258,
262, 264, 265, 267
Brahmapurohita, 244
Bṛhatphala, 232, 244
heavenly, 58, 81, 175, 182, 206, 269,
270, 280
Mahābrahmā, 244

Index
moon, 182, 293–294, 295
Naivasaṃjñānāsaṃjñāyātana, 155, 244
Nirmāṇarati, 229, 230, 23–232, 233,
234, 237, 244, 251, 252, 256, 258,
263, 264, 267, 279
Paranirmitavaśavartin, 229, 230, 232,
233, 234, 237, 244, 251, 252, 256,
258, 262, 263, 264, 267, 279
Parītta, 244
Parīttābha, 244
Parīttaśubha, 244
Puṇyaprasava, 230
of the stars and constellations, 296
Śubha, 244
Śubhakṛtsna, 230, 232, 244, 264, 266,
268
Sudarśana, 230, 232, 244
Sudṛśa, 230, 232, 244
sun, 182, 287–288
thirty-three/Trāyastriṃśa, 79, 155, 167,
170, 171, 222, 223, 224, 229, 231,
233, 234, 236, 239, 240, 244, 251,
252, 256, 260, 263, 264, 269, 270,
271, 273–279
ten great:
Bala, 228
Dhāra, 228
Indra, 228
Gopaka, 228
Jīva, 228
Lingxidu, 228
Nantou, 228
Pilou, 228
Piloupoti, 228
Wuluo, 228
Tuṣita, 79, 155, 229, 230, 231, 233, 234,
237, 244, 252, 256, 259, 263, 264,
267, 279
Vijñānajña, 244
Vijñānānantyāyatana, 155, 232

Yama, 231, 233, 234, 237, 244, 251,
252, 256, 259, 262, 263, 264, 267,
279
See also Brahmā; deity(ies); four
guardian gods/princes; goddess(es);
Heavens, named; Indra; Śakra
goddess(es):
earth, 245, 246, 247, 248
ﬁre, 247, 248
water, 246, 247, 248
wind, 248
See also god(s)

H

happiness, xvii, 30, 111, 112, 113, 114,
115, 116, 117, 118, 133, 206, 207,
215, 228, 233, 285, 288, 294, 299,
303, 304
heaven(s), xii, 15, 28, 74, 79–80, 83,
172, 203, 204, 205, 206, 210, 221–
222, 229, 231, 233, 234, 235, 236,
237, 250, 251, 261, 273, 279, 282,
284, 285, 287, 293
rebirth in, 72, 146, 147, 148, 245, 246,
247, 248, 281, 284
See also heavenly
Heaven(s), named:
Ābhā, 244
Ābhāsvara, 13, 155, 230, 232, 244, 249,
250, 251, 256, 258, 262, 263, 264,
265, 266, 268, 269, 284, 285, 298
Abṛha, 155
Akaniṣṭha, 155, 230, 232, 244
Ākāśajñā, 244
Ākāśānantyāyatana, 155, 232
Ākiṃcanajña, 244
Ākiṃcanyāyatana, 155
Anabhraka, 155, 244
Apramāṇa, 244
Apramāṇābha, 244
Apramāṇaśubha, 244

319

Index
Heaven(s), named (continued):
Asaṃjñi, 244
Asaṃjñika, 230
Asaṃjñisattva, 155, 232
Atapa, 155, 230, 232, 244
Avṛha, 230, 232, 244
Bhūmivaśavartin, 230
Brahmā, 13, 14, 15, 41, 56, 68, 77, 80,
81, 94, 95, 96–97, 99, 100, 102, 103,
105, 152, 181, 202, 251, 252, 256,
257, 263, 284
Brahmagaṇa, 244
Brahmakāyika, 79–80, 155, 230, 232,
244, 258, 262, 264–265, 267
Brahmapurohita, 244
Bṛhatphala, 155, 232, 244, 250, 266,
268
Mahābrahmā, 244
Naivasaṃjñānāsaṃjñāyātana, 155, 244
Nirmāṇarati, 79, 152, 155, 229, 230,
231–232, 233, 234, 237, 244, 251,
252, 256, 258, 263, 264, 267, 279
Paranirmitavaśavartin, 79, 152, 155,
229, 230, 232, 233, 234, 237, 244,
251, 252, 256, 258, 262, 263, 264,
267, 279
Parītta, 244
Parīttābha, 244
Parīttaśubha, 244
Puṇyaprasava, 155, 230
Śubha, 244
Śubhakṛtsna, 155, 230, 232, 244, 250,
263, 264, 265, 266, 268
Sudarśana, 155, 230, 232, 244
Sudṛśa, 155, 230, 232, 244
Trāyastriṃśa, xvii, 79, 152, 157, 167,
170, 171, 222, 229, 231, 233, 236,
239, 240, 244, 251, 252, 256, 260,
263, 269, 270, 271, 273–279
Tuṣita, 79, 152, 155, 229, 230, 231,

320

233, 234, 237, 244, 252, 256, 259,
263, 264, 267, 279
Vijñānajña, 244
Vijñānānantyāyatana, 155, 232
Yama, 79, 152, 231, 233, 234, 237, 244,
251, 252, 256, 259, 262, 263, 264,
267, 279
heavenly, 14, 13, 174, 204, 205
beings/spirits, 229, 285, 287, 293
body/bodies, 97, 98, 128, 129, 135,
136–137, 138
consciousness, 235, 236
domain/realm/world(s), 173, 235, 264,
283
ﬂavor/tastes, 233, 235
fragrance(s), 167, 170
garment, 163, 165, 166, 168, 170, 180,
224, 225, 287, 293, 297
gold, 225, 286
Bhadra, 225
Subhadra, 225
maidens, 236
messenger(s), 204, 205, 206
path of, 262, 266
radiance, 40, 56
silver, 292
treasures, seven, 163
See also god(s), heavenly; heaven(s)
hell(s), xvii, 83, 152, 182–207, 282
eight great, 183
Black Rope, 183, 190–191, 198, 199
Compression, 183, 191–192, 199
Conscious Recovery, 183–184, 198,
199
Fiery Heat, 183, 194–195, 199
Great Fiery Heat, 183, 196–197, 199
Great Screaming, 183, 193–194, 199
Screaming, 183, 193, 199
Unremitting Suffering, 183, 197–198,
199

Index
realm(s), 251, 263, 266
sixteen smaller, 183
Axes and Hatchets, 183, 189
Black Sands, 183, 184, 191, 192,
193, 194, 195, 197, 198
Bladed Trees, 183, 189–190
Blood and Pus, 183, 187
Boiling Excrement, 183, 184–185
Cold and Icy, 183, 190, 191, 192,
193, 194, 195, 197, 198
Copper Cauldron, 183, 186
Copper Cauldrons, 183, 186
Fire Tending, 183, 187
Five Hundred Nailings, 183, 185
Grindstone, 183, 186–187
Iron Fetters, 183, 189
River of Ashes, 183, 187–188
Starvation, 183, 185
Thirst, 183, 185–186
Wolf Pack, 183, 189
Padma, 202
heretic(s)/heretical, 30, 241
See also Hindu; non-Buddhist
hill(s)/hillock(s), 76, 88, 153, 160, 200,
215, 277, 281
seven, 163, 296
Baihe, 296
Chanshan, 296
Gaoshan, 296
Luotu, 296
Shougong, 296
Tushan, 296
Xianshan, 296
See also mound(s); mountain(s)
Hinayana, xiv, xv, xx, xxi, xxii, xxiv
See also Theravāda
Hindu, xiv, xvi
literary works, Purāṇas and Śāstras,
305n5
See also heretic(s)/heretical; nonBuddhist; Vedas

householder(s), 8, 33, 34, 40, 41, 42, 47,
49,50, 56, 57, 75, 76, 77, 78, 173,
177–178, 181, 182, 302
See also lay, devotee(s); vaiśya(s)
Huibian, xix
Huiyüen, xix
hungry ghost(s), 231, 243, 244, 251, 266
realm, 251, 263, 266

I

ignorance, 48, 71, 78, 88, 120, 146, 206
See also delusion
Ikṣvāku, King, 301–302
impermanence, 15, 128, 135, 232
Indian (language), 173, 306n23
See also Sanskrit
Indra, xvi, 224, 227, 228, 240, 271
See also Śakra
insect(s), 166, 178, 281
bees/hornets, 170, 179, 281
ﬂeas/lice, 170
ﬂies/gadﬂies/horseﬂies, 85, 166, 170,
179, 281
grubs, 170, 179
mosquitoes, 166, 170, 179
See also animal(s)/creature(s)
Īśvara, 96

J

Jātūkarṇya Vyāsa, 305n5
Jingji, 301
Jīvaka, Prince, 107, 110–112, 121, 122

K

Kaliṅga, King, 301
kalpa. See eon
Kalyāṇa-jātika, xvii
kāmadhātu. See realm(s), desire
Kaniṣka, King, xiv, 305n4
Kaṇṇagoccha, King, 301
Kakuda-katyāyana, 109, 116

321

Index
Kāśyapa, 83–85, 86–88, 89–92, 96
Kaukālika, 202
Kaurava, King, 301
Khuddaka Nikāya (Short Discourses), xv
See also Nikāyas, ﬁvefold
kṣatriya(s), 38, 54, 58, 61, 62–69, 97,
114, 115, 116, 118, 134, 174, 288,
294, 302–303, 304
See also class(es), four
Kula, King, 302
Kumārajīva, xviii, xix, xx–xxi,
305–306n10
kumbhāṇḍa, 222
Kūṭadanta, 39, 49–53, 57, 58, 65, 66, 68–
74

L

lake(s), 160–162, 164, 166, 168, 169, 171,
218, 253, 290–291
Anavatapta, 160, 161–162, 164, 166,
180, 253
Sifangyan, 253
Sudarśana, 168, 169, 171, 253
Udyāna, 160
Upananda, 218, 219
See also pond(s)
lay:
brāhmaṇas, 123
devotee(s)s, 48, 71, 73, 88, 120, 122,
138, 149, 245, 246, 247, 248
ordination, 39, 55
See also householder(s); laywoman
laywoman, 87
lion’s roar, 89–90
lion throne, 112
Lohitya, 141–149
Lotus Association, xix
lotus(es)/lotus blossom(s), 160, 221, 26,
227, 297
blue, 177, 201, 221, 226

322

pink, 160
red, 160, 221, 226
yellow, 221, 226
white, 160, 221, 226
See also ﬂower(s); water lilies
lotus posture, 76
Lüguang, General, xviii, 305–306n10

M

Madhyama Āgama (Middle-length Discourses), xv
See also Āgamas, four/fourfold;
Majjhima Nikāya
Madhyamaka, xxiii
magic/magical, 76, 77
Gāndhārī, 77
gem, 167, 170
incantations/spells, 9
Mahāratnākara, 297
Mahāsammata, 297
Mahāsudarśana, 298
Mahayana, xvi, xxiii
sutras/texts, xx–xxiv
Tripiṭaka, xv, xix, xx–xxi, xxiv
Majjhima Nikāya (Middle-length Discourses), xv
See also Nikāyas, ﬁvefold; Madhyama
Āgama
Maṇḍikā, 110
Māra, 155
See also evil ones; Pāpīyas
Maskarin Gośālīputra, 108, 115, 306n18
Maudgalyāyana, 202
meditation, 15, 112, 133, 152, 302
meditative absorption, four states of, 29–
30, 87, 103
ﬁrst, 29, 125
fourth, 30, 47, 125, 266
second, 29, 125, 251, 284
third, 29, 125, 262, 263

Index
mendicant, three robes of, 47, 68, 78, 90,
119, 143, 144, 145, 206, 302, 303
See also robe(s); śramaṇa(s)
Miaomi, 301
mindful/mindfulness, 29, 78, 120, 125,
135, 146, 266
concentrated/of one’s point of observation, 17, 47, 48, 203
Miti, 301
Mithila, King, 301
monk(s), xiii, xiv, xix, 119
See also bhikṣu(s); disciple(s); śramaṇa(s); śravaka(s)
mound(s), 219, 222, 227, 260, 261
cemetery, 115, 205, 241
stone, 225
Anusudarśana (Shunshanjian), 225
Bhadra, 225, 227
Dina, 225
Mahāsukha (Taxi), 225
Subhadra, 225, 227
Sudarśana (Shanjian), 225
Sudina, 225
Sukha (Xi), 225
See also hill(s)/hillock(s); mountain(s)
mountain(s, 100, 152, 153, 155, 157–159,
160, 163, 165, 166, 191, 196, 200,
241, 255, 256, 259, 260–261, 262,
264, 267, 281–282, 289–290, 302
Fragrant Mountain, 163
Himalaya/Snow Mountain, 160, 163
Jingangwei, 158–159
Mount Abanni, 260
Mount Binito, 261
Mount Jinganglun, 261, 290, 291
Mount Khadira, 207, 260, 289, 290
Mount Mashi, 158
Mount Dajinganglun, 261
Mount Diaofu, 158, 159, 261, 289, 290,
291

N

Mount Masi, 289
Mount Massu, 291
Mount Milin, 260–261
Mount Nimi, 289
Mount Nimin/Nimintoluo, 158, 289,
291
Mount Qu/Qutoluo, 157
Mount Shuchen/Shuchentoluo, 157,
158, 260
Mount Shuti, 289, 290, 291
Mount Sudarśana, 158
Mount Sudṛśa, 289, 291
Mount Sumeru, 152, 153, 154, 155,
156, 157, 200, 207, 216, 220, 222,
230, 252, 253, 255, 256, 257, 259,
260, 261, 262, 264, 267, 277, 278,
279, 285, 286, 289, 290
Mount Yisha/Yishatoluo, 157, 260,
289, 290
Mount Youzhan, 160
Suvarṇavarṇa (“Golden Wall”), 160

nāga(s), 157, 207–208, 222, 231, 233,
234, 243, 277–278
lord/king, 157, 162, 171, 180, 207,
224, 227
Irāpatra, 224, 227
Nanda, 277
Upananda, 277
See also dragon(s)
Nikāyas, ﬁvefold, xiv–xv
See also Aṅguttara Nikāya; Dīgha
Nikāya; Khuddaka Nikāya;
Majjhima Nikāya; Saṃyutta Nikāya
Nikula, King, 302
Nirgrantha Jñātiputra, 110, 117
nirvana, 29–30, 31, 131, 133, 305n4
ﬁnal, 74, 90, 91, 207
non-Buddhist, xvi, 306n13
See also heretic(s)/heretical; Hindu

323

Index
nonreturner, 126, 146
See also anāgāmin
non-self, 270
See also self/selfhood
Numata, Dr. Yehan, xxiv
Nyagrodha, 88

O

offering(s), 39, 40, 55, 69, 70, 72, 88, 89,
90, 97, 98, 108, 109, 110, 175, 182,
281
omniscient, 13, 14, 284
once-returner, 146

P

Pāli, xiv, xv, xvi, xix, xxiv, xxv, 29, 38,
83, 96, 306nn15, 17, 18, 21
See also Sanskrit
Pali Text Society, xxv
Pañcāla, King, 301
Pāpīyas, 244
See also evil ones; Māra
Paramārtha/Paramount Pavilion/Pavilion
of the Supreme Victor, 276
parinirvāṇa. See nirvana, ﬁnal
path(s), 38, 40, 54, 56, 68, 75–78, 85, 90,
91, 94–98, 102, 113–119, 124, 143,
230, 251, 262, 266, 273, 302, 303,
306n22
of austerity/renunciation, 40, 47, 56,
100
authentic/right/ultimate, 8, 9 10, 245,
246, 247, 248
of Brahmā/to Brahmā Heaven, 95, 96,
103, 251, 262, 266
to the cessation/of liberation from
suffering, 73, 131, 133, 215, 216,
230, 245, 246, 248
of disciples, 251, 262, 266
of distancing oneself from both pleasure
and suffering, 245, 246, 247, 248

324

evil/false, 8, 9, 10, 152
of heaven, 251, 262, 266
of transcendence out of this world, 252,
253, 254, 255, 256, 257, 264, 267,
268
See also eightfold noble path
Pāyāsi, xvi
pleasure garden(s)/grove(s), 7, 154, 162,
164, 165, 169–171, 179, 182, 222,
224, 225, 226, 227, 236, 287
Abhilāṣa, 217, 218, 219
Citraprīti, 225, 227, 228
Cuse, 225, 227, 228
Denghua, 171
Jiapiyantou, 221
Mahāsudarśana, 171
Mahāsukha, 225, 226, 227, 228
Śāla, 217, 218, 219
Saṃsarga, 225, 226, 227, 228
Śobhanatara, 217, 218, 219
Sudarśana, 169, 171
Yāma, 217, 218, 219
Yuluo, 171
See also forest(s)/grove(s)
Poluosuntuo, 96
pond(s) 7, 31, 41, 49, 154, 160, 161, 162,
163, 164–165, 182, 221, 224, 226,
227, 236, 253, 287, 288, 294
Motuoyan, 163, 164, 166
Nalinni, 221
Nanda, 225, 227
Queen Gaggarā’s, 33, 34, 35, 41, 42
See also lake(s)
Poṭṭhapāda, 123–135, 139–140
practice(s), xvi, xvii, xviii, xxiii, xxv, 14,
15, 20, 22, 38, 40, 47, 54, 56, 71, 72,
73, 78, 85, 86, 90, 97, 98, 100, 103,
116, 151–152, 172, 212, 230, 302
ascetic/of austerity, 5, 34, 35, 47, 50,
51, 68, 78, 83, 85, 86, 87, 88, 90,
91–92, 95, 113, 124, 130, 131, 133,

Index
139–140, 142, 143, 144, 145, 206,
210, 242, 243, 303, 304
attachment to, 306n16
defective/wrong, 100, 302
of equanimity, 119
of the four immeasurable minds, 68,
103
harmonious, 299, 304
leading to meditative states of absorption, 251, 252, 266
of non-harm, 38, 55
of patience, 273
prescribed/right, 22, 85
of silent introspection and analysis of
doctrine, 151–152
of the threefold sacriﬁcial rite, 68
transcendent, 270
See also discipline(s); meditation
Prasenajit, King, 33, 37, 39, 49, 53, 55,
141, 147
precept(s), 5, 38, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 54,
173, 237, 238, 239, 240, 288, 294
ﬁve, 39, 48, 55, 70, 71, 73, 306n22
Vinaya, 47, 48, 144, 145, 146
See also discipline(s), moral; Vinaya
psychophysical elements, xix, 232, 252,
253, 254, 255, 256, 257, 264, 267,
268
ﬁve, 156
Purāṇa Kāśyapa, 108, 113
Pure Land, xix
Puṣkarasvādi, 39, 55, 93, 94, 95

Q

quiescence, 13, 16, 18, 21, 88, 131, 133

R

Rāhu/Rāhvasurin, King, 219–220, 277
See also asura(s)
Rāhula, 302
Ratna, 301

Ratnākara, 301
realm(s), 68, 125, 156, 251, 263, 266,
270, 283, 304
of desire, 28, 74, 128, 129, 135, 136,
137, 138, 244
of form, 28, 129, 135, 136, 137, 138,
244
formless, 28, 129, 135, 136, 137, 138,
233, 244
of inﬁnite consciousness, 28, 126,
129, 135, 136, 137
of inﬁnite space, 28, 125, 126, 129,
135, 136, 137
of neither thought nor nonthought,
28, 126, 129, 135, 136, 137, 138
of nothingness, 28, 126, 127, 135,
136, 137, 138
rebirth, 46, 73, 92, 206, 210, 233, 281, 282
in heaven, 72, 146, 147, 245, 246, 247,
248
in the Pure Land, xix
See also birth
rite(s), 89, 99, 109, 181
sacriﬁcial, 33, 36, 37, 43, 49, 51–52,
53, 57–60, 62–64, 65–72, 83, 93,
94, 114, 141
river(s), 72, 76, 99, 100, 114, 165, 166,
168–169, 188, 200, 241, 253, 291,
292, 293
Aciravatī, 99, 253
Amoqie, 253
Ganges, 114, 162, 253
Guangying, 169
Gushe, 253
Indus, 162
Miaomi, 169
Miaoti, 169
Pochache, 162
Poluo, 253
Shandao, 162, 168
Sindhu, 253

325

Index
river(s) (continued):
Situohe, 162
Yamunā, 253
Yangzi, xviii
robe(s), 6, 302, 303
outer, 32, 72, 121, 123, 142
three, ix, 14, 15, 21, 47, 68, 78, 90, 119,
143, 144, 145, 206, 303
See also mendicant, three robes of
rūpadhātu. See realm(s), of form

S

Śakra, 227, 228, 239, 240, 269, 270,
271–275, 276, 279–280
See also Indra
sakṛdāgāmin. See once-returner
sage(s), 34, 35, 50, 51, 95, 96–97, 142,
262, 296
Śākyamuni, xiii, xvi, xix, xxiii–xxiv, xxv
See also Bodhisattva; Buddha; clan(s),
Śākya; Gautama
Saṃyukta Āgama (Mixed Discourses), xv
See also Āgamas, four/fourfold;
Saṃyutta Nikāya
Saṃyutta Nikāya (Mixed Discourses), xv,
306n12
See also Nikāyas, ﬁvefold; Saṃyukta
Āgama
Sandhāna, xvi
sangha, xx, 5, 41, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 79,
91, 121
See also Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha
Sañjayī Vairaṭṭiputra, 110, 116
Sanskrit, xiv, xv, xxiv, xxv, 305n4, 306n21
See also Indian (language); Pāli
Saptaparṇa Hall, 269, 270
Śāriputra, 202
śāstra. See commentaries/treatises
Śatadhanu, 301
Śatajña, 301
Śataratha, 301

326

self/selfhood, 11–18, 23–26, 82, 89, 96,
123, 124, 125, 128–129, 130,
131–133, 211–213, 270, 283, 306n16
See also non-self
Sengyou, xx, xxi
Sengzhao, xxi, xxiv, xxv
sensation(s), 13, 16, 18, 20, 21, 30, 31,
126, 127, 171, 181, 270
See also sense(s)
sense(s), 31, 99, 118, 224, 228
faculties, six, 128, 134, 135, 136, 137,
138
ﬁve, 29, 40, 56, 58, 98, 120, 122, 227,
228, 269
object(s), 31, 99
scriptures/sutras/texts, xiii– xvii, xix, xxi,
xxii–xxv, 7, 32, 45, 82, 305nn4, 8;
306nn12, 15
astronomical, 9
brāhmaṇa/non-Buddhist, 33, 36, 43,
49, 52, 61, 64, 93, 141, 306n13
categories, ninefold/twelvefold, 305n2
esoteric, xxiii
Hinayana, xxii, xxiii
Mahayana, xxii, xxiii
Prajñāpāramitā/Wisdom, xx, xxi, xxiii,
xxiv
See also catalogues/collections; commentaries/treatises; Sutra, Vinaya,
and Abhidharma; Vinaya, texts
scriptures/sutras/texts, named:
Daśabhūmika-sūtra (Sutra on the Ten
Stages of the Bodhisattva Career),
xviii
Dīpavaṃsa, 305n3
Mahāparinirvāṇa-sūtra, 306n12
Mahāprajñāpāramitā-sūtra, xxiv
Mahāsaṃnipāta-sūtra (Great Collection Sutra), xxiii
Mahāvaṃsa, 305n3

Index
Xukongyun pusa jing (Ākāśagarbhasūtra; Sutra on Ākāśagarbha Bodhisattva), xx
Shansi, 301
Shanyü, 301
Shanyue, 301
Shemoli, 277
See also asura(s)
Shentian, 301
Shiyü, 301
Shouzhi, 96
Shuixian, 301
Siṃhahanu, King, 302
skandhas. See psychophysical elements
Soṇadaṇḍa, 33–35, 37, 41–42, 43–46, 48
spirit(s), 6, 9, 39, 40, 55, 56, 114, 124,
223, 228, 241, 242, 280, 283, 287,
293
ancestral, 204, 205
ﬁve great, 222
Daṇḍala, 222
Dīpaṃkara, 222
Hemabhadra, 222
Pañcāla, 222
Xiuyilumo, 222
guardian, 241–242
Manda, 228
śramaṇa(s), xvii, xviii, xix, 6–31, 34, 35,
47, 50, 51, 78, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88,
94, 100, 107–114, 117, 118, 119,
120, 123, 131, 133, 134, 135, 141,
142, 143, 146, 147, 173, 204, 205,
211, 215, 237, 238, 239, 240, 287,
293, 302–303
See also ascetic(s); bhikṣu(s); monk(s)
śrāvakas, 270
See also bhikṣu(s); disciple(s); monk(s)
śrāvakayāna. See disciple(s), path of
srotaāpanna. See stream-enterer
Sthāvira/Sthāvira-Sarvāstivāda school,
xiii, xiv, xv

stream-enterer, 146
stupa. See commemorative tower(s)
Sucarita, 301
Sudarśana, 301
Śuddhodana, King, 302
Sudharma Hall, 224, 225, 227, 228, 239,
269, 270, 271, 279
See also heaven(s), Trāyastriṃśa
śūdra(s), 97, 134, 302, 303
See also class(es), four
Suniddha, 108
supernormal blessings, 173, 181
supernormal knowledge, three kinds of,
88, 120, 146, 306n20
supernormal power(s), 3, 4, 19, 42, 75, 76,
77, 78, 95, 134, 151, 277, 284, 285
three kinds of, 48, 71, 76, 78, 79
Sukamāṇavatodeyya, 39, 55
Suppiya, 3–4
Surasa, 301
Sutra, Vinaya, and Abhidharma, xx, 305n2
See also Abhidharma; Tripiṭaka; Vinaya
Swift and Urgent, 287, 293
See also god(s), moon, sun

T

Tathāgata, 3, 4, 6, 10, 12, 13, 16, 18, 21,
22, 31, 33, 34, 35, 41, 46, 47, 49,
57, 69, 71, 81, 87, 89–90, 94, 103–
104, 119, 121, 124, 130, 131–132,
133, 146, 152, 202, 206, 304
See also Buddha; World-honored One
ten kinds of unwholesome behavior, 281,
282
ten kinds of wholesome behavior/ten
norms of conduct, 65–66, 172, 173,
181, 242, 250, 262, 265, 281, 283,
288, 294
ten supreme titles, of Buddha/Tathāgata,
33, 34, 35, 49, 50, 51, 78, 94, 124,
141

327

Index
Theravāda, xiv, xv
See also Hinayana
Thousand Lights, 287, 288, 294
See also god(s), moon, sun
three ancient collections of hymns. See
Vedas
Three Treasures, 39, 55, 72
See also Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha
Tibetan (language), xxiv, 305n4
Tipiṭaka. See Tripiṭaka
transcendental insight, 38, 54
treasure(s), 37, 53, 58, 59, 60, 61, 63, 66,
67, 154, 160, 177–178, 179, 286
seven kinds of, 157, 158, 159, 160,
161, 163, 164, 166, 168, 169, 170,
207, 208, 217, 218, 220, 221, 223–
224, 25, 226, 227, 258, 259, 260,
261, 265, 268, 269, 280, 286, 287,
289–290, 292, 293
seven, of a cakravartin/universal ruler,
173–174, 175–179, 182
dark blue horse, 173, 176, 182
divine gem, 173, 176–177
gentleman householder, 173, 177–
178, 181, 182
golden wheel, 173, 174–176
jadelike queen, 173, 177, 181
military commander, 173, 178–179,
181, 182
white elephant, 173, 176, 182
tree(s), 31, 49, 152, 153, 154, 155,
156–157, 159–160, 161, 162,
163–164, 165, 166, 167–168, 169,
170, 171–172, 175, 178, 180, 181,
182, 188, 190, 200, 203, 207, 208,
215, 216, 217, 218, 220, 221, 224,
226, 228, 229, 236, 241, 252, 257,
276, 281, 286, 292, 296, 302
amolei, 159
anpoluo, 275–276
anshilin, 159

328

bamboo, 157, 158, 159
bonapoluo, 159
campaka/sandalwood, 159, 229
duoluoli, 160
grape, 160
helilei, 159
Jambu, 156, 159, 295, 296
jiaya, 160
Jielanfou, 156
jietuo, 160
Jinti, 156
Julishanpoluo, 157
kūṭaśālmali, 207, 208–210
mango/Mango, 107, 156, 159, 168
mokṣaka, 229
na, 159
nadoluo, 159
nannü, 159
Pārijāta, 218, 219, 226, 227, 228
pātalī, 229
piluo, 159
pine, 157, 158, 159
pixilei, 159
poluoluo, 160
poshi, 160
quchouoluo, 159
qugong, 167, 170
śāla, 141, 159, 163, 165
sanna, 159
made of seven kinds of treasure, 222–
224, 225, 226–228, 286–287, 292
Shanhua, 157
Shanju, 163, 164, 165
śiṃśapā, 49
sumanā, 229
tāla, 31, 159, 161, 254
tongnü, 229
vārṣika, 229
weigan, 159
weili, 159
weinan, 159

Index
weinü, 159
xiangna, 159
xiumona, 160
yenpo, 159
zhanpo, 160
Zhoudu, 157, 228
Tripiṭaka, xiii, xiv, xv, xix, xx–xxiv,
303nn2, 4

U

Udāyibhadra, Crown Prince, 112
Udāyin, 110
universal ruler, xvi, xvii, 160, 173–174,
179
See also cakravartin

V

vaiśya(s), 97, 134, 302, 303
See also class(es), four; householder(s)
Vaiśyamitra, 96
Vāmaka, 96
Vāmadeva, 96
Varṣakāra, 108
Vāseṭṭha, 93, 94–105
Vedas, 33, 36, 43, 49, 52, 61, 64, 93–94,
96–102, 141
Vidmisāra, King, 120, 121, 306nn17, 21
See also Bimbisāra, King
view(s), 3, 4, 10–19, 21–23, 25, 26,
28–32, 123, 128, 129–133, 211, 212,
213, 215
common/worldly, 16, 18, 19, 22
eternalist, 11, 12, 13, 16, 18
evil/mistaken/wrong, 66, 143, 172,
175, 199, 210, 241, 242, 245, 246,
247, 248, 250, 283, 288, 294
right, 66, 181, 242, 283
Vinaya, xiii, xxi, 5, 47, 48, 144, 145, 146,
305n2
texts, xvii–xix, xxii, xxiii, xxiv, 47,
306n13

Daśabhāṇavāra-vinaya, xviii
Dharmaguptaka-vinaya (Sifen lü/Vinaya in Four Divisions), xviii–xix
Mahāsāṃghika-vinaya, 306n12
See also Sutra, Vinaya, and Abhidharma

W

water lilies, 157, 158, 159, 161, 164,
229, 290
blue/utpala, 157, 161, 164, 229, 290
pink/padma, 157, 229, 290
red/kumuda, 157, 161, 164, 229, 290
sugandha, 229, 290
white/puṇḍarīka, 157, 161, 164, 229,
290
yellow, 161, 164
See also ﬂower(s); lotus(es)/lotus
blossom(s)
world(s), 5, 11–19, 21–23, 25–27, 30, 31,
46, 71, 74, 78, 80, 87, 94, 95–98,
103, 114, 119, 124, 130–133, 146,
151, 152, 173, 174, 180–200, 206,
210–213, 232, 236–240, 250–257,
262–268, 276, 281, 283–285, 287,
293, 295, 298, 299
heavenly, 235, 264
human, 14, 15, 21, 89, 174, 237–240,
251, 263, 266, 298
World-honored One, 3–4, 42, 44–45, 46,
57, 58, 69, 72–73, 75, 81, 82, 83,
95, 112–113, 115–122, 123–124,
127, 131, 132, 136, 138, 142–143,
146 149, 151–152, 198, 205, 208,
214, 215, 290, 292
See also Buddha; Tathāgata
worldly, 38, 40, 54, 56, 302, 303
mentality/views, 19, 78, 120, 146
Wuluopo, King, 302

X

Xuanzang, xiv, xxiv, 305n4

329

Index

Y

yakṣa(s), 165
Yamataggi, 96
Yangmu, 301
Yaoxing, xviii, xix, xx, xxi, 305–306n10
Yili, 301
Yogācāra, xxii

330

Z

Zhexing, 301
Zhi Faling, xix
Zhisheng, 301
Zhouzhu, 301
Zhu Fonian, xviii

BDK English Tripiṭaka
(First Series)

Title

Abbreviations
Ch.: Chinese
Skt.: Sanskrit
Jp.: Japanese
Eng.: Published title

Ch. Chang ahan jing (長阿含經)
Skt. Dīrghāgama
Eng. The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses
(Volume I, 2015)
The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses
(Volume II, 2016)
The Canonical Book of the Buddha’s Lengthy Discourses
(Volume III, 2018)

Taishō No.

Ch. Zhong ahan jing (中阿含經)
Skt. Madhyamāgama
Eng. The Madhyama Āgama (Middle-length Discourses),
(Volume I, 2013)

1

26

Ch. Dasheng bensheng xindi guan jing (大乘本生心地觀經)

159

Ch. Zabao zang jing (雜寶藏經)
Eng. The Storehouse of Sundry Valuables (1994)

203

Ch. Xiaopin banruo boluomi jing (小品般若波羅蜜經)
Skt. Aṣṭasāhasrikā-prajñāpāramitā-sutra

227

Ch. Fo suoxing zan (佛所行讃)
Skt. Buddhacarita
Eng. Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts (2009)

Ch. Faju piyu jing (法句譬喩經)
Eng. The Scriptural Text: Verses of the Doctrine, with Parables (1999)

331

192

211

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Jingang banruo boluomi jing (金剛般若波羅蜜經)
Skt. Vajracchedikā-prajñāpāramitā-sutra

Taishō No.

Ch. Daluo jingang bukong zhenshi sanmoye jing
(大樂金剛不空眞實三麼耶經)
Skt. Adhyardhaśatikā-prajñāpāramitā-sutra
Eng. The Sutra of the Vow of Fulﬁlling the Great Perpetual
Enjoyment and Beneﬁting All Sentient Beings Without
Exception (in Esoteric Texts, 2015)

235

243

Ch. Renwang banruo boluomi jing (仁王般若波羅蜜經)
Skt. *Kāruṇikārājā-prajñāpāramitā-sutra

245

Ch. Miaofa lianhua jing (妙法蓮華經)
Skt. Saddharmapuṇḍarīka-sutra
Eng. The Lotus Sutra (Revised Second Edition, 2007)

262

Ch. Guan Puxian pusa xingfa jing (觀普賢菩薩行法經)
Eng. The Sutra Expounded by the Buddha on Practice of the Way
through Contemplation of the Bodhisattva All-embracing
Goodness (in Tiantai Lotus Texts, 2013)

277

Ch. Banruo boluomiduo xin jing (般若波羅蜜多心經)
Skt. Prajñāpāramitāhṛdaya-sutra

251

Ch. Wuliangyi jing (無量義經)
Eng. The Inﬁnite Meanings Sutra (in Tiantai Lotus Texts, 2013)

276

Ch. Dafangguang fo huayan jing (大方廣佛華嚴經)
Skt. Avataṃsaka-sutra

279

Ch. Shengman shizihou yisheng defang bianfang guang jing
(勝鬘師子吼一乘大方便方廣經)
Skt. Śrīmālādevīsiṃhanāda-sutra
Eng. The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of the Lion’s Roar (2004)

353

Ch. Guan wuliangshou fo jing (觀無量壽佛經)
Skt. *Amitāyurdhyāna-sutra
Eng. The Sutra on Contemplation of Amitāyus
(in The Three Pure Land Sutras, Revised Second Edition, 2003)

365

Ch. Wuliangshou jing (無量壽經)
Skt. Sukhāvatīvyūha
Eng. The Larger Sutra on Amitāyus (in The Three Pure Land Sutras,
Revised Second Edition, 2003)

332

360

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Taishō No.

Ch. Amituo jing (阿彌陀經)
Skt. Sukhāvatīvyūha
Eng. The Smaller Sutra on Amitāyus (in The Three Pure Land Sutras,
Revised Second Edition, 2003)

366

Ch. Fochuibo niepan lüeshuo jiaojie jing (佛垂般涅槃略説教誡經)
Eng. The Bequeathed Teaching Sutra (in Apocryphal Scriptures, 2005)

389

Ch. Da banniepan jing (大般涅槃經)
Skt. Mahāparinirvana-sutra
Eng. The Nirvana Sutra (Volume I, 2013)

374

Ch. Dizang pusa benyuan jing (地藏菩薩本願經)
Skt. *Kṣitigarbhapraṇidhāna-sutra

412

Ch. Yaoshi liuli guang rulai benyuan gongde jing
(藥師琉璃光如來本願功徳經)
Skt. Bhaiṣajyaguru-vaiḍūrya-prabhāsa-pūrvapraṇidhāna-viśeṣavistara

450

Ch. Wenshushili wen jing (文殊師利問經)
Skt. *Mañjuśrīparipṛcchā
Eng. The Sutra of Mañjuśrī’s Questions (2016)

468

Ch. Banzhou sanmei jing (般舟三昧經)
Skt. Pratyutpanna-buddhasammukhāvasthita-samādhi-sutra
Eng. The Pratyutpanna Samādhi Sutra (1998)

Ch. Mile xiasheng chengfo jing (彌勒下生成佛經)
Skt. *Maitreyavyākaraṇa
Eng. The Sutra that Expounds the Descent of Maitreya Buddha
and His Enlightenment (2016)

Ch. Weimojie suoshuo jing (維摩詰所説經)
Skt. Vimalakīrtinirdeśa-sutra
Eng. The Vimalakīrti Sutra (2004)

418

454

475

Ch. Yueshangnü jing (月上女經)
Skt. Candrottarādārikā-paripṛcchā

480

Ch. Damoduoluo chan jing (達磨多羅禪經)

618

Ch. Zuochan sanmei jing (坐禪三昧經)
Eng. The Sutra on the Concentration of Sitting Meditation (2009)

614

Ch. Yuedeng sanmei jing (月燈三昧經)
Skt. Samādhirāja-candrapradīpa-sutra

639

333

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Shoulengyan sanmei jing (首楞嚴三昧經)
Skt. Śūraṅgamasamādhi-sutra
Eng. The Śūraṅgama Samādhi Sutra (1998)

Taishō No.
642

Ch. Jinguang ming zuishengwang jing (金光明最勝王經)
Skt. Suvarṇaprabhāsa-sutra

665

Ch. Jie shenmi jing (解深密經)
Skt. Saṃdhinirmocana-sutra
Eng. The Scripture on the Explication of Underlying Meaning (2000)

676

Ch. Sishierzhang jing (四十二章經)
Eng. The Sutra of Forty-two Sections (in Apocryphal Scriptures, 2005)

784

Ch. Dasheng rulengqie jing (大乘入楞伽經)
Skt. Laṅkāvatāra-sutra

672

Ch. Yulanpen jing (盂蘭盆經)
Skt. *Ullambana-sutra
Eng. The Ullambana Sutra (in Apocryphal Scriptures, 2005)

685

Ch. Dafangguang yuanjue xiuduoluo liaoyi jing
(大方廣圓覺修多羅了義經)
Eng. The Sutra of Perfect Enlightenment
(in Apocryphal Scriptures, 2005)

842

Ch. Da Biluzhena chengfo shenbian jiachi jing
848
(大毘盧遮那成佛神變加持經)
Skt. Mahāvairocanābhisambodhi-vikurvitādhiṣṭhāna-vaipulyasūtrendrarājanāma-dharmaparyāya
Eng. The Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi Sutra (2005)

Ch. Jinggangding yiqie rulai zhenshi she dasheng xianzheng dajiao
865
wang jing (金剛頂一切如來眞實攝大乘現證大教王經)
Skt. Sarvatathāgata-tattvasaṃgraha-mahāyānā-bhisamaya-mahākalparāja
Eng. The Adamantine Pinnacle Sutra (in Two Esoteric Sutras, 2001)

Ch. Suxidi jieluo jing (蘇悉地羯囉經)
Skt. Susiddhikara-mahātantra-sādhanopāyika-paṭala
Eng. The Susiddhikara Sutra (in Two Esoteric Sutras, 2001)
Ch. Modengqie jing (摩登伽經)
Skt. *Mātaṅgī-sutra
Eng. The Mātaṅga Sutra (in Esoteric Texts, 2015)

334

893

1300

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Mohe sengqi lü (摩訶僧祇律)
Skt. *Mahāsāṃghika-vinaya

Taishō No.
1425

Ch. Sifen lü (四分律)
Skt. *Dharmaguptaka-vinaya

1428

Ch. Fanwang jing (梵網經)
Skt. *Brahmajāla-sutra
Eng. The Brahmā’s Net Sutra (2017)

1484

Ch. Shanjianlü piposha (善見律毘婆沙)
Pāli Samantapāsādikā

1462

Ch. Youposaijie jing (優婆塞戒經)
Skt. Upāsakaśīla-sutra
Eng. The Sutra on Upāsaka Precepts (1994)

1488

Ch. Shizha biposha lun (十住毘婆沙論)
Skt. *Daśabhūmika-vibhāṣā

1521

Ch. Apidamojushe lun (阿毘達磨倶舍論)
Skt. Abhidharmakośa-bhāṣya

1558

Ch. Miaofa lianhua jing youbotishe (妙法蓮華經憂波提舍)
1519
Skt. Saddharmapuṇḍarīka-upadeśa
Eng. The Commentary on the Lotus Sutra (in Tiantai Lotus Texts, 2013)

Ch. Fodijing lun (佛地經論)
Skt. *Buddhabhūmisutra-śāstra
Eng. The Interpretation of the Buddha Land (2002)

1530

Ch. Zhonglun (中論)
Skt. Madhyamaka-śāstra

1564

Ch. Cheng weishi lun (成唯識論)
Eng. Demonstration of Consciousness Only
(in Three Texts on Consciousness Only, 1999)

1585

Ch. Yüqie shidilun (瑜伽師地論)
Skt. Yogācārabhūmi-śāstra

1579

Ch. Weishi sanshilun song (唯識三十論頌)
Skt. Triṃśikā
Eng. The Thirty Verses on Consciousness Only
(in Three Texts on Consciousness Only, 1999)

1586

335

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Weishi ershi lun (唯識二十論)
Skt. Viṃśatikā
Eng. The Treatise in Twenty Verses on Consciousness Only
(in Three Texts on Consciousness Only, 1999)

Taishō No.
1590

Ch. She dasheng lun (攝大乘論)
1593
Skt. Mahāyānasaṃgraha
Eng. The Summary of the Great Vehicle (Revised Second Edition, 2003)
Ch. Bian zhongbian lun (辯中邊論)
Skt. Madhyāntavibhāga

1600

Ch. Dasheng chengye lun (大乘成業論)
Skt. Karmasiddhiprakaraṇa
Eng. A Mahayana Demonstration on the Theme of Action (in Three
Short Treatises by Vasubandhu, Sengzhao, and Zongmi, 2017)

1609

Ch. Yinming ruzheng li lun (因明入正理論)
Skt. Nyāyapraveśa

1630

Ch. Jingangzhen lun (金剛針論)
Skt. Vajrasūcī

1642

Ch. Dasheng zhuangyanjing lun (大乘莊嚴經論)
Skt. Mahāyānasūtrālaṃkāra

1604

Ch. Jiujing yisheng baoxing lun (究竟一乘寳性論)
Skt. Ratnagotravibhāga-mahāyānottaratantra-śāstra

1611

Ch. Dasheng ji pusa xue lun (大乘集菩薩學論)
Skt. Śikṣāsamuccaya

1636

Ch. Zhang suozhi lun (彰所知論)
Eng. The Treatise on the Elucidation of the Knowable (2004)

1645

Ch. Jingangding yuqie zhongfa anouduoluo sanmiao sanputi xin lun
(金剛頂瑜伽中發阿耨多羅三藐三菩提心論)
Eng. The Bodhicitta Śāstra (in Esoteric Texts, 2015)

1665

Ch. Putixing jing (菩提行經)
Skt. Bodhicaryāvatāra

1662

Ch. Dasheng qixin lun (大乘起信論)
Skt. *Mahāyānaśraddhotpāda-śāstra
Eng. The Awakening of Faith (2005)

1666

336

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Ch. Shimoheyan lun (釋摩訶衍論)

Taishō No.

Ch. Naxian biqiu jing (那先比丘經)
Pāli Milindapañhā

1668
1670

Ch. Banruo boluomiduo xin jing yuzan (般若波羅蜜多心經幽賛)
Eng. A Comprehensive Commentary on the Heart Sutra
(Prajñāpāramitā-hṛdaya-sutra) (2001)

1710

Ch. Guan wuliangshou fo jing shu (觀無量壽佛經疏)

1753

Ch. Miaofalianhua jing xuanyi (妙法蓮華經玄義)

1716

Ch. Sanlun xuanyi (三論玄義)

1852

Ch. Zhao lun (肇論)
Eng. Essays of Sengzhao (in Three Short Treatises by Vasubandhu,
Sengzhao, and Zongmi, 2017)

1858

Ch. Dasheng xuan lun (大乘玄論)

1853

Ch. Huayan yisheng jiaoyi fenqi zhang (華嚴一乘教義分齊章)

1866

Ch. Mohe zhiguan (摩訶止觀)

1911

Ch. Yuanren lun (原人論)
Eng. Treatise on the Origin of Humanity (in Three Short Treatises
by Vasubandhu, Sengzhao, and Zongmi, 2017)

1886

Ch. Xiuxi zhiguan zuochan fayao (修習止觀坐禪法要)

1915

Ch. Guoqing bai lu (國清百録)

1934

Ch. Tiantai sijiao yi (天台四教儀)
Eng. A Guide to the Tiantai Fourfold Teachings
(in Tiantai Lotus Texts, 2013)

1931

Ch. Zhenzhou Linji Huizhao chanshi wulu (鎭州臨濟慧照禪師語録)
Eng. The Recorded Sayings of Linji (in Three Chan Classics, 1999)

1985

Ch. Wumen guan (無門關)
Eng. Wumen’s Gate (in Three Chan Classics, 1999)

2005

Ch. Foguo Yuanwu chanshi biyan lu (佛果圜悟禪師碧巖録)
Eng. The Blue Cliff Record (1998)

2003

Ch. Liuzu dashi fabao tan jing (六祖大師法寶壇經)
Eng. The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch (2000)

2008

337

Translator’s Introduction

Title

Ch. Xinxin ming (信心銘)
Eng. The Faith-Mind Maxim (in Three Chan Classics, 1999)

Taishō No.

Ch. Huangboshan Duanji chanshi chuanxin fayao
(黄檗山斷際禪師傳心法要)
Eng. Essentials of the Transmission of Mind (in Zen Texts, 2005)
Ch. Yongjia Zhengdao ge (永嘉證道歌)

Ch. Chixiu Baizhang qinggui (勅修百丈清規)
Eng. The Baizhang Zen Monastic Regulations (2007)

2010

2012A
2014

2025

Ch. Yibuzonglun lun (異部宗輪論)
Skt. Samayabhedoparacanacakra
Eng. The Cycle of the Formation of the Schismatic Doctrines (2004)

2031

Ch. Maming pusa zhuan (馬鳴菩薩傳)
Eng. The Life of Aśvaghoṣa Bodhisattva
(in Lives of Great Monks and Nuns, 2002)

2046

Ch. Ayuwang jing (阿育王經)
Skt. Aśokāvadāna
Eng. The Biographical Scripture of King Aśoka (1993)

2043

Ch. Longshu pusa zhuan (龍樹菩薩傳)
Eng. The Life of Nāgārjuna Bodhisattva
(in Lives of Great Monks and Nuns, 2002)

2047

Ch. Posoupandou fashi zhuan (婆藪槃豆法師傳)
Eng. Biography of Dharma Master Vasubandhu
(in Lives of Great Monks and Nuns, 2002)

2049

Ch. Gaoseng zhuan (高僧傳)

2059

Ch. Datang Daciensi Zanzang fashi zhuan (大唐大慈恩寺三藏法師傳) 2053
Eng. A Biography of the Tripiṭaka Master of the Great Ci’en
Monastery of the Great Tang Dynasty (1995)

Ch. Biqiuni zhuan (比丘尼傳)
Eng. Biographies of Buddhist Nuns
(in Lives of Great Monks and Nuns, 2002)

Ch. Gaoseng Faxian zhuan (高僧法顯傳)
Eng. The Journey of the Eminent Monk Faxian
(in Lives of Great Monks and Nuns, 2002)

338

2063

2085

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Taishō No.

Ch. Datang xiyu ji (大唐西域記)
Eng. The Great Tang Dynasty Record of the Western Regions (1996)

Ch. Youfangjichao: Tangdaheshangdongzheng zhuan
(遊方記抄: 唐大和上東征傳)

2087

2089-(7)

Ch. Hongming ji (弘明集)
Eng. The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation
of Buddhism (Volume I, 2015)
The Collection for the Propagation and Clariﬁcation
of Buddhism (Volume II, 2017)

2102

Ch. Fayuan zhulin (法苑珠林)

2122

Ch. Fanyu zaming (梵語雑名)

2135

Jp. Yuimakyō gisho (維摩經義疏)
Eng. The Expository Commentary on the Vimalakīrti Sutra (2012)

2186

Jp.

2203

Ch. Nanhai jigui neifa zhuan (南海寄歸内法傳)
Eng. Buddhist Monastic Traditions of Southern Asia (2000)
Jp. Shōmangyō gisho (勝鬘經義疏)
Eng. Prince Shōtoku’s Commentary on the Śrīmālā Sutra (2011)

2125

2185

Jp.

Hokke gisho (法華義疏)

2187

Jp.

Daijō hossō kenjin shō (大乘法相研神章)

2309

Jp. Risshū kōyō (律宗綱要)
Eng. The Essentials of the Vinaya Tradition (1995)

2348

Jp.

2376

Jp.

Hannya shingyō hiken (般若心經秘鍵)

Kanjin kakumu shō (觀心覺夢鈔)

2312

Jp. Tendai hokke shūgi shū (天台法華宗義集)
Eng. The Collected Teachings of the Tendai Lotus School (1995)

2366

Jp.

2377

Kenkairon (顯戒論)

Sange gakushō shiki (山家學生式)

Jp. Hizōhōyaku (秘藏寶鑰)
Eng. The Precious Key to the Secret Treasury (in Shingon Texts, 2004)

2426

339

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Jp. Benkenmitsu nikyō ron (辨顯密二教論)
Eng. On the Differences between the Exoteric and Esoteric
Teachings (in Shingon Texts, 2004)

Taishō No.
2427

Jp. Sokushin jōbutsu gi (即身成佛義)
Eng. The Meaning of Becoming a Buddha in This Very Body
(in Shingon Texts, 2004)

2428

Jp. Unjigi (吽字義)
Eng. The Meanings of the Word Hūṃ (in Shingon Texts, 2004)

2430

Jp. Shōji jissōgi (聲字實相義)
2429
Eng. The Meanings of Sound, Sign, and Reality (in Shingon Texts, 2004)
Jp. Gorin kuji myōhimitsu shaku (五輪九字明秘密釋)
Eng. The Illuminating Secret Commentary on the Five Cakras
and the Nine Syllables (in Shingon Texts, 2004)

2514

Jp. Mitsugonin hotsuro sange mon (密嚴院發露懺悔文)
Eng. The Mitsugonin Confession (in Shingon Texts, 2004)

2527

Jp. Fukan zazengi (普勧坐禪儀)
Eng. A Universal Recommendation for True Zazen
(in Zen Texts, 2005)

2580

Jp. Kōzen gokoku ron (興禪護國論)
Eng. A Treatise on Letting Zen Flourish to Protect the State
(in Zen Texts, 2005)

2543

Jp. Shōbōgenzō (正法眼藏)
Eng. Shōbōgenzō: The True Dharma-eye Treasury (Volume I, 2007)
Shōbōgenzō: The True Dharma-eye Treasury (Volume II, 2008)
Shōbōgenzō: The True Dharma-eye Treasury (Volume III, 2008)
Shōbōgenzō: The True Dharma-eye Treasury (Volume IV, 2008)

2582

Jp. Senchaku hongan nenbutsu shū (選擇本願念佛集)
Eng. Senchaku Hongan Nembutsu Shū: A Collection of Passages
on the Nembutsu Chosen in the Original Vow (1997)

2608

Jp. Zazen yōjin ki (坐禪用心記)
Eng. Advice on the Practice of Zazen (in Zen Texts, 2005)

2586

Jp. Kenjōdo shinjitsu kyōgyō shōmon rui (顯淨土眞實教行証文類)
Eng. Kyōgyōshinshō: On Teaching, Practice, Faith, and
Enlightenment (2003)

2646

340

BDK English Tripiṭaka

Title

Jp. Tannishō (歎異抄)
Eng. Tannishō: Passages Deploring Deviations of Faith (1996)
Jp. Rennyo shōnin ofumi (蓮如上人御文)
Eng. Rennyo Shōnin Ofumi: The Letters of Rennyo (1996)

Jp.

Ōjōyōshū (往生要集)

Taishō No.
2661

2668
2682

Jp. Risshō ankoku ron (立正安國論)
Eng. Risshōankokuron or The Treatise on the Establishment
of the Orthodox Teaching and the Peace of the Nation
(in Two Nichiren Texts, 2003)

2688

Jp. Kaimokushō (開目抄)
Eng. Kaimokushō or Liberation from Blindness (2000)

2689

Ch. Fumu enzhong jing (父母恩重經)
Eng. The Sutra on the Profundity of Filial Love
(in Apocryphal Scriptures, 2005)

2887

Jp. Kanjin honzon shō (觀心本尊抄)
Eng. Kanjinhonzonshō or The Most Venerable One Revealed
by Introspecting Our Minds for the First Time at the
Beginning of the Fifth of the Five Five Hundred-year Ages
(in Two Nichiren Texts, 2003)

2692

Jp. Hasshūkōyō (八宗綱要)
Eng. The Essentials of the Eight Traditions (1994)

extracanonical

Jp. Mappō tōmyō ki (末法燈明記)
Eng. The Candle of the Latter Dharma (1994)

extracanonical

Jp.

Sangō shīki (三教指帰)

Jp.

Jūshichijō kenpō (十七條憲法)

extracanonical

extracanonical

341

