1

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

In the Name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful

The Quran Translated
Marmaduke Pickthall

Revised By

ICSFP
International Committee for the Support of the Final Prophet
Website:www.icsfp.com

Email: info@icsfp.com

2

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

CONTENT
Introduction
Prophet Muhammad
From Revelation to Compilation
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.

Al-Fatihah: The Opening
Al-Baqarah: The Cow
Aal Imran: The Family of Imran
An-Nisa': The Women
Al-Ma'idah: The Table Spread
Al-An`am: Cattle
Al-A`raf: The Purgatory
Al-Anfal: The Spoils Of War
At-Taubah: The Repentance
Yunus: Jonah
Hud: Hood
Yusuf: Joseph
Ar-Ra`d: The Thunder
Ibrahim: Abraham
Al-Hijr: Al Hijr Valley
An-Nahl: The Bee
Al-Isra: The Children of Israel
Al-Kahf: The Cave
Maryam: Mary
Ta-Ha
Al-Anbiya’: The Prophets
Al-Hajj: The Pilgrimage
Al-Mu'minun: The Believers
An-Nur: Light
Al-Furqan: The Criterion
Ash-Shu`ara: The Poets
An-Naml: The Ant
Al-Qasas: The Story
Al-‘Ankabut: The Spider
Ar-Rum: The Romans
Luqman
As-Sajdah: The Prostration
Al-Ahzab: The Clans
Saba: Sheba
Al-Mala'ikah: The Creator of Angels
Ya-Sin
As-Saffat: Those Who Set The Ranks
Sad
Az-Zumar: The Troops
Ghafir: Forgiver
Fussilat: Expounded
Ash-Shura: Counsel
Az-Zukhruf: Ornaments of Gold
Ad-Dukhan: Smoke
Al-Jathiyah: The Kneeling
Al-Ahqaf: The Wind-Curved Sand Dunes

3

47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
74.
75.
76.
77.
78.
79.
80.
81.
82.
83.
84.
85.
86.
87.
88.
89.
90.
91.
92.
93.
94.
95.
96.
97.
98.
99.

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

Muhammad
Al-Fath: Victory
Al-Hujurat: The Private Apartments
Qaf: Q
Adh-Dhariyat: The Winnowing Winds
At-Tur: Mount Sinai
An-Najm: The Stars
Al-Qamar: The Moon
Ar-Rahman: The Beneficent
Al-Waqi`ah: The Event
Al-Hadid: Iron
Al-Mujadilah: The Dispute
Al-Hashr: Exile
Al- Mumtahanah: She that is to be examined
As-Saff: The Ranks
Al-Jumu`ah: Friday
Al-Munafiqun: The Hypocrites
At-Taghabun: Mutual Disillusion
At-Talaq: Divorce
At-Tahrim: The Banning
Al-Mulk: Supreme Power
Al-Qalam: The Pen
Al-Haqqah: The Reality
Al-Ma`arij: The Ascending Stairways
Nuh: Noah
Al-Jinn: The Jinn
Al-Muzzammil: The Wrapped One
Al-Muddaththir: The Cloaked One
Al-Qiyamah: Resurrection
Al-Insan or Ad-Dahr: Man or Time
Al-Mursalat: The Emissaries
An-Naba: The Tidings
An-Nazi`at: Those Who drag forth
Abasa: He Frowned
At-Takwir: The Overthrowing
Al-Infitar: The Cleaving
Al-Mutaffifin: Defrauding
Al-Inshiqaq: The Sundering
Al-Buruj: The Mansions of the Stars
At-Tariq: The Morning Star
Al-A`la: The Most High
Al-Ghashiyah: The Overwhelming
Al-Fajr: The Dawn
Al-Balad: The City
Ash-Shams: The Sun
Al-Lail: The Night
Ad-Duha: The Morning Hours
Ash-Sharh: Solace
At-Tin: The Fig
Al-`Alaq: The Clot
Al-Qadr: Power
Al-Baiyinah: The Clear Proof
Az-Zalzalah: The Earthquake

4

100.
101.
102.
103.
104.
105.
106.
107.
108.
109.
110.
111.
112.
113.
114.

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

Al-`Adiyat: The Coursers
Al-Qari`ah: The Shocker
At-Takathur: Rivalry in Worldly Increase
Al-`Asr: The Declining Day
Al-Humazah: The Traducer
Al-Fil: The Elephant
Quraish: Quraish Tribe
Al-Ma`un: Small Kindnesses
Al-Kauthar: Abundance
Al-Kafirun: The Disbelievers
An-Nasr: Succor
Al-Masad: Palm Fiber
Al-Ikhlas: The Sincerity
Al-Falaq: The Daybreak
An-Nas: People

5

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

Introduction
The book you are about to read is an English translation of the Scripture that Prophet
Muhammad said was revealed to him by God, word for word, in the Arabic language. This
Scripture is still in existence and hundreds of thousands of Muslims the world over,
including non-Arabic speakers, have it preserved in their memories, just as they have been
preserving it for the past fourteen centuries. This book is the Quran.
This book is not only still with us in its original form, but the life of the man to whom it
was revealed is also recorded in authentic historical records so meticulously that some of
the Westerners who studied his life have described him as being .the only historical figure
among founders of religions''.
Muhammad was a Prophet chosen by God to be the recipient of a divine message. He was
entrusted with the task of conveying this message to the people around him, and through
them, to all people throughout the world. As a Prophet and Messenger of God to His
servants, Muhammad was not something new; he was merely the last in a long chain of
Prophets and Messengers. Many were those upon whom God bestowed the honor of
being the recipients of His message, who He appointed to be examples of righteousness
for the rest of humanity. The Quran mentions a number of these Prophets, including
Adam, Noah, Abraham, Moses and Jesus.
The core message they all brought was the same: Islam, submission to God by
worshipping none but Him. Every one of them was charged with conveying this message
as well with showing the people of their time how to live by it. Being the last of these
Prophets, Muhammad was to be God's final and therefore universal Messenger.
How do we know whether someone is an imposter or a true Prophet? This is indeed a
very vital question requiring serious thought. It is clear that there is no way for us to
decide this issue except by examining the character as well as the message of the person
who makes such a claim. We naturally start by ascertaining the historical authenticity of
the records that describe the life and teachings of the claimant. Next we must examine the
character of the person who made the claim especially regarding his truthfulness. Finally
we need to look carefully into the message which he claimed to have received from God:
·
·
·

Does it contain any factual falsehoods or contradictions?
How far is it comprehensive?
To what extent is it consistent with the attributes which we know God must have?

And so forth.
One might ask .why we should take the trouble?''
The answer is clear. If we are believers in God, we will know that He is a Merciful and
Wise Lord, because it is He Who has given us our lives and is providing for all of our
needs. Being our Creator, He knows that we have spiritual needs as well. As believers in
Him, we need to know how to lead a life that is in agreement with that belief and pleasing
to Him. We need to know how to worship Him, and on what principles to establish our
relationships with one another: whether political, social, economic, or otherwise. This
leads us to the conclusion that the Merciful and Wise God who provided us with all of our
material needs will not neglect to provide us
with our spiritual needs as well. We must also conclude that such guidance from Him can

6

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

only come as a message from Him and that there must be such a message somewhere in
the world, a message that must be available to all who seek it. Here is the book that
Muslims claim contains that message, and the following is a sketch of the life of the
Messenger who brought it.
- ICSFP

7

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

Prophet Muhammad
Birth
Muhammad was born in Mecca, Arabia. His mother, Aminah, was the daughter of Wahb
son of Abd Manaf of the Zuhrah family. His father, Abdullah, was the son of AbdulMuttalib. His genealogy has been traced back in roughly forty generations to the noble
house of Ishmael, the son of Abraham. Muhammad's father had died before his birth, and
his mother died when he was about six years old, making him an orphan. In accordance
with the tradition of the noble families of Mecca, he was cared for in his infancy by a
foster mother in a remote village. He lived with his foster mother, Halimah, for a few
years, during which, he was taken to Mecca several times to visit his mother. After the
death of his mother, he was placed under the custody of his grandfather, Abdul- Muttalib.
When the grandfather died, he came under the care of his uncle, Abu Talib. During this
time, he used to tend sheep around Mecca and accompany his uncle on trade journeys to
Syria.
Youth
From the time of his youth, he believed firmly in the oneness of God. He lived a very
simple life and hated vanity and pride. He was compassionate to the poor, widows and
orphans and shared their sufferings by helping them. He avoided all immoral acts, which
were commonplace among young people, such as gambling, drinking, and vulgarity. He
was known as As-Siddiq (the truthful) and Al-Amin (the trust- worthy) . He was always
trusted to be a mediator between conflicting parties in his homeland , Mecca .
Marriage
When he was about 25 years old, his uncle urged him to work with the caravan that
belonged to a wealthy widow named Khadijah. He accepted this and undertook the
journey to Syria. He conducted business with such prudence and sense of duty that he
returned with a larger profit than usual. Khadijah was so impressed by the honest and
attractive personality of Muhammad that she offered to marry him, an offer which
Muhammad accepted. Their marriage was a happy one. They had children. Khadijah
remained his only wife until she died at the age of 51.
Prophethood
Muhammad was born amidst a polytheistic society. He was saddened and sickened by the
corrupt society that surrounded him. He often went to the cave of Hira in a mountain
near Mecca, which would later be known as Jabal An-Nur (the Mountain of Light). There
he would meditate and ponder over the prevailing darkness brought about by ignorance.
There he would often remain deep in thought, in communion with the unseen yet AllPervading God of the universe.
One night, while he was meditating in the cave, the angel Gabriel came to him. The angel
aroused him and his mighty voice reverberated in his ears. Muhammad was perplexed and
did not know what to do. He was asked to read. He replied: .I cannot read!'' The angel
repeated his command three times, demanding Muhammad to read, but each time he
replied that he could not read. Finally the angel said:
“Read: In the name of your Lord Who creates, creates man from a clot. Read: And your Lord is the
Most Bounteous, Who teaches by means of the pen, teaches man that which he knew not.” (Quran 96:15)
This was the first revelation received by Muhammad. He was 40 years old at that time.
The revelations continued to come to him from time to time over a period of 23 years.
This series of revelations was arranged according to the divine guidance given to Prophet

8

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

Muhammad, and later collected in the form of a book. This book is the Quran (the
Recitation). Most of its verses have clear meanings. Some verses are interpreted in
conjunction with other verses and some others were interpreted by the Prophet himself
through his words, actions, and tacit approvals which together are known as his Sunnah
(Tradition).
The Quran and the Sunnah together constitute the guidance and way of life for those who
submit their lives to God. People who follow this guidance and way of life are guaranteed
by God to be saved in this world and the Hereafter.
Challenges
When the Prophet called the people to the way of God, few heeded his call. Most of those
who did were either members of his family or from the lowest
ranks of society. Among them were Khadijah, Ali, Zaid and Bilal. When he intensified his
mission by publicly announcing the religion he preached, he won more followers, but at
the same time had to face many challenges from the nobles and leaders whofound their
position being threatened and jeopardized. They stood together - under the pretext of
defending the religion of their ancestors - to fight the new religion.
The morale of the few people who embraced Islam was heightened when some prominent
members of Meccan society joined the religion. Most notable among them were Uthman
bin Affan, Zubair bin Al- Awwam, Abdur-Rahman bin Awf, Talhah bin Ubaidullah, Sad
bin Abi Waqqas, Arqam bin Abi Arqam, Ubaidullah, Saeed bin Zaid, Amr bin Nufail,
Fatimah (the wife of Nufail), Asma bint Abu Bakr, Abdullah bin Masud, Jafar bin Abi
Talib and many others.
Before this group accepted Islam, there had been Abu Bakr, the first among his earliest
followers who impressed the Prophet considerably. The Prophet said about him: “I never
invited anyone to the faith who did not display some hesitation in embracing it, except
Abu Bakr. When I had offered him Islam, he showed no hesitation at all in accepting it.”
As the result of the opposition of the Meccan disbelievers, Muslims were subjected to
severe torture, persecution, isolation and boycotts. The Prophet had to be patient and had
to look for a means to protect the Muslims. He asked Negus, the King of Ethiopia, to
allow the Muslims to emigrate to his country. Negus welcomed the Muslim emigrants in
his territory and refused to hand them over to the disbelieving rulers of Mecca.
Emmigration (Hijra)
Near the end of the time known to historians as the Meccan period, the Prophet lost two
people who were very dear to him. They were his beloved uncle, Abu Talib, and his
faithful and loving wife, Khadijah. After their deaths, the Meccans felt free to impose what
they wanted on the Prophet and his followers. To most, Makkah was the Kabah (the
Sacred Mosque), which was built by Prophet Abraham centuries before as a place of
worship. But in the course of time, the place had been converted by the disbelievers into a
place of idolatry. People added many traditions of their own. They used to visit this place
for a few months during the year for pilgrimage.
They came from all parts of Arabia, representing various prominent tribes. The
pilgrimage, in spite of its religious bearing, constituted for the Arabs a yearly festival where
people would meet and indulge in their cultural activities. The Prophet took this
opportunity to spread Islam.

9

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

Among those interested in his call, were some delegations from the town of Yathrib (later
to be known as Madinah) in the north of Arabia. They met secretly with the Prophet and a
few Muslims from Makkah in a village called Aqabah. After becoming Muslims, they took
an oath of allegiance to protect
Islam, the Prophet, and the Meccan Muslims. The following year, the group of Muslims
from Yathrib came again to Makkah. They met with the Prophet at the same place where
they previously met. This time, Abbas bin Abdul-Muttalib, the Prophet's uncle who was
himself not a Muslim yet, was present at the meeting. They invited the Prophet and the
Muslims from Mecca to emigrate to Yathrib.
They promised to treat them as true brothers and sisters. A long discussion ensued
between the Muslims of Yathrib and the Prophet's uncle to make sure that they really
wanted to welcome the Meccan Muslims into their own homes. The Prophet agreed, in
the end, to emmigrated to this new land. Upon coming to know that the Muslims had
planned to leave Mecca, the Meccan disbelievers tried to stop the emigration; however, the
first group had already migrated to Yathrib. The Meccans feared that the movement to
Yathrib would give the Muslims a new base from which to spread the message. Within
two months, nearly all Muslims from Mecca, except the Prophet, Abu Bakr, Ali and a few
helpless people, had emmigrated. The Meccans then decided to kill the Prophet. They
made a plan for this purpose, but God – as He says in the Quran – had made another
plan over theirs. With various tactics and good planning, the Prophet finally arrived
peacefully in Yathrib, which was later known as Madinatur-Rasul (The City of the Prophet)
A New Era
In Madinah, the Prophet was able to work freely for the spread of Islam. The followers of
Islam increased day after day. But the threat from Mecca continued relentlessly. A few
physical confrontations with the Meccans ensued. Sometimes the battles were won by the
Muslims and sometimes by the Meccans. The Prophet also engaged in battles with the
Byzantine and Persian powers that were jeopardizing the existence of Islam from the
north and the east. Confrontation with the Meccans stopped for a while after the treaty of
Hudaibiyah had been signed between the Muslims and the Meccans. During the Madinian
period, the Muslims also established treaties with the Jews of Madinah and the tribes
around the city. The Jews broke the treaty, which led to their expulsion from the Arabian
Peninsula.
In Madinah, the Prophet succeeded in establishing Islam as a way of life in the fullest
sense. He was not only giving guidance on purely religious matters such as prayers,
almsgiving, fasting and pilgrimage, but was also providing the Muslims with guidance and
legislation concerning their social, economic and political lives.
Emissiaries entertained in Madinah
It was in Madinah that the Prophet received envoys and emissaries from different tribes
and nations. They came to ask him about various matters, to engage in dialogue, to
negotiate, and for a number of other reasons. Among the emissaries was an envoy
representing the Christian community in Najran (South Arabia). The Prophet welcomed
them, entertained them as honoured guests, and even allowed them to conduct their
religious service in his city. It was a good occasion to share each other's views on matters
of religion. Some members of the envoy were deeply impressed by the treatment they
received from the Muslims, thus leading them to embrace Islam.
Liberation of Makkah
The treaty of Hudaibiyah gave the Muslims a good opportunity to exemplify Islam to the

10

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

fullest in their personal conduct and in their relations with other peoples and
communities. But the peace did not endure for long, on account of the attitude of the
Meccan tribal chiefs who soon broke the treaty. The Prophet marched very quietly to
Mecca in the 8th year after his emigration to Madinah. The Meccans gave no resistance and
the whole city surrendered to the Prophet. He announced a general amnesty for all his
enemies and treated the citizens of the city with generosity. A verse of the Quran was
revealed on the occasion:
“When God's succor and the triumph comes. And you see people entering the religion of God in troops.
Then hymn the praises of your Lord, and seek forgiveness of Him. Lo! He is ever ready to show mercy.”
(Quran 110:1-3)
After the liberation of Mecca, all the remaining hostile tribes in Arabia began to realize the
reality of the Islamic faith. People had seen the noble teachings of Islam in action, a living
example of forgiveness, tolerance, justice, fairness, stead- fastness, and other noble
qualities, all exemplified by the Prophet and his Companions. This had left an impression
upon the hearts of hundreds of thousands of people who became Muslims.
Farewell Pilgrimage
In time, the whole of Arabia had become the land of Islam. The Prophet intended to
perform the pilgrimage. He announce d his intention to the Muslims in Madinah and the
surrounding areas and asked them to join him. This was in fact the only pilgrimage
performed by the Prophet during his lifetime. On this occasion, he taught those who were
present with him and the whole world about the pilgrimage and the divine message that
God had entrusted him to convey to all mankind.
At this last gathering with the people during the pilgrimage season, what would come to
be known as his farewell pilgrimage, the Prophet Muhammad delivered a sermon at the
valley of Arafat. This was about 81 or 82 days before his death. It contained the very
fundamentals of Islam. Seated on his camel, he spoke with a clear tone and asked all those
who heard his speech to convey it to those who were not present. Among what he said
was the following:
“O people, lend me an attentive ear, for I know not whether, after this year, I shall ever be
amongst you again. Therefore listen to what I am saying to you carefully and take these
words to those who could not be present here today.”
“O people, just as you regard this month, this day, this city as sacred, so regard the life and
property of every Muslim as a sacred trust. Return the goods entrusted to you to their
rightful owners. Hurt no one so that no one may hurt you. Remember that you will indeed
meet your Lord, and that He will indeed reckon your deeds. God has forbidden you to
take usury; therefore all interest obligations shall henceforth be waived. Beware of Satan
for the safety of your religion. He has lost all hopes that he will be able to lead you astray
in big things, so beware of following him in small things.”
“O people, it is true that you have certain rights with regard to your women, but they also
have rights over you. If they abide by your right then to them belongs the right to be fed
and clothed in kindness. Do treat your women well and be kind to them for they are your
partners and committed helpers. And it is your right that they do not make friends with
anyone of whom you do not approve, as well as never to commit adultery.”
“O people, listen to me in earnest, worship God, offer your five daily prayers, fast during
the month of Ramadan, and give your wealth in Zakat. Perform the pilgrimage if you can

11

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

afford to. You know that every Muslim is the brother of every other Muslim. You are all
equal. Nobody has superiority over the other except by piety and good deeds.”
“Remember, one day you will appear before God and answer for your deeds. So beware,
do not go astray from the path of righteousness after my death.'' .O people, no Prophet or
Messenger will come after me and no new faith will be born.”
“O people, understand my words that I conveyed to you. I leave behind me two things,
the Quran and my example, the Sunnah, and if you follow these, you will never go astray.”
“All those who listen to me, should pass on my words to others and those to others again;
and may the last ones understand my words better than those who listen to me directly. Be
my witness O God that I have conveyed Your message to Your slaves.”
The importance of this sermon can be seen from the Prophet's perception that this
occasion may be the last one like it during his lifetime. He felt that this was the right time
to summarize the principles of Islam to his brothers and sisters. With the religion now
conveyed to the people in its entirety, there was no need for humanity, and for the
Muslims in particular, to look for an alternative way of life. By holding fast to the two
things left behind by the Prophet (the Quran and the Sunnah) , a person will never go
astray.
Death
About two months after returning from his pilgrimage to Mecca, the Prophet became
seriously ill. He was still able to perform his prayers in the mosque and give direction to
the Companions. However, his health was deteriorating day by day. Near the end, he
asked Abu Bakr to lead the prayers in the mosque. Every member of his family and every
one of his Companions was worried about his health. It was on a Monday, in the 11th year
after his emigration to Madinah, that the Prophet passed away at the age of sixty-three.
Many people did not want to believe that he had died; it was as if they had thought the
Messenger of God would live forever. Abu Bakr, who had sensed since the farewell
pilgrimage that the death of the Prophet was near, convinced the congregation that the
Prophet had actually passed away. Abu Bakr said to the congregation that if they had been
worshipping Muhammad, then Muhammad had died, and if they had been worshipping
God, He lives forever. Then he recited from the Quran:
“Muhammad is but a Messenger, Messengers (the like of whom) have passed away before him. Will it be
that when he dies or is slain, you will turn back on your heels?” (Quran 3:144)
A Guidance to follow
Muhammad as a man had died, but as a Prophet, his legacy lives on in the form of the
Quran and the Sunnah. He had stressed the urgent need to hold firmly to these two
sources of guidance during his farewell sermon in the valley of Arafat . If people hold fast
to them , they will never go astray. The teachings he left for us, if put into practice in their
true spirit and proper way, will bring happiness to life in this world as well as in the life to
come. In this sense, Islam is a worldly religion which considers first the worldly affairs of
humanity, with the Hereafter merely a continuation of life. It is difficult to hold that man
can be saved in the Hereafter without being saved in this world. To be saved in the
Hereafter without being saved in this world is simply unthinkable. The sensible approach
is to follow the way shown to us by Prophet Muhammad. When his wife, Aishah, was
asked by a Companion about the Prophet's daily conduct, Aishah replied that the conduct
of the Prophet was the Quran, which is the guidance from God and for which

12

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

Muhammad was given authority by God to interpret. That is why his conduct was the
most exemplary expression of human conduct.

13

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

The History of the Quranic Text 1
From Revelation to Compilation
The Quran consistently refers to itself as a Kitab (Book), or something that is written.
Accordingly, the revealed verses were recorded in writing from earliest stages of Islam.
Those revealed during the Makkan period were recorded in Makkah and those revealed
during the Madinian period were recorded in Madinah. As soon as a revelation came, the
Prophet, peace and blessing of God be on him, would routinely call one of his scribes to
write it down. There is also evidence of proofreading after dictation. The scribe would
read it back to the Prophet to ensure that no scribal errors had crept in. There were 65
Companions of the Prophet who functioned as scribes at one time or the other.
The entire Quran was thus written during the Prophet's own lifetime on parchments by
the Prophet's scribes. There were other Companions of the Prophet who also wrote for
their own benefit on different objects including parchments, wooden planks or palm
leaves. The parchments on which the Prophet's scribes wrote were, however, not bound
in the form of a book during his lifetime. Binding could not, however, be undertaken as
long as there was a continuous flow of revelation. It had to wait until the Prophet's
mission had been completed. The Prophet had even instructed the scribes about the
placement of different Ayahs (verses) as they were revealed.
The compilation of the Quran in the form of a book took place during the caliphate of
Abu Bakr when it became clear after the Prophet's death that there would be no more
revelation. The task of binding the parchments in the form of a book was assigned to Zaid
bin Thabit who had attended the recitation of the Quran by Archangel Gabriel with the
Prophet during the month of Ramadan. Nevertheless, a great deal of care was taken to
ensure that no errors would unconsciously creep into the compilation of the Quran. Other
people were, therefore, asked to bring what they had also written down of the Quran after
having directly heard it from the Prophet. To ensure that they had themselves written
what they were putting forward, they had to back their claim by two witnesses. Every
word was verified by cross comparison as well as against the memories of the
Companions who had learned it by heart by directly hearing it from the Prophet himself.
Once the compilation of the Quran in book form was completed during the caliphate of
Abu Bakr, it was placed in his custody. After his death, it was passed on to Umar, the
second caliph, and then to Hafsah, the Prophet's wife, who was also the daughter of
Umar. Thus the contribution that was made by Abu Bakr was just to collect all Quran
parchments into a master volume after thoroughly verifying their accuracy against what
was written by others and memorized by the Prophet's Companions. However, the
pronunciation of the words of the Quran continued to be in various dialects prevalent at
that time because the Prophet had allowed the people, out of necessity, to recite the
Quran in their own dialects as they were facing difficulty in abandoning their own dialects
straight away. Since the Quran was revealed in the dialect of Quraysh , it was considered
necessary to standardize its pronunciation in this dialect in order to avoid any confusion
later on. The contribution of Uthman was to standardize the pronunciation of the Quran
in the dialect of Quraysh . For this purpose he obtained the Mushaf from Hafsah and
appointed a committee of twelve persons from among the Quraysh and Ansar to oversee
the task. Several copies were made for distribution to various provinces. Although there is
1 The History of the Quranic Text From Revelation to Compilation (A Comparative study with old and
new Testament) by Prof. M.M. Al-Azmi (Leicester, UK: UK Islamic Academy, 2003) Book Review; by Dr.
M. Umer Chapra.

14

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

a difference of opinion about how many copies were made , there is greater support in
favor of eight copies. It is the text of these thoroughly checked manuscripts standardized
in the dialect of Quraysh which has prevailed and the span of fourteen centuries has not
been able to corrupt or dent the skeletal text of this Uthmani Mushaf.
Though the text has remained unchanged, a number of reading aids have been added. One
of these is the Surah (chapter) separators. These existed before but primarily in the form of
Bismillah . . . (In the name of God. . .) being written in the beginning of each Surah. To this
has been added the Surah titles, possibly in a different color also. A second aid was in the
form of Ayah (verse) separators for which no fixed style was observed in the earlier
centuries. A circle at the end of the verse with the Ayah number written on or inside it has
now become a standard practice. To make the reading even easier, the Quran was divided
by the close of the first century into seven parts called Manazil to enable a person to finish
reading the Quran in one week . The third century witnessed the division of the Mushaf
into thirty parts (Juz . pl . Ajza) so that anyone who could not finish reading the Quran in a
week could do so in a month. In addition, dots and vowel marks (Tashkil) were added to
make the reading of the Quran easier even for those whose command over Arabic was not
very good.

15

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
“God has now revealed the best of Scriptures, a Book with parts resembling each other (and) frequently
repeated, which raises the hair on the skins of those who fear their Lord, so that their flesh and their
hearts soften to the remembrance of God. That is the guidance of God, He guides with it whom He
pleases; and whom God leaves astray, for him there is no guide.” (The Quran 39:23)

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

16

1. Al-Fatihah: The Opening
1:1 In the name of God, the Beneficent, the Merciful
1:2-4 Praise be to God, Lord of the Worlds. The Beneficent, the Merciful. Owner of the
Day of Judgment,
1:5-7 You (alone) we worship; You alone we ask for help. Guide us to the straight path,
the path of those whom You have favored; not (the path) of those who earn Your anger
nor of those who go astray.

2. Al-Baqarah: The Cow
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful

2:1 Alif. Lam. Mim.2
2:2-5 This is the Scripture whereof there is no doubt, a guidance to those who are pious.
Who believe in the unseen, and establish worship, and spend of that which, We have
bestowed upon them. And who believe in that which is revealed to you (O Muhammad)
and that which was revealed before you, and are certain of the Hereafter. These are on
(true) guidance from their Lord. These are the successful.
2:6-7 As for the disbelievers, whether you warn them or you warn them not it is all one
for them; they believe not. God has sealed their hearing and their hearts, and on their eyes
there is a covering. Theirs will be an awful punishment.
2:8-10 And among the people are some who say: We believe in God and the Last Day,
when they believe not. They think to deceive God and those who believe, and they
deceive none except themselves; but they perceive not. In their hearts is a disease, and
God has increased their disease. A painful punishment is theirs because they lie.
2:11-13 And when it is said to them: Make not mischief in the earth, they say: We are
peace-makers only. Are not they indeed the mischief-makers? But they perceive not. And
when it is said to them: Believe as the people believe, they say: Shall we believe as the
foolish believe? Are not they indeed the foolish? But they know not. 2:14-16 And when
they fall in with those who believe, they say: We believe; but when they go apart to their
satans they declare: Lo! We are with you; verily we did but mock (the believers). God
(Himself) does mock them, leaving them to wander blindly on in their contumacy. These
(hypocrites) are they who purchase error at the price of guidance, so their commerce does
not prosper, neither are they guided.
2:17-18 Their similitude is as that of one who kindled a fire, and when it shed its light
around him, God took away their light and left them in darkness, where they cannot see.
Deaf, dumb and blind; and
they return not.
2 Three letters of the Arabic alphabet. Twenty-nine of the Quran's 114 Surahs (chapters) begin in this
manner with combinations of letters of the Arabic alphabet from one single letter up to five. These letters
capture the listener's attention and are indicative of the Divine origin of the Quran. As for the wisdom
behind these no explanation was given by the Prophet, it is best to say that knowledge of that is known to
God alone.

17

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

2:19-20 Or like a rainstorm from the sky, wherein is darkness, thunder and the flash of
lightning. They thrust their fingers in their ears by reason of the thunder-claps, for fear of
death. God surrounds the disbelievers (from every side). The lightning almost snatches
away their sight from them. As often as it flashes forth for them, they walk therein; and
when it darkens against them, they stand still. If God willed, He could destroy their
hearing and their
sight. Lo! God is Able to do all things. 2:21-22 O people! Worship your Lord, Who has
created you and those before you, so that you may become pious. Who has appointed the
earth a resting-place for you, and the sky a canopy; and caused water to pour down from
the sky, thereby producing fruits as food for you. And do not set up rivals to God when
you know (better).
2:23-24 And if you are in doubt concerning that which We reveal to Our slave
(Muhammad), then produce a Surah3 (chapter) or the like thereof, and call your witnesses
beside God if you are truthful. And if you do it not.and you can never do it.then guard
yourselves against the fire prepared for disbelievers, whose fuel is men and stones.
2:25 And give glad tidings (O Muhammad) to those who believe and do good works; that
theirs are Gardens underneath which rivers flow; as often as they are regaled, with food of
the fruit thereof, they say: This is what was given us aforetime; and it is given to them in
resemblance. There for them are pure companions; there forever they abide.
2:26-27 Lo! God disdains not to coin the similitude even of a gnat. Those who believe
know that it is the truth from their Lord; but those who disbelieve say: What does God
wish (to teach) by such a similitude? (God) misleads many thereby, and He guides many
thereby; and He misleads thereby only miscreants. Those who break the covenant of God
after ratifying it and sever that which God ordered to be joined, and (who) make mischief
in the earth: Those are they who are the losers
2:28-29 How disbelieve you in God when you were dead and He gave life to you! Then he
will give you death, then life again, and then to Him you will return. He it is Who created
for you all that is in the earth. Then turned He to the heaven, and fashioned it as seven
heavens. And He is Knower of all things.
2:30-32 And when your Lord said to the angels: Lo! I am about to place a viceroy in the
earth, they said: Will You place therein one who will do harm therein and will shed blood,
while we hymn Your praise and sanctify You? He said: Surely I know that which you
know not. And He taught Adam all the names, then showed them to the angels, saying:
Inform Me of the names of these, if you are truthful. They said: Be glorified! We have no
knowledge except that which You have taught us. Lo! You, only You, are the Knower, the
Wise.
2:33 He said: O Adam! Inform them of their names, and when (Adam) had informed
them of their names, (God) said: Did I not tell you that I know the secret of the heavens
and the earth? And I know that which you disclose and which you hide.
2:34-37 And when We said to the angels: Prostrate yourselves before Adam, they fell
prostrate, all except Iblis (Satan). (Iblis) refused in his pride, and so became a disbeliever.
And We said: O Adam! Dwell you and your wife in the Garden, and eat you freely (of the
fruits) thereof where you will; but come not near this tree lest you become wrongdoers.
But Satan caused them to deflect therefrom and expelled them from the (happy) state in
which they were; and We said: Fall down, one of you a foe to the other! There shall be for
you on earth a habitation and provision for a time. Then Adam received from his Lord
words (of revelation), and He accepted his repentance. Lo! He is the Forgiving, the
Merciful.
3

A part of the Quran. The Quran consists of 114 Surahs. The shortest of which is of three verses .

18

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

2:38-39 We said: Go down, all of you, from here; but verily there comes to you from Me a
guidance; and whoso follows My guidance, there shall no fear come upon them neither
shall they grieve. But they who disbelieve, and deny Our revelations, such are rightful
inhabitants of the Fire. They will abide therein.
2:40-46 O Children of Israel! Remember My favor wherewith I favored you, and fulfill
your (part of the) covenant, I shall fulfill My (part of the) covenant and fear Me. And
believe in that which I reveal, confirming that which you possess already (of the
Scripture), and be not first to disbelieve therein, and part not with My revelations for a
trifling price, and fear Me. Confound not truth with falsehood, nor knowingly conceal the
truth. Establish worship, pay the poor-due, and bow your heads with those who bow (in
worship). Enjoin you righteousness on the people while you yourselves forget (to practice
it)? And you are readers of the Scripture! Have you then no sense? Seek help in patience
and prayer; and truly it is hard except for the humble ones, who know that they will have
to meet their Lord, and that to Him they are returning.
2:47-54 O Children of Israel! Remember My favor wherewith I favored you and how I
preferred you to (all) creatures. And guard yourselves against a Day when no soul will avail
another, nor will intercession be accepted from it, nor will compensation be received from
it, nor will they be helped. And (remember) when We did deliver you from Pharaoh's folk,
who were afflicting you with dreadful torment, slaying your sons and sparing your women:
That was a tremendous trial from your Lord. And when We brought you through the sea
and rescued you, and drowned the folk of Pharaoh in your sight. And when We did
appoint for Moses forty nights (of solitude), and then you chose the calf, when he had
gone from you, and you were wrongdoers. Then, even after that, We pardoned you in
order that you might give thanks. And when We gave to Moses the Scripture and the
Criterion (of right and wrong), that you might be led aright. And when Moses said to his
people: O my people! You have wronged yourselves by your choosing of the calf (for
worship) so turn in penitence to your Creator, and kill (the guilty among) yourselves. That
will be best for you with your Creator and He will accept your repentance. Lo! He is the
Forgiving, the
Merciful.
2:55-57 And when you said: O Moses! We will not believe in you till we see God plainly;
and even while you gazed, the lightning seized you. Then We revived you after your
extinction, that you might give thanks. And We caused the white cloud to overshadow you
and sent down on you the manna
and the quails, (saying): Eat of the good things wherewith We have provided you – and
(the Children of Israel) wronged Us not, but they did wrong themselves.
2:58-60 And when We said: Go into this township and eat freely of that which is therein,
and enter the gate prostrate, and say: `We repent'.4 We will forgive you your sins and
increase (reward) for the right-doers. But those who did wrong changed the word
replacing it with another disparaging word, so We sent down upon the evildoers a
pestilence from heaven for their evildoing. And when Moses asked

for water for his people, We said: Smite with your staff the rock. And there gushed out
therefrom twelve springs (so that) each tribe knew their drinking place. Eat and drink of
that which God has provided, and do not act corruptly, making mischief in the earth.
2:61 And when you said: O Moses! We are weary of one kind of food; so call upon your
4 According

to a tradition of the Prophet, Hittatun is a word implying submission to God and repentance .
The evil-doers changed it for a word of rebellion - i.e., they were disobedient.

19

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

Lord for us that He bring forth for us of that which the earth grows. of its herbs and its
cucumbers and its corn and its lentils and its onions. He said: Would you exchange that
which is higher for that which is lower? Go down to settled country, thus you shall get
that which you demand. And humiliation and destitution were stamped upon them and
they were visited with wrath from God. That was because they disbelieved in God's
revelations and slew the Prophets wrongfully. That was for their disobedience and
transgression.
2:62 Lo! Those who believe (in that which is revealed to you, O Muhammad), and those
who are Jews, and Christians, and Sabaeans – whoever believes in God and the Last Day
and does right – surely their reward is with their Lord, and there shall no fear come upon
them neither shall they grieve.
2:63-66 And (remember, O Children of Israel) when We made a covenant with you and
caused the Mount to tower above you, (saying): Hold fast that which We have given you,
and remember that which is therein, that you may become pious. Then, even after that,
you turned away, and if it had not been for the grace of God and His mercy, you had been
among the losers. And you know of those of you who broke the Sabbath, how We said to
them: Be you apes, despised and hated! And We made it an example to their own and to
succeeding generations, and an admonition to the God fearing.
2:67-71 And when Moses said to his people: Lo! God commands you that you sacrifice a
cow, they said: Do you make game of us? He answered: God forbid that I should be
among the foolish! They said: Pray for us to your Lord that He make clear to us what
(kind of cow) she is. (Moses) answered: Lo! (God) says: Verily she is a cow neither with
calf nor immature; (she is) between the two conditions; so do that which you are
commanded. They said: Pray for us to your Lord that He make clear to us of what color
she is. (Moses) answered: Lo! (God) says: Verily she is a yellow cow. Bright is her color,
gladdening the beholders. They said: Pray for us to your Lord that He make clear to us
what (kind of cow) she is. Lo! Cows are much alike to us; and lo! If God wills, we may be
led aright. (Moses) answered: Lo! (God) says: Verily she is a cow unyoked; she ploughs not
the soil nor waters the tilth; whole and without mark. They said: Now you have described
all the attributes in reality. So they sacrificed her, though almost they did not.
2:72-74 And (remember) when you slew a man and disagreed concerning (who murdered
him) and God brought forth that which you were hiding. And We said: Smite (the
murdered corpse) with some of (the slaughtered cow). Thus God brings the dead to life
and shows you His signs so that you may understand. Then, even after that (sign), your
hearts were hardened and became as rocks or even worse in hardness. For indeed there
are rocks from out which rivers gush, and indeed there are rocks which split asunder so
that water flows from them. And indeed there are rocks which fall down for fear of God,
and (remember) God is not unaware of what you do.
2:75-79 Have you any hope that (the Children of Israel) will be true to you when a party of
them used to listen to the Word of God, then used to change it, after they had understood
it knowingly? And when they fall in with those who believe, they say: We believe. But
when they go apart one with another they say: Do you tell them of that which God has
disclosed to you that they may contend with you before your Lord concerning it? Have
you then no sense? Are they then unaware that God knows that which they keep hidden
and that which they proclaim? And (beware) among (the Children of
Israel) are unlettered folk who know the Scripture not but consider to be true what others
lie (to them). Therefore woe to those who write the Scripture with their hands and then
say, `This is from God,' that they may purchase a small gain therewith. Woe to them for
that their hands have written, and woe to them for that they earn thereby.
2:80-82 And they say: The fire (of Hell) will not touch us except for a certain number of
days. Say: Have you received a covenant from God – truly God will not break His

20

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

covenant – or tell you concerning God that which you know not? Nay, but whosoever has
done evil and his sin surrounds him; such are rightful inhabitants of the Fire; they will
abide therein. And those who believe and do good works: such are rightful inhabitants of
the Garden. They will abide therein.
2:83-86 And (remember) when We made a covenant with the Children of Israel (saying):
Worship none except God (only), and be good to parents and to kindred and to orphans
and the needy, and speak good to people; and establish worship and pay the poor-due.
Then, after that, you (the Children of Israel) slid back, except a few of you, being averse.
And when We made with you (the Children of Israel) a covenant (saying): Shed not the
blood of your people nor turn (a party of) your people out of your dwellings. Then you
ratified (Our covenant) and you were witnesses (thereto). Yet you it is who slay each other
and drive out a party of your people from their homes, supporting one another against
them by sin and transgression. and if they came to you as captives you would ransom
them. whereas their expulsion was itself unlawful for you. Believe you in part of the
Scripture and disbelieve you in part thereof? And what is the reward of those who do so
except humiliation in the life of the world, and on the Day of Resurrection they will be
consigned to the most grievous punishment. For God is not unaware of what you (O
Children of Israel) do. Such are those who buy the life of this world at the price of the
Hereafter: Their punishment will not be lightened, neither will they have support.
2:87 And verily We gave to Moses the Scripture and We caused a train of Messengers to
follow after him, and We gave to Jesus, son of Mary, clear proofs (like raising the dead and
healing the sick, etc.), and We supported him with the holy Spirit.5 Is it ever so, that when
there comes to you (the Children of Israel) a Messenger (from God) with that which you
yourselves desire not, you grow arrogant, and some (of these Messengers) you disbelieve
and some you slay?
2:88-90 And they say: Our hearts are hardened. Nay, but God has cursed them for their
disbelief. Little is that which they believe. And when there comes to them a Scripture from
God, confirming that in their possession. though before that they were asking for a
decisive victory over those who disbelieved. and when there comes to them that which
they know (to be the Truth) they disbelieve therein. The curse of God is on disbelievers.
Evil is that for which they sell their souls: that they should disbelieve in that which God
has revealed, grudging that God should reveal of His bounty to whom He wills of His
bondmen. They have incurred anger upon anger. For disbelievers is a shameful
punishment.
2:91-93 And when it is said to them: Believe in that which God has revealed, they say: We
believe in that which was revealed to us. And they disbelieve in that which comes after it,
though it is the truth confirming that which they possess. Say (to them, O Muhammad):
Why then slew you the Prophets of God aforetime, if you are (indeed) believers? And
Moses came to you with clear proofs (of God's supreme power), yet, while he was away,
you chose the calf (for worship) and you were wrongdoers. And when We made with you
a covenant and caused the Mount to tower above you, (saying):
Hold fast by that which We have given you, and hear (Our Word), they said: We hear and
we rebel. And (worship of) the calf was made to sink into their hearts because of their
rejection (of the covenant). Say (to them): Evil is that which your belief enjoins on you, if
you are believers.

2:94-96 Say (to them): If the abode of the Hereafter in the providence of God is indeed
for you alone and not for other people (as you claim), then long for death if you are
truthful. But they will never long for it, because of that which their own hands have sent
5

`The holy Spirit' is a term for the angel of Revelation, Gabriel (on whom be peace).

21

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

before them. God is Aware of evildoers. And you will find them (Jews) more greedy of all
people and the polytheists for a little life. (Each) one of them would like to be allowed to
live a thousand years. And to live (a thousand years) would by no means remove him from
the (due) punishment. God is Seer of what they do.
2:97-98 Say (O Muhammad to the Children of Israel): Who is an enemy to Gabriel? For
he it is who has revealed (this Scripture) to your heart by God's leave, confirming that
which was (revealed) before it, and a guidance and glad tidings to believers. Who is an
enemy to God, and His angels and His Messengers, and Gabriel and Michael! Then, lo!
God (Himself) is an enemy to the disbelievers.
2:99-100 Verily We have revealed to you clear signs, and only miscreants will disbelieve in
them. Is it ever so that when you (the Children of Israel) make a covenant, a party of you
set it aside? The truth is, most of them believe not.
2:101-103 And when there comes to (the Children of Israel) a Messenger from God,
confirming that which they possess, a party of those who have received the Scripture fling
the Scripture of God behind their backs as if they knew not. And follow that which the
satans falsely related about the power of Solomon. Solomon disbelieved not; but the
satans disbelieved, teaching people sorcery and that which was revealed to the two angels
in Babel, Harut and Marut. Nor did they (the two angels) teach it to anyone till they had
said: We are only a temptation, therefore disbelieve not (by learning sorcery). And from
these two (angels) people learn that by which they cause division between man and wife;
and they cannot harm anyone with its effect except by God's permission. And they learn
that which harms them and profits them not. And surely they do know that he who
traffics therein will have no (happy) portion in the Hereafter; and surely evil is the price
for which they sell their souls, if they but knew. And if they had believed and kept from
evil, a recompense from God would be better, if they only knew.
2:104-105 O you who believe, say not (to the Prophet): `Listen to us,' but say: `Look upon
us,' and be you listeners.6 For disbelievers is a painful punishment. Neither those who
disbelieve among the People of the Scripture nor the polytheists love that there should be
sent down to you any good thing from your Lord. But God chooses for His mercy whom
He wills, and God is of infinite bounty.
2:106-108 Such of Our revelations as We abrogate or cause to be forgotten, we bring (in
place) one better or the like thereof. Know you not that God is Able to do all things?
Know you not that it is God to Whom belongs the supreme power of the heavens and the
earth; and you have not, beside God, any protector or helper? Or would you question your
Messenger as Moses was questioned aforetime? He who chooses disbelief instead of faith,
verily he has gone astray from a plain road.
2:109 Many of the People of the Scripture long to make you disbelievers after your belief,
through envy on their own account, after the truth has become manifest to them. Forgive
and be indulgent (toward them) until God gives command. Lo! God is Able to do all
things.
2:110 Establish worship, and pay the poor-due; and whatever of good you send before
(you) for your souls, you will find it with God. Lo! God is Seer of what you do.
2:111 And they say: None enters Paradise unless he be a Jew or a Christian. These are
their own desires. Say: Bring your proof (of what you state) if you are truthful.

6 Earlier, the Muslims used to say Ra`ina respectfully to get the attention of the Prophet , whereas in
Hebrew this word conveys a derogatory meaning and the Jews used to say it to the Prophet with bad
intentions, so it was replaced.

22

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

2:112 Nay, but whosoever surrenders his purpose to God while doing good, his reward is
with his Lord; and there shall no fear come upon them neither shall they grieve.
2:113 And the Jews say: The Christians follow nothing (true), and the Christians say: The
Jews follow nothing (true); yet both are readers of the Scripture. Even thus speak those
who know not. God will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection concerning that
wherein they differ.
2:114 And who does greater wrong than he who forbids the approach to the mosques of
God lest His name should be mentioned therein, and strives for their ruin? As for such
(individuals), it was not proper that they should enter them except fearing. Theirs in the
world is humiliation and theirs in the
Hereafter is an awful punishment.
2:115 To God belong the east and the west, and wherever you turn, there is God's
direction. Lo! God is All-Embracing, All-Knowing.
2:116-117 And they say: God has taken to Himself a son. Be He glorified! Nay, but
whatsoever is in the heaven and the earth is His. All are subservient to Him. The
Originator of the heavens and the earth! When He decrees a thing, He says to it only: Be!
And it is.
2:118 And those who have no knowledge say: Why does not God speak to us, or some
sign come to us? Even thus, as they now speak, spoke those (who were) before them.
Their hearts are all alike.
2:119 Lo! We have sent you (O Muhammad) with the truth, a bringer of glad tidings and a
warner. And you will not be asked about the inhabitants of Hell-fire.
2:120-121 And the Jews will not be pleased with you, nor will the Christians, till you
follow their creed. Say: Lo! The guidance of God (Himself) is the (only) guidance. And if
you should follow their desires after the knowledge which has come to you, then would
you have from God no protector nor helper. Those to whom We have given the Scripture,
who read it with the right reading, those believe in it. And whoso disbelieve in it, those are
they who are the losers.
2:122-123 O Children of Israel! Remember My favor wherewith I favored you and how I
referred you to (all) creatures. And guard (yourselves) against a Day when no soul will in
anything avail another, nor will compensation be accepted from it, nor will intercession be
of use to it; nor will they be helped.
2:124 And (remember) when his Lord tried Abraham with (His) commands, and he
fulfilled them, He said: Lo! I have appointed you a leader for people. (Abraham) said: And
of my offspring (will there be leaders)? He said: My covenant includes not the
wrongdoers.
2:125 And when We made the House (at Mecca) a resort for people and a sanctuary
(saying): Take as your place of worship the place where Abraham stood (to pray). And We
imposed a duty upon Abraham and Ishmael (saying): Purify My House for those who go
around and those who meditate therein and those who bow down and prostrate
themselves (in worship).
2:126 And when Abraham prayed: My Lord! Make it (Mecca) a secure town and bestow
upon its people fruitage, such of them as believe in God and the Last Day. He answered:
As for him who disbelieves, I shall leave him in contentment for a while, then I shall
compel him to the punishment of Fire – an evil journey's end!

23

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

2:127-129 And when Abraham and Ishmael were raising the foundations of the House,
(Abraham prayed:) Our Lord! Accept from us (this duty). Lo! You, only You, are the
Hearer, the Knower. Our Lord! And make us Muslims (submissive to You) and of our
seed a Muslim nation (submissive to You), and show us our ways of worship, and forgive
toward us. Lo! You, only You, are the Forgiving, the Merciful. Our Lord! And raise up in
their midst a Messenger from among them who shall recite to them Your revelations, and
shall instruct them in the Scripture and in wisdom and shall purify them of their sins. Lo!
You, only You, are the Mighty, the Wise.
2:130-133 And who forsakes the religion of Abraham except him who befools himself?
Verily We chose (Abraham) in the world, and lo! In the Hereafter he is among the
righteous. When his Lord said to him: Surrender! He said: I have surrendered to the Lord
of the Worlds. The same did Abraham enjoin upon his sons, and also Jacob (saying): O
my sons! Lo! God has chosen for you the (true) religion; therefore die not except as
Muslims (who have surrendered to Him). Or were you present when death came to Jacob,
when he said to his sons: What will you worship after me? They said: We shall worship
your God, the God of your fathers, Abraham and Ishmael and Isaac, One God, and to
Him we have surrendered (as Muslims).
2:134 Those are a people who have passed away. Theirs is that which they earned, and
yours is that which you earn. And you will not be asked of what they used to do.
2:135-136 And they say: Be Jews or Christians, then you will be rightly guided. Say (to
them, O Muhammad): Nay, but (we follow) the religion of Abraham, the upright, and he
was not of the polytheists. Say (O Muslims): We believe in God and that which is revealed
to us and that which was revealed to Abraham, and Ishmael, and Isaac, and Jacob, and the
Tribes, and that which Moses and Jesus received, and that which the Prophets received
from their Lord. We make no distinction between any of them, and to Him we have
surrendered (as Muslims).
2:137 And if they believe in the like of that which you believe, then are they rightly guided.
But if they turn away, then are they in schism, and God will suffice you (for defense)
against them. He is the Hearer, the Knower.
2:138 (Our religion is) the religion of God (Islam) and which religion can be better than
God's? We are His worshippers.
2:139-141 Say (to the People of the Scripture): Dispute you with us concerning God when
He is our Lord and your Lord? Ours are our works and yours your works. We worship
Him alone. Or say you that Abraham, and Ishmael, and Isaac, and Jacob, and the Tribes
were Jews or Christians? Say: Do you know best, or does God? And who is more unjust
than he who hides a testimony which he has received from God? God is not unaware of
what you do. Those are a people who have passed away; theirs is that which they earned
and yours that which you earn. And you will not be asked of what they used to do.
2:142 The foolish of the people will say: What has turned them from the Qiblah (prayer
direction) which they formerly observed? Say : To God belong the east and the west . He
guides whom He wills to a straight path.
2:143 Thus We have appointed you a middle nation, that you may be witnesses against
humankind, and that the Messenger may be a witness against you. And We appointed the
Qiblah which you formerly observed only that We might know him who follows the
Messenger, from him who turns on his heels . In truth it was a hard (test) except for those
whom God guided. But it was not God's purpose that your faith should be in vain, for
God is full of pity, Merciful toward people.
2:144-145 We have seen the turning of your face to heaven (for guidance, O Muhammad).
And now verily We shall make you turn (in prayer) toward a Qiblah that is dear to you. So

24

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

turn your face toward the Inviolable Place of Worship (i.e., the mosque of Mecca), and
you (O Muslims), wherever you may be , turn your faces (when you pray) toward it. Lo!
Those who have received the Scripture know that (this revelation) is the truth from their
Lord. And God is not unaware of what they do. And even if you brought to those who
have received the Scripture all kinds of signs, they would not follow your Qiblah, nor can
you be a follower of their Qiblah; nor are some of them followers of the Qiblah of others.
And if you should follow their desires after the knowledge that has come to you, then
surely you would be of the evildoers.
2:146-147 Those to whom We gave the Scripture recognize (this revelation) as they
recognize their sons. But lo! A party of them knowingly conceals the truth. It is the truth
from your Lord (O Muhammad), so be not you of those who waver.
2:148 And to everyone there is a direction to which he should turn; so vie with one
another in good works. Wherever you may be, God will bring you all together. Lo! God is
Able to do all things.
2:149-150 And wherever you come forth (for prayer, O Muhammad) turn your face
toward the Inviolable Place of Worship. Lo! It is the truth from your Lord, and God is not
unaware of what you do. Wherever you come forth turn your face toward the Inviolable
Place of Worship; and wherever you may be (O Muslims), turn your faces toward it (when
you pray), so that people may have no argument against you, except such of them who are
troublemakers. Fear them not, but fear Me. so that I may complete My grace upon you,
and that you may be guided.
2:151-152 Even as We have sent to you a Messenger from among you, who recites to you
Our revelations and purifies you, and teaches you the Scripture and wisdom, and teaches
you that which you knew not. Therefore remember Me, I will remember you. Give thanks
to Me, and reject Me not.
2:153-157 O you who believe! Seek help in patience, and prayer. Lo! God is with the
patient. And call not those who are slain in the way of God `dead'. Nay, they are living,
only you perceive it not. And surely We shall try you with something of fear and hunger,
and loss of wealth and lives and crops; but give glad tidings to the patient; who say, when
a misfortune strikes them: Lo! We belong to God, and lo! To Him we are returning. Such
are they on whom are peace & blessings, and mercy from their Lord. Such are those who
are the rightly guided.
2:158 Lo! (The mountains) Al-Safa and Al-Marwah are among the symbols of God. It is
therefore no sin for him who is on pilgrimage to the House (of God) or visits it, to go
between them. And he who does good of his own accord (for him), Lo! God is
Responsive, Aware.
2:159-160 Those who hide the proofs and the guidance which We revealed, after We had
made it clear in the Scripture: such are accursed of God and accursed of those who have
the power to curse. Except such of them as repent and amend and make manifest (the
truth). These are whose repentance I accept. I am the Forgiving, the Merciful.
2:161-162 Lo! Those who disbelieve, and die while they are disbelievers; on them is the
curse of God and of angels and of people combined. They ever dwell therein. The
punishment will not be lightened for them, neither will they be reprieved.
2:163 Your God is One God (so worship Him only); none should be worshipped but God
alone, the Beneficent, the Merciful.
2:164-165 Lo! In the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the alteration of night and
day, and the ships which run upon the sea with that which is of use to people, and the
water which God sends down from the sky, thereby reviving the earth after its death, and

25

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

dispersing all kinds of beasts therein, and (in) the ordinance of the winds, and the clouds,
obedient between heaven and earth: are signs (of God's supreme power) for people who
have sense. Yet of people are some who take to themselves objects of worship, (which
they set as) rivals to God, loving them with a love like (that which is the due) of God
(only). Those who believe are stauncher in their love for God, (than those who worship
others with God). Had (those who worship others with God) but known, (on the Day)
when they behold the punishment, that power belongs wholly to God, and that God is
severe in punishment!
2:166-167 (On the Day) when those who were followed disown those who followed
(them), and they behold the punishment, and all their relations will be cut off. And those
who were but followers will say: If a return were possible for us, we would disown them
even as they have disowned us. Thus will God show them their own deeds as anguish for
them, and they will not emerge from the Fire.
2:168-169 O people! Eat of that which is lawful and wholesome in the earth, and follow
not the footsteps of Satan. Lo! He is an open enemy for you. He enjoins upon you only
the evil and the foul, and that you should say concerning God that which you know not.
2:170-271 And when it is said to them: Follow that which God has revealed, they say: We
follow that wherein we found our fathers. What! Even though their fathers did not
understand anything and had no guidance? The similitude of those who disbelieve (in
relation to the Messenger) is as that of one who calls to that which hears nothing except a
shout and cry. Deaf, dumb and blind, therefore they have no sense.
2:172-173 O you who believe! Eat of the good things wherewith We have provided you,
and render thanks to God if it is (indeed) He whom you worship. He has forbidden you
only carrion, and blood, and swine flesh, and that which has been sacrificed in (the name
of) any other than God. But he who is driven by necessity (to eat what has been
forbidden), neither craving nor transgressing, it is no sin for him. Lo! God is Forgiving,
Merciful. 2:174-176 Lo! Those who hide parts of the Scripture which God has revealed,
and purchase a small gain therewith, they eat into their bellies nothing else than fire. God
will not speak to them on the Day of Resurrection, nor will purify them of their sin.
Theirs will be a painful punishment. Those are they who purchase error at the price of
guidance, and torment at the price of pardon. How patiently they seek the Fire! That is
because God has revealed the Scripture with the truth. Lo! Those who disputed as regards
the Scripture are far away in opposition.
2:177 It is not in righteousness that you turn your faces to the east and the west; but
righteous is he who believes in God and the Last Day and the angels and the Scripture and
the Prophets; and gives his wealth, for love of (God), to kinsfolk and to orphans and the
needy and the wayfarer and to those who ask, and to set slaves free; and observes proper
worship and pays the poor-due. And those who keep their covenant when they make one,
and the patient in tribulation and adversity and times of stress. Such are they who are
sincere. Such are the God fearing.
2:178-179 O you who believe! (The Law of) Retaliation is prescribed for you in the matter
of the murdered, the freeman for the freeman, and the slave for the slave, and the female
for the female. And for him who is forgiven somewhat by his (injured) brother, then settle
it on reasonable terms and payment should be made in fairness. This is alleviation and a
mercy from your Lord. He who transgresses after this will have a painful punishment.
And there is life for you in (the Law of) Retaliation, O men of understanding, that you
may become pious.
2:180-182 It is prescribed for you, when one of you approaches death, if he leaves wealth,
that he bequeaths to parents and near relatives in fairness. (This is) a duty upon the pious.
And whoever changes (the will) after he has heard it, the sin thereof is only upon those
who change it. Lo! God is Hearer, Knower. But he who fears from a testator some unjust

26

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

or sinful clause, and makes peace between the parties (by making amendments in the will
according to mutual consent), (it shall be) no sin for him. Lo! God is Forgiving, Merciful.
2:183-185 O you who believe! Fasting is prescribed for you, even as it was prescribed for
those before you. that you may become pious.(fast) a certain number of days; and (for)
him who is sick among you, or on a journey, (let him fast the same number) on other days;
and for those who can afford it there is a ransom: the feeding of a person in need. But
whoever does good of his own accord, it is better for him: and that you fast is better for
you if you did but know. The month of Ramadan in which was revealed the Quran, a
guidance for people, and clear proofs of the guidance, and the Criterion (of right and
wrong). And whoever of you is present, let him fast the month, and whoever of you is sick
or on a journey, (let him fast the same) number of other days. God desires for you, ease;
He desires not hardship for you; and (He desires) that you should complete the period (of
the fast), and that you should magnify God for having guided you, and that perhaps you
may be thankful.
2:186 And when My servants question you concerning Me, then surely I am near. I answer
the prayer of the suppliant when he cries to Me. So let them respond to My call and let
them trust in Me, in order that they may be led aright.
2:187 It is made lawful for you to conjugate with your wives on the night of the fast. They
are raiment for you and you are raiment for them. God is aware that you were deceiving
yourselves in this respect and He has turned in mercy toward you and forgave you. So
have conjugation with them and seek that which God has ordained for you, and eat and
drink until the white thread becomes distinct to you from the black thread of the dawn.
Then strictly observe the fast till nightfall and touch them not, but stay at your prayers in
the mosques. These are the limits imposed by God, so approach them not. Thus God
expounds His revelations to people that they may become pious.
2:188 And devour not your property among yourselves unjustly, nor seek by it to gain the
hearing of the judges that you may knowingly devour a portion of the property of others
wrongfully.
2:189 They ask you (O Muhammad) of new moons. Say: They are fixed seasons for people
and for the pilgrimage. It is not righteousness that you go to houses by the backs thereof
(as do the idolaters at certain seasons), but the righteous man is he who adopts piety. So
go to houses by the gates thereof, and fear God, that you may be successful
2:190-193 Fight in the way of God against those who fight against you, but begin not
hostilities. Lo! God loves not aggressors. And slay them wherever you find them and drive
them out of the places whence they drove you out, for persecution is worse than
slaughter. And fight not with them at the Inviolable Place of Worship (Mecca) until they
first attack you there, but if they attack you (there) then slay them. Such is the reward of
disbelievers. But if they desist, then lo! God is Forgiving, Merciful. And fight them until
persecution is no more, and religion is for God (alone). But if they desist, then let there be
no hostility except against wrongdoers.
2:194 The sacred month for the sacred month, (but) sacred things too are subject to
retaliation. Then whoever attacks you, attack him in a like manner as he attacked you. And
fear God, and know that God is with those who are pious.
2:195 Spend your wealth for the cause of God, and do not be cast by your own hands to
ruin; and do good. Lo! God loves those who do good.
2:196-197 Perform the pilgrimage and the visit (to Mecca) for God. And if you are barred
(from reaching Mecca) then send such offering for sacrifice such as you may find, and
shave not your heads until the offerings have reached their destination. And whoever
among you is sick or has an ailment of the head (necessitating shaving), must pay a

27

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

ransom of fasting or almsgiving or offering. And if you are in safety, then whosoever
contents himself with the visit for the pilgrimage (shall make) such offering as can be had
with ease. And whosoever cannot find such offering, then a fast of three days while on the
pilgrimage, and seven, when you have returned (to your abode); that is, ten in all. That is
for him whose folk are not present at the Inviolable Place of Worship. And fear God, and
know that God is Severe in punishment. The pilgrimage is (in) the well-known months,
and whoever is minded to perform the pilgrimage therein (let him remember that) there is
(to be) no lewdness nor abuse nor angry conversation on the pilgrimage. And whatsoever
good you do God knows it. So make provision for yourselves (for the Hereafter); for the
best provision is piety. So fear Me, O people of understanding.
2:198-199 It is no sin for you that you seek the bounty of your Lord (by engaging in trade
and commerce during the pilgrimage). But, when you press on in the multitude from
Arafat, remember God by the Sacred Monument. Remember (God) as He has guided you,
although before you were of those astray. Then hasten onward from the place whence the
multitude hastens onward, and ask forgiveness of God. Lo! God is Forgiving, Merciful.
2:200-202 And when you have completed your devotions, then remember God as you
remember your fathers or with a far more remembrance. But of people is he who says:
`Our Lord! Give to us in the world,' and he has no portion in the Hereafter. And of them
(also) is he who says: `Our Lord! Give to us in the world that which is good and in the
Hereafter that which is good, and guard us from the punishment of Fire.' For them there
is in store a goodly portion out of that which they have earned. God is Swift at reckoning.
2:203 Remember God through the appointed days. Then whoever hastens (his departure)
by two days, it is no sin for him, and whoever delays, it is no sin for him. That is for him
who adopts piety. And fear God, and know that to Him you will be gathered.
2:204-206 And among people there is he whose speech about the life of this world may
please you, and he calls God to witness as to that which is in his heart; yet he is the most
severe of the opponents. And when he turns away (from you) his effort in the land is to
spread evil therein and to destroy the crops and the offspring; and God loves not evil.
And when it is said to him: Fear God; pride takes him to sin. Hell will settle his account,
an evil resting place.
2:207 And of people is he who would sell himself, seeking the pleasure of God; and God
has compassion on (His) bondmen.
2:208-209 O you who believe! Come, all of you, into submission (to Him as Muslims); and
follow not the footsteps of Satan. Lo! He is an open enemy for you. And if you slide back
after the clear proofs have come to you, then know that God is Mighty, Wise.
2:210 Do they wait for nothing either than that God should come to them in the shadows
of the clouds with the angels? Then the case would be already judged. All cases go back to
God (for judgment). 2:211 Ask of the Children of Israel how many a clear revelation We
gave them! He who alters the grace of God after it has come to him (for him), lo! God is
Severe in punishment.
2:212 Beautified is the life of the world for those who disbelieve; they make a jest of the
believers, but those who fear (God) will be above them on the Day of Resurrection. God
gives without limit to whom He wills.
2:213 (All) people were one community (but then they differed, so) God sent (to them)
Prophets as bearers of good tidings and as warners, and revealed therewith the Scripture
with the truth that it might judge between people concerning that wherein they differed.
But those to whom (the Scripture) was sent, due to hatred of one another differed in the
same after clear proofs had come to them. And God by His will guided those who
believed to the truth of that concerning which they differed. God guides whom He wills

28

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

to a straight path.
2:214 Or think you that you will enter Paradise while yet there has not come to you the
like of (that which came to) those who passed away before you? Affliction and adversity
befell them, they were shaken as with earthquake, till the Messenger (of God) and those
who believed along with him said: When will God's help come? Now surely God's help is
near.
2:215 They ask you (O Muhammad) as to what they shall spend. Say: That which you
spend for good (must go) to parents and near kindred and orphans and the needy and the
wayfarer. And whatever good you do, lo! God is Aware of it.
2:216 Warfare is ordained for you, though it is hateful to you; but it may happen that you
hate a thing, which is good for you, and it may happen that you love a thing, which is bad
for you. God knows, and you know not.
2:217 They question you (O Muhammad) with regard to warfare in the sacred month. Say:
Warfare therein is a great (transgression), but to turn (men) from the way of God, and to
disbelieve in Him, and in the Inviolable Place of Worship (Mecca), and to expel his people
thence, is a greater (transgression) with God; for persecution is worse than killing. And
they will not cease from fighting against you until they have made you apostates from your
religion, if they can. And whoso becomes an apostate and dies in his disbelief: such are
they whose works have fallen both in the world and the Hereafter. Such are rightful
inhabitants of the Fire: they will abide therein.
2:218 Lo! Those who believe, and those who emigrate (to escape the persecution) and
fought hard in the way of God, they have hope of God's mercy. God is Forgiving,
Merciful.
2:219-220 They question you about strong drink and games of chance. Say: In both is
great sin, and (some) utility for men; but the sin of them is greater than their usefulness.
And they ask you what they should spend. Say: That which is superfluous. Thus God
makes plain to you (His) revelations that perhaps you may reflect upon the world and the
Hereafter. And they question you concerning orphans. Say: To improve their lot is best.
And if you mingle your affairs with theirs then (they are) your brothers. God knows him
who impairs from him who improves. Had God willed, He could have overburdened you.
God is Mighty, Wise.
2:221 Wed not polytheist women till they believe, for lo! A believing bondwoman is better
than a free idolatress though she please you; and give not your daughters in marriage to
polytheists till they believe, for lo! A believing slave is better than a free idolater though he
please you. These invite to the Fire, and God invites to the Garden, and to forgiveness by
His grace, and expounds thus His revelations to people that perhaps they may remember.
2:222 They question you (O Muhammad) concerning menstruation. Say: It is a harmful
thing (for a husband), so let women alone at such time and approach them not till they are
cleansed (from their menses). And when they have cleansed themselves, then approach
them as God has enjoined upon you. Truly God loves those who turn to Him, and loves
those who have a care for cleanness.
2:223-225 Your women are a tilth for you so go to your tilth as you will, and send (good
deeds) before you for your souls, and fear God, and know that you will (one day) meet
Him. Give glad tidings to believers, (O Muhammad). And make not God, by your oaths, a
hindrance to your being righteous and observing piety and making peace among people.
God is Hearer, Knower. God will not take you to task for that which is unintentional in
your oaths. But He will take you to task for that which your hearts have garnered. God is
Forgiving, Forbearing.

29

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

2:226-227 Those who forswear (sexual relations with) their wives (for) four months (or
more); then if they change their mind, lo! God is Forgiving, Merciful. But if they decide
upon divorce, then God is Hearer, Knower.
2:228 Women who are divorced shall wait, keeping themselves apart, three (monthly)
courses. And it is not lawful for them that they should conceal that which God has created
in their wombs if they are believers in God and the Last Day. And their husbands would
do better to take them back in that case if they desire reconciliation. And they (women)
have rights similar to those (of men) over them in a just manner, and men are a degree
above them. God is Mighty, Wise.
2:229 Divorce must be pronounced twice and then (a woman) must be retained in honor
or released in a just manner. And it is not lawful for you that you take from women
anything of that which you have given them; except (in the case) when both fear that they
may not be able to keep within the limits (imposed by) God. And if you fear that they may
not be able to keep the limits of God, in that case it is no sin for either of them if the
woman ransoms herself. These are the limits (imposed by) God. Transgress them not. For
whoever transgresses God's limits: such are wrongdoers.
2:230-231 And if he has divorced her (the third time), then she is not lawful to him
thereafter until she has wedded another husband. Then if he (the other husband) divorces
her it is no sin for both of them that they come together again if they consider that they
are able to observe the limits of God. These are the limits of God. He manifests them for
people who have knowledge. When you have divorced women, and they have reached
their term, then retain them in a just manner or release them in a just manner. Retain them
not to their hurt so that you transgress (the limits). He who does that has wronged his
soul. Make not the revelations of God a laughing stock (by your behavior), but remember
God's grace upon you and that which He has revealed to you of the Scripture and of
wisdom, whereby He does exhort you. Fear God and know that God is Aware of all
things.
2:232 And when you have divorced women and they reach their term, place not
difficulties in the way of their (re)marrying their husbands if it is agreed between them in a
just manner. This is an admonition for him among you who believe in God and the Last
Day. That is more virtuous for you, and purer. God knows: you know not.
2:233 Mothers shall suckle their children for two whole years, (that is) for those who wish
to complete the suckling. The duty of feeding and clothing nursing mothers in a seemly
manner is upon the father of the child. No one should be charged beyond his capacity. A
mother should not be made to suffer because of her child, nor should he, to whom the
child is born (be made to suffer) because of his child. And on the (father's) heir is
incumbent the like of that (which was incumbent on the father). If they desire to wean the
child by mutual consent and (after) consultation, it is no sin for them; and if you wish to
give your children out to nurse, it is no sin for you, provided that you pay what is due
from you in kindness. Fear God, and know that God is the Seer of what you do.
2:234 Such of you as die and leave behind them wives, they (the wives) shall wait (and not
remarry), keeping themselves apart, four months and ten days. And when they reach the
term (prescribed for them) then there is no sin for you in anything that they may do with
themselves in a just manner. God is informed of what you do.
2:235 There is no sin for you to openly propose marriage to such women or to cherish
them in your hearts. God knows that you will think of them. Do not arrange to meet them
in secret, and if you do, speak to them honorably. And do not consummate the marriage
until (the term) prescribed is run. Know that God knows what is in your minds, so beware
of Him; and know that God is Forgiving, Forbearing.
2:236-237 It is no sin for you if you divorce women before the marriage is consummated

30

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

or the dowry settled. Provide for them, the rich, according to his means, and the straitened
according to his means, a reasonable amount. (This is) a bounden duty for those who do
good. If you divorce them before you have consummated the marriage, but after their
dowry has been settled, give them the half of their dowry, unless they (the women) agree
to forgo it, or he agrees to forgo it in whose hand is the marriage tie. To forgo is nearer to
piety. And forget not kindness among yourselves. God is the Seer of what you do.
2:238-239 Be guardians of your prayers, and of the middle prayer, and stand up with
devotion to God. And if you are in danger, then (you may pray) standing or riding. And
when you are again in safety, remember God, as He has taught you that which you knew
not.
2:240-242 And those of you who are about to die and leave behind them wives, they
should bequeath for their wives a year's maintenance and residence without turning them
out, but if they leave (of their own) there is no sin for you in that which they do of
themselves provided it is honorable. God is Mighty, Wise. And for divorced women a
reasonable maintenance: a duty for those who are pious. Thus God expounds to you His
revelations so that you may understand.
2:243-244 Have you not considered those of old, who went forth from their habitations in
their thousands, fearing death, and God said to them: Die, and then He brought them
back to life. Lo! God is Lord of kindness to people, but most of the people give not
thanks. Fight in the way of God, and know that God is the Hearer, Knower.
2:245 Who is it that will lend to God a goodly loan, so that He may give it increase
manifold? God straitens and enlarges. To Him you will return.
2:246 Have you not considered the leaders of the Children of Israel after Moses, how they
said to a Prophet whom they had: Set up for us a king and we will fight in God's way. He
said: Would you then refrain from fighting if fighting were prescribed for you? They said:
Why should we not fight in God's way when we have been driven from our dwellings with
our children? Yet, when fighting was prescribed for them, they turned away, all except a
few of them. God is Aware of evildoers.
2:247 Their Prophet said to them: Lo! God has raised up Saul to be a king for you. They
said: How can he be king over us when we are more deserving of the kingdom than he is,
since he has not been given wealth enough? He said: Lo! God has chosen him above you,
and has increased him abundantly in wisdom and stature. God bestows His kingdom on
whom He wills. God is All-Embracing, All-Knowing.
2:248 And their Prophet said to them: Lo! The sign of his kingdom (being from God) is
that there shall come to you the ark wherein is peace of reassurance from your Lord, and a
remnant of that which the house of Moses and the house of Aaron left behind, the angels
bearing it. Lo! Herein shall be a sign for you if (in truth) you are believers.
2:249 And when Saul set out with the army, he said: Lo! God will try you by (the ordeal
of) a river. Whoever therefore drinks thereof, he is not of me, and whoever tastes it not he
is of me, except he who takes with his hand as much of it as fills the hand. But they drank
thereof, all except a few of them. And after he had crossed (the river), he and those who
believed with him, they said: We have no power this day against Goliath and his hosts. But
those who knew that they would meet their Lord, exclaimed: How (often has) a little
company has overcome a mighty host by God's leave! God is with the patient.
2:250-251 And when they went into the field against Goliath and his hosts they said: Our
Lord! Bestow on us patience, make our foothold sure, and give us help against the
disbelieving folk. So they routed them by God's leave and David slew Goliath; and God
gave (David) the kingdom and wisdom, and taught him of that which He willed. And if
God had not repelled some people by others, the earth would have been corrupted. But

31

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

God is Lord of kindness to (His) creatures.
2:252 These are the signs of God that We recite to you (O Muhammad) with truth, and
Lo! You are (one) of (Our) Messengers.
2:253 Of those Messengers, some of whom We have caused to excel others, and of those
there are some to whom God spoke, while some of them He exalted (above others) in
degree; and We gave Jesus, son of Mary, clear proofs and We supported him with the holy
Spirit (i.e.,the angel Gabriel) . And if God had so willed it, those who followed after them
(the Messengers) would not have fought with one another after the clear proofs had come
to them. But they differed, some of them believing and some disbelieving. And if God had
so willed it, they would not have fought with one another; but God does what He wills.
2:254 O you who believe! Spend of that which We have provided you before a Day comes
when there will be no trafficking, nor friendship, nor intercession. The disbelievers, they
are the wrongdoers.
2:255 God! None should be worshipped but God alone, the Alive, the Eternal. Neither
slumber nor sleep overtakes Him. To Him belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and
whatsoever is in the earth. Who is he that intercedes with Him except by His leave? He
knows that which is in front of them and that which is behind them, while they
encompass nothing of His knowledge except what He wills. His Throne extends across
the heavens and the earth, and He is never weary of preserving them. He is the Sublime,
the Tremendous.
2:256 There is no compulsion in religion. The right direction is henceforth distinct from
error. And he who rejects false deities and believes in God, has grasped a firm handhold
which will never break. God is Hearer, Knower.
2:257 God is the Guardian (and Protector) of those who believe. He brings them out of
darkness into light. As for those who disbelieve, their patrons are false deities. They bring
them out of light into darkness. Such are rightful inhabitants of the Fire. They will abide
therein.
2:258 Have you not considered him who had an argument with Abraham about his Lord,
because God had given him the kingdom; how, when Abraham said: My Lord is He Who
gives life and causes death, he answered: I give life and cause death. Abraham said: Lo!
God causes the sun to rise in the east, so you cause it to come up from the west. Thus was
the disbeliever absolutely defeated. And God guides not wrongdoing folk.
2:259 Or (consider you of) the like of him who, passing by a township which had fallen
into utter ruin, exclaimed: How shall God bring this township to life after its death? And
God made him die a hundred years, then brought him back to life. (God) said (to him):
How long have you tarried? (The man) said: I have tarried a day or part of a day. (God)
said: Nay, but you have tarried for a hundred years. Just look at your food and drink which
have rotted! Look at your donkey! And, that We may make of you a sign for people, look
at the bones, how We bring them together and then cover them with flesh! And when (the
matter) became clear to him, he said: I know now that God is Able to do all things.
2:260 And when Abraham said (to his Lord): My Lord! Show me how You give life to the
dead, He said: Do you not believe? Abraham said: Yes, but (I ask) in order that my heart
may be at ease. (His Lord) said: Take four of the birds and train them to follow you, then
(slaughter them and) place a part of them on each hill, then call them, they will come to
you in haste. And know that God is Mighty, Wise.
2:261-263 The similitude of those who spend their wealth in God's way is as that of a
grain which grows seven ears, in every ear a hundred grains. God gives increase manifold
to whom He wills. God is All-Embracing, All-Knowing. Those who spend their wealth for

32

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

the cause of God and afterward make not reproach and injury to follow that which they
have spent; their reward is with their Lord, and no fear shall come upon them, nor shall
they grieve. A kind word with forgiveness is better than almsgiving followed by injury.
God is Absolute, Forbearing.
2:264-267 O you who believe! Render not vain your almsgiving by reproach and injury,
like him who spends his wealth only to be seen of men and believes not in God and the
Last Day. His similitude is as that of a rock whereon is the dust of earth; on it falls heavy
rain leaving it smooth and bare. They have no control of any kind to that which they have
gained. God guides not the disbelieving folk. And the similitude of those who spend their
wealth in search of God's pleasure, and for the strengthening of their souls, is as that of a
garden on a height. Heavy rain falls on it and it brings forth its fruit twofold. And if it
does not receive heavy rain, then light rain suffices it. God is the Seer of what you do.
Would any of you like to have a garden of palm trees and vines, with rivers flowing
underneath it, with all kinds of fruit for him therein; and old age has stricken him and he
has feeble offspring; and a fiery whirlwind strikes it and it is (all) consumed by fire. Thus
God makes plain His revelations to you, in order that you may give thought. O you who
believe! Spend of the good things which you have earned, and of that which we bring
forth from the earth for you, and seek not the bad (with intent) to spend thereof (in
charity) when you would not take it for yourselves except with disdain; and know that
God is Absolute, Owner of praise.
2:268 Satan promises you destitution and enjoins on you lewdness. But God promises you
forgiveness from Himself with bounty. God is All-Embracing, All-Knowing.
2:269 He gives wisdom to whom He wills, and he, to whom wisdom is given, he truly has
received abundant good, but none remember except men of understanding.
2:270-271 Whatever alms you spend, or vow you vow, lo! God knows it, and wrongdoers
have no helpers. If you publish your almsgiving, it is well, but if you hide it and give it to
the poor, it will be better for you, and will atone for some of your ill deeds. God is
informed of what you do.
2:272 The guiding of them is not your duty (O Muhammad), but God guides whom He
wills. And whatever good thing you spend, it is for yourselves, when you spend not except
in search of God's Face; and whatever good thing you spend, it will be repaid to you in
full, and you will not be wronged.
2:273-274 (Alms are) for the poor who are straitened in the cause of God, who cannot
travel in the land (for trade). The one who knows them not, thinks that they are rich
because of their modesty. You shall know them by their mark: They do not beg of men
with importunity. And whatsoever good thing you spend, lo! God knows it. Those who
spend their wealth by night and day, by stealth and openly, verily their reward is with their
Lord, and there shall no fear come upon them neither shall they grieve.
2:275-276 Those that live on usury shall rise up before God like men whom Satan has
demented by his touch. That is because they say: Trade is just like usury; whereas God
permits trading and forbids usury. He to whom an admonition from his Lord comes, and
(he) refrains (in obedience thereto), he shall keep (the profits of) that which is past, and
his affairs (henceforth) are with God. As for him who returns (to usury), such are rightful
inhabitants of the (Hell) Fire. They will abide therein. God has blighted usury and made
almsgiving fruitful. God loves not the sinful disbelievers.
2:277-279 Lo! Those who believe and do good works and establish worship and pay the
poor-due, their reward is with their Lord and no fear shall come upon them nor shall they
grieve. O you who believe! Fear God, and give up what remains (due to you) from usury,
if you are (in truth) believers. And if you do not, then be warned of war (against you) from
God and His Messenger. And if you repent, then you have your principal (without

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

33

interest). Wrong not, and you shall not be wronged.
2:280-281 And if the debtor is in straitened circumstances, then (let there be)
postponement to (the time of) ease; and that you remit the debt as almsgiving, it would be
better for you if you did but know. And guard yourselves against a Day in which you will
be brought back to God. Then every soul will be paid in full that which it has earned, and
they will not be wronged.
2:282 O you who believe! When you contract a debt for a fixed term, record it in writing.
Let someone (learned) write down in justice. No person (able to write) should refuse to
write as God has taught him, so let him write, and let him who incurs the debt dictate, and
let him observe his duty to God, his Lord, and diminish not thereof. But if he who owes
the debt is an ignorant or feeble-minded person, or unable himself to dictate, then let the
guardian of his interests dictate in justice. And call to witness, from among your men, two
witnesses. And if two men be not (at hand) then a man and two women, of such as you
approve as witnesses, so that if one (woman) errs (through forgetfulness) the other will
remember. And the witnesses must not refuse when they are summoned. Be not averse to
writing down (the contract) whether it is small or great, with (record of) the term thereof.
That is more equitable in the sight of God and better for testimony, and the best way of
avoiding doubt between you; except only in the case when it is actual merchandise that
you transfer among yourselves from hand to hand. In that case it is no sin on you if you
write it not. See that witnesses are present when you sell to one another, and let no harm
be done to the person who wrote or the witness. If you do (harm to them) lo! It is a sin in
you. Fear God, and God will teach you. And God is Knower of all things.
2:283-284 If you be on a journey and cannot find someone to write, then a pledge in hand
(shall suffice). And if one of you entrusts to another let him who is trusted deliver up that
which is entrusted to him (according to the pact between them) and let him be afraid of
God. Hide not testimony. He who hides it, verily his heart is sinful. God is Aware of what
you do. To God (belongs) whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth;
and whether you make known what is in your minds or hide it, God will bring you to
account for it. He will forgive whom He will and He will punish whom He will. God is
Able to do all things.
2:285-286 The Messenger believes in that which has been revealed to him from his Lord
and (so do) the believers. Each one believes in God and His angels and His Scriptures and
His Messengers. (They say:) We make no distinction between any of His Messengers; and
they say: We hear, and we obey. (Grant us) Your forgiveness, our Lord, To You is the
journeying. God tasks not a soul beyond its scope, for it (is only) that which it has earned,
and against it (only) that which it has deserved. Our Lord! Condemn us not if we forget,
or miss the mark! Our Lord! Lay not on us such a burden as You did lay on those before
us! Our Lord! Impose not on us that which we have not the strength to bear! Pardon us,
absolve us and have mercy on us, You are our Protector, and give us victory over the
disbelieving folk.

3. Aal Imran: The Family of Imran
In the Name of God , the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
3:1 Alif. Lam. Mim.
3:2-4 God! None should be worshipped but God alone, the Alive, the Eternal. He has
revealed to you (O Muhammad) the Scripture with truth, confirming that which was
(revealed) before it, even as He revealed the Torah and the Gospel aforetime, for a
guidance to people; and has revealed the Criterion (of right and wrong). Lo! Those who
disbelieve the revelations of God, theirs will be a heavy punishment. God is Mighty, Able

34

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

to requite (the wrong).
3:5-6 Lo! Nothing in the earth or in the heavens is hidden from God. It is He, Who
fashions you in the wombs as pleases Him. None should be worshipped but God alone,
the Almighty, the Wise.
3:7-9 It is He, Who has revealed to you (O Muhammad) the Scripture wherein are definite
revelations. They are the substance of the Book. and others (which are) indefinite. But
those in whose hearts is doubt pursue, forsooth, that which is indefinite seeking (to cause)
dissension by seeking to explain it. None knows its explanation except God. And those
who are of sound instruction say: We believe therein; the whole is from our Lord; but only
men of understanding really heed. Our Lord! Cause not our hearts to stray after You have
guided us, and bestow upon us mercy from Your Presence. Lo! You, only You are the
Bestower. Our Lord! It is You Who will gather people together to a Day of which there is
no doubt. Lo! God fails not to keep the promise.
3:10-11 (On that Day) neither the riches nor the progeny of those who disbelieve will avail
them anything with God. They will be fuel for fire. Like Pharaoh's folk and those who
were before them, they disbelieved Our revelations and so God seized them for their sins.
And God is Severe in punishment.
3:12-13 Say (O Muhammad) to those who disbelieve: You shall be overcome and gathered
to Hell, an evil resting place. There was a sign for you in two hosts which met: one army
fighting in the way of God, and another disbelieving; whom (the disbelievers) saw as twice
their (real) number clearly with their very eyes. Thus God strengthens with His succor
whom He wills. Lo! Herein verily is a lesson for those who have eyes.
3:14 Beautified for people is love of the joys (that come) from women and offspring, and
stored up heaps of gold and silver, and horses branded (with their mark), and cattle and
land. That is comfort of the life of the world. God! With Him is a more excellent abode.
3:15-17 Say: Shall I inform you of something better than that? For the pious, with their
Lord, are Gardens underneath which rivers flow, and pure companions, and contentment
from God. God is the Seer of His bondmen, those who say: Our Lord! Lo! We believe. So
forgive us our sins and guard us from the punishment of Fire; the patient, and the
truthful, and the obedient, those who spend (and hoard not), and those who pray for
(God's) pardon in the watches of the night.
3:18 God (Himself) is witness that none should be worshipped but God alone. The angels
and the men of learning (too are witness). Maintaining His creation in justice, none should
be worshipped but God alone, the Almighty, the Wise.
3:19 Lo! Religion with God (is) Islam (i.e., surrendering to God alone by worship and
obedience) . Those who (formerly) received the Scripture differed only after knowledge
came to them, through transgression among themselves. Whoso disbelieves the
revelations of God (will find that), lo! God is Swift at reckoning.
3:20 And if they argue with you, (O Muhammad), say: I have surrendered my being to
God and (so have) those who follow me. And say to those who have received the
Scripture and those who are unlettered: Have you (too) surrendered? If they surrender (by
becoming Muslims), then truly they are rightly guided, and if they turn away, then it is
your duty only to convey the message (to them). God is the Seer of (His) bondmen.
3:21-22 Lo! Those who disbelieve the revelations of God, and slay the Prophets
wrongfully, and slay those people who enjoin equity; promise them a painful punishment.
Those are they whose works have failed in the world and the Hereafter; and they have no
helpers.

35

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

3:23-25 Have you not seen how those who have received the Scripture invoke the
Scripture of God (in their disputes) that it may judge between them; then a faction of
them turned away, being opposed (to it)? That is because they say: The Fire (of Hell) will
not touch us except for a certain number of days. That which they used to invent has
deceived them regarding their religion. How (will it be with them) when We have brought
them all together to a Day of which there is no doubt, when every soul will be paid in full
what it has earned, and they will not be wronged.
3:26-27 Say: O God! Owner of supreme power! You give power to whom You will, and
You withdraw power from whom You will. You exalt whom You will and You abase
whom You will. In Your Hand is the good. Lo! You are able to do all things. You cause
the night to pass into the day, and You cause the day to pass into the night. And You
bring forth the living from the dead, and You bring forth the dead from the living. And
You give sustenance to whom You choose, without limit.
3:28 Let not the believers take disbelievers for their helpers (and protectors) in preference
to believers. Whoever does that will never be helped by God in any way, except if you
indeed fear a danger from them. God warns you of Himself. To God is the journeying.
3:29 Say (O Muhammad): Whether you hide that which is in your breasts or reveal it, God
knows it. He knows that which is in the heavens and that which is in the earth, and God is
Able to do all things.
3:30 On the Day when every soul will find itself confronted with all that it has done of
good and all that it has done of evil, (every soul) will long that there might be a mighty
space of distance between it and that (evil). God warns you of Himself. And God is full of
pity for (His) bondmen.
3:31-32 Say (O Muhammad to people): If you love God, follow me; God will love you and
forgive you your sins. God is Forgiving, Merciful. Say: Obey God and the Messenger. But
if they turn away, lo! God loves not the disbelievers (in His guidance).
3:33-34 Lo! God preferred Adam and Noah and the family of Abraham and the family of
Imran above (all His) creatures. They were descendants one of another. God is Hearer,
Knower.
3:35-37 (Remember) when the wife of Imran said: My Lord I have vowed to You that
which is in my belly to be devoted (to Your service and worship). Accept this from me.
Lo! You, only You, are the Hearer, the Knower! And when she was delivered she said: My
Lord! Lo! I am delivered of a female. God knew best of what she was delivered. the male
is not as the female, and lo! I have named her Mary, and lo! I crave Your protection for
her and for her offspring from Satan the outcast. And her Lord accepted her with full
acceptance and bestowed to her a goodly growth; and made Zachariah her guardian.
Whenever Zachariah went into the sanctuary where she was, he found that she had food.
He said: O Mary! From where does this food come to you? She answered: It is from God.
God gives without limit to whom He wills.
3:38-41 Then Zachariah prayed to his Lord and said: My Lord! Bestow upon me of Your
bounty, goodly offspring. Lo! You are the Hearer of prayer. And the angels called to him
as he stood praying in the sanctuary: God gives you glad tidings of (a son whose name is)
John, (who comes) to confirm a Word from God, lordly, chaste, a Prophet of the
righteous. He said: My Lord! How can I have a son when age has overtaken me already
and my wife is barren? (The angel) answered: So (it will be). God does what He wills. He
said: My Lord! Appoint a sign for me. (The angel) said: The sign to you (shall be) that you
will not speak to people three days except by signals. Remember your Lord much, and
praise (Him) in the early hours of night and morning.
3:42-43 And when the angels said: O Mary! Lo! God has chosen you and made you pure,

36

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

and has preferred you above (all) the women of creation. O Mary! Be obedient to your
Lord, prostrate yourself and bow with those who bow (in worship).
3:44 This is of the news of things unknown (to you). We reveal it to you (O Muhammad).
You were not present with them when they threw their lots (to know) which of them
should be the guardian of Mary, nor were you present with them when they quarreled
(regarding that).
3:45-48 When the angels said: O Mary! God gives you glad tidings of a Word from Him,
whose name is the Messiah Jesus, son of Mary, illustrious in the world and the Hereafter,
and one of those brought near (to God). He will speak to people in his cradle and in his
manhood, and he is of the righteous. She said: My Lord! How can I have a child when no
man has touched me? He said: So (it will be). God creates what He wills. If He decrees a
thing, He says to it only: Be! and it is. And (God) will teach him the Scripture and wisdom,
and the Torah and the Gospel.
3:49-51 And (God) will make him a Messenger to the Children of Israel (saying): Lo! I
come to you with a sign from your Lord. Lo! I fashion for you out of clay the likeness of a
bird, and I breathe into it and it (becomes) a (living) bird, by God's leave. I heal him who
was born blind, and the leper, and I raise the dead, by God's leave. And I inform you what
you eat and what you store up in your houses. Lo! Herein verily is a sign for you, if you are
believers. And (I come) confirming, that which was before me of the Torah, and to make
lawful some of that which was forbidden to you. I come to you with a sign from your
Lord, so fear God and obey me. Lo! God is my Lord and your Lord, so worship Him.
That is a straight path.
3:52-53 But when Jesus became conscious of their disbelief, he cried: Who will be my
helpers in the cause of God? The disciples said: We will be God's helpers. We believe in
God, and bear you witness that we are Muslims (have surrendered to God). Our Lord! We
believe in that which You have revealed and we follow him whom You have sent, so write
us down among those who witness (to the truth).
3:54 And they (the disbelievers) schemed, and God schemed (against them): and God is
the Best of schemers.
3:55-57 When God said: O Jesus! Indeed I will take you and raise you to myself, and am
cleansing you of those who disbelieve and am setting those who follow you above those
who disbelieve until the Day of Resurrection. Then to Me you will (all) return, and I shall
judge between you as to that wherein you used to differ. As for those who disbelieve I will
punish them with a severe punishment in the world and the Hereafter; and they will have
no helpers. And as for those who believe and do good works, He will pay them their
wages in full. God loves not wrongdoers.
3:58 This (which) We recite to you is a revelation and a wise reminder.
3:59-60 Lo! The similitude of Jesus with God is as that of Adam. (God) created (Adam) of
dust (of the ground), then He said to him: Be! and he is. (This is) the truth from your Lord
(O Muhammad), so be not you of those who waver.
3:61-63 And whoso disputes with you concerning (Jesus), after the knowledge that has
come to you, say (to him): Come! We will summon our sons and your sons, and our
women and your women, and ourselves and yourselves, then we will pray humbly (to our
Lord) and (solemnly) invoke the curse of God upon those who lie. Lo! This verily is the
true narrative (of Jesus). None should be worshipped but God alone, and lo! God is the
Mighty, the Wise. And if they turn away, then lo! God is Aware of (who are) the
corrupters.
3:64-66 Say: O People of the Scripture. Come to an agreement between you and us: that

37

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

we shall worship none but God, and that we shall ascribe no partners to Him, and that
none of us shall take others for lords beside God. And if they turn away, then say: Bear
witness that we are they who are Muslims. O People of the Scripture! Why will you argue
about Abraham, when the Torah and the Gospel were not revealed till after him? Have
you then no sense? Lo! You are those who argue about that whereof you have some
knowledge: Why then argue you concerning that whereof you have no knowledge? God
knows. You know not.
3:67-68 Abraham was not a Jew, nor yet a Christian; but he was a true Muslim, and he was
not of the polytheists. Lo! Those of people who have the best claim to Abraham are those
who followed him, and this Prophet and those who believe (this Prophet); and God is the
Guardian (and Protector) of the believers.
3:69-71 A party of the People of the Scripture long to make you go astray; and they make
none to go astray except themselves, but they perceive not. O People of the Scripture!
Why disbelieve you in the revelations of God, when you (yourselves) bear witness (to their
truth)? O People of the Scripture! Why confound you truth with falsehood and knowingly
conceal the truth?
3:72-74 And a party of the People of the Scripture say: Believe in the morning in that
which is revealed to the believers (Muslims), and deny it in the evening, in order that they
may turn back (from their religion); and believe not except in one who follows your
religion. Say (O Muhammad): Lo! The guidance is God's guidance. (do not believe) that
anyone will be given the like of that which you were given, otherwise they would engage
you in argument before your Lord. Say (O Muhammad): Lo! The bounty is in God's
Hand. He bestows it on whom He wills. God is All-Embracing, All-Knowing. He selects
for His mercy whom He wills. God is of infinite bounty.
3:75-77 Among the People of the Scripture there is he who, if you trust him with a weight
of treasure, will return it to you. And among them there is he who, if you trust him with a
gold coin, will not return it to you unless you keep standing over him. That is because they
say: We have no duty to the Gentiles (non-Jews, esp. Christians). They speak a lie
concerning God knowingly. Nay, but he who fulfills his pledge and fears God; for lo! God
loves those who are pious. Lo! Those who purchase a small gain at the cost of God's
covenant and their oaths, they have no portion in the Hereafter. God will neither speak to
them nor look upon them on the Day of Resurrection, nor will He purify them of their
sin. Theirs will be a painful punishment.
3:78 And lo! There is a party of them who distort the Scripture with their tongues, so you
may think that what they say is from the Scripture, when it is not from the Scripture. And
they say: It is from God, when it is not from God; and they speak a lie concerning God
knowingly.
3:79-80 It is not (possible) for any human being to whom God had given the Scripture
and wisdom and the Prophethood that he should afterwards have said to people: Worship
me instead of God; but (what he said was): Be you faithful servants of the Lord by virtue
of your constant teaching of the Scripture and of your constant study thereof. And (God)
commanded you not that you should take the angels and the Prophets for lords. Would
(God) command you to disbelieve after you had surrendered (to God alone)?
3:81-82 When God made (His) covenant with the Prophets (He said): Behold that which I
have given you of the Scripture and knowledge. And afterward there will come to you a
Messenger (i.e., Muhammad), confirming that which you possess. You shall believe in him
and you shall help him. And then He said: Do you accept and will you shoulder this
burden of responsibility which I am placing upon you? They said : We accept! He said:
Then bear you witness, and I too shall bear witness along with you! Then whosoever after
this shall turn away : they will be miscreants.

38

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

3:83-85 Seek they other than the religion of God, when to Him submitted whosoever is in
the heavens and the earth, willingly or unwillingly, and to Him they will be returned. Say
(O Muhammad): We believe in God and that which is revealed to us and that which was
revealed to Abraham and Ishmael and Isaac and Jacob and the Tribes, and that which was
given to Moses and Jesus and the Prophets from their Lord. We make no distinction
between any of them (by believing in some and denying others), and to Him (alone) we
have surrendered (in Islam). And whoso seeks as religion other than Islam (i.e., surrender
to God in worship and obedience) it will not be accepted from him, and he will be a loser
in the Hereafter.
3:86-89 How shall God guide a people who disbelieved after believing and (after) they
bore witness that the Messenger is true and after clear proofs (of God's supreme power)
had come to them. And God guides not wrongdoing folk. As for such, their burden is that
on them rests the curse of God and of angels and of all people combined. They will abide
therein. Their punishment will not be lightened, neither will they be reprieved; except
those who afterward repent and mend their ways. Lo! God is Forgiving, Merciful.
3:90-91 Lo! Those who disbelieve after their (profession of) belief, and then went on
increasing in their disbelief: their repentance will not be accepted. And such are those who
are astray. Lo! Those who disbelieve, and die in disbelief, the (whole) earth full of gold
would not be accepted from such a one if it were offered as a ransom (for his soul). Theirs
will be a painful punishment and they will have no helpers.
3:92 You will not attain piety until you spend of that which you love. And whatsoever you
spend, God is aware thereof.
3:93-94 All food was lawful to the Children of Israel, except that which Israel (Jacob)
forbade himself, (in days) before the Torah was revealed. Say: Produce the Torah and read
it (to us) if you are truthful. And whoever shall invent a falsehood after that concerning
God, such will be wrongdoers.
3:95 Say: God speaks truth. So follow the religion of Abraham, the upright. He was not of
the polytheists.
3:96-97 Lo! The first Sanctuary appointed for people was that at Becca (Mecca) a blessed
place, a guidance to the worlds; wherein are manifest signs (among which is) the place
where Abraham stood up to pray; and whoever enters (the Sanctuary of Mecca) is safe.
And pilgrimage to the House (at Mecca) is a duty to God for (all) people who can afford
the journey. As for him who disbelieves, (let him know that) lo! God is independent of (all
His) creatures.
3:98-99 Say: O People of the Scripture! Why disbelieve you in the revelations of God,
when God (Himself) is Witness of what you do? Say: O People of the Scripture! Why you
block the believers from the way of God (Islam), seeking to make it crooked, when you
are witnesses (to the truth of Islam)? God is not unaware of what you do.
3:100-101 O you who believe! If you obey a party of those who have received the
Scripture they will make you disbelievers after your belief. How can you disbelieve, when
God's revelations are recited to you, and His Messenger is in your midst? He, who holds
fast to God, is indeed guided to the right path.
3:102-105 O you who believe! Fear God as He should be feared, and die not except as
those who have surrendered (as Muslims); and hold fast, all of you together, to the rope of
God, and do not separate. And remember God's favor to you: how you were enemies and
He made friendship between your hearts so that you became brothers by His grace; and
(how) you were upon the brink of the abyss of the fire (of Hell), and He saved you from
it. Thus God makes clear His revelations to you, that you may be guided. And let there
arise from you a nation inviting to goodness, and enjoining what is right and forbidding

39

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

what is wrong. Such are they who are successful. And be you not as those who separated
and disputed after the clear proofs had come to them. For them there is an awful
punishment.
3:106-107 On the Day when (some) faces will be whitened and (some) faces, blackened;
and as for those whose faces have been blackened, it will be said to them: Disbelieved you
after your (profession of) belief? Then taste the punishment for your disbelief. As for
those whose faces have been whitened, lo! in the mercy of God they dwell forever.
3:108-109 These are revelations of God. We recite them to you in truth. God wills no
injustice to (His) creatures. To God belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever
is in the earth; and to God all things are returned.
3:110 You are the best community that has been raised up for people. You enjoin what is
right and forbid what is wrong; and you believe in God. And if the People of the Scripture
had believed, it had been better for them. Some of them are believers (in Muhammad); but
most of them are evildoers.
3:111-312 They will not harm you except an annoyance, and if they fight against you they
will turn and flee. And afterward they will not be helped. Humiliation surrounds them
wherever they are found except (where they grasp) a rope from God and a rope from men
(an agreement of protection). They have incurred anger from their Lord, and destitution is
laid upon them. That is because they used to disbelieve the revelations of God, and slew
the Prophets without right. That is because they were rebellious and used to transgress.
3:113-115 They are not all alike. Of the People of the Scripture there is a staunch
community who recites the revelations of God in the night season, falling prostrate
(before Him). They believe in God and the Last Day, and enjoin what is right and forbid
what is wrong, and vie one with another in good works. They are of the righteous. And
whatever good they do, they will not be denied the reward thereof. God is Aware of those
who are pious.
3:116-117 Lo! The riches and the progeny of those who disbelieve will avail them nothing
against God; and such are rightful inhabitants of the (Hell) Fire. Therein they will abide.
The similitude of that which (the disbelievers) spend (of charity) in this worldly life is as
the similitude of a biting, icy wind that smites the harvest of a people who have wronged
themselves, and devastates it. God wronged them not, but they did wrong themselves.
3:118-120 O you who believe! Take not for intimates others (outside your own selves),
they would spare no pains to ruin you; they love to hamper you. (Their) hatred (of you) is
apparent by (the utterance of) their mouths, and that which their breasts hide is greater.
We have made plain for you the revelations if you will understand. Lo! You are those who
love them though they love you not, and you believe in all the Scripture. When they fall in
with you, they say: We believe; but when they go apart they bite their fingertips at you, out
of rage. Say: Perish in your rage! Lo! God is Aware of what is hidden in (your) breasts. If a
good befalls you, it is evil to them, and if disaster strikes you they rejoice thereat. But if
you persevere and become pious, their deceit will never harm you. Lo! God is surrounding
what they do.
3:121-122 And remember when you set forth from your household at daybreak to assign
to the believers their positions for the battle, God was Hearer, Knower. When two parties
of you almost fell away, and God was their Guardian (and Protector). In God do believers
put their trust.
3:123-127 God had already given you the victory at Badr, when you were weak. So fear
God in order that you may be thankful. And when you did say to the believers: Is it not
sufficient for you that your Lord should support you with three thousand angels sent
down (for your help)? Nay, but if you persevere and are pious, and (the enemy) attacks

40

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

you suddenly, your Lord will help you with five thousand angels sweeping on. God
ordained this only as a message of good news for you, and that thereby your hearts might
be at rest – victory comes only from God, the Mighty, the Wise. that He may cut off a
part of those who disbelieve, or overwhelm them so that they retire, frustrated.
3:128-129 It is no concern at all of you (O Muhammad) whether He forgives toward (the
disbelievers) or punishes them; for they are evildoers. To God belongs whatsoever is in
the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth. He forgives whom He wills, and punishes
whom He wills. God is Forgiving, Merciful.
3:130-133 O you who believe! Devour not usury, multiplying (the sum lent). Fear God
that you may be successful. And fear the Fire prepared for disbelievers. And obey God
and the Messenger, that you may find mercy. And vie one with another for forgiveness
from your Lord, and for a Paradise as wide as are the heavens and the earth, prepared for
those who are the pious.
3:134-136 Those who spend (of that which God has given them) in ease and in adversity,
those who control their wrath and are forgiving toward people; God loves the good. And
those who, when they do an evil thing or wrong themselves, remember God and implore
forgiveness for their sins. Who forgives sins except God alone?. and will not persist in
what (wrong) they have done, while they know. The reward for those will be forgiveness
from their Lord, and Gardens underneath which rivers flow, wherein they will abide
forever, a bountiful reward for workers!
3:137-138 Many nations have passed away before you until their appointed terms (set with
God) were reached. So travel in the land and see the nature of the consequence for those
who did deny (the Messengers). This is a declaration for people, a guidance and an
admonition to those who are pious.
3:139-143 Faint not nor grieve, for you will overcome them if you are (indeed) believers.
If you have received a blow, the (disbelieving) people have received a blow the like
thereof. And We bring these days to men by turns, and that God may identify those who
(truly) believe and may choose martyrs from among you; and God loves not wrongdoers.
And that God may test those who believe, and may destroy the disbelievers. Or deemed
you that you would enter Paradise while yet God has not made known those of you who
really fought hard, nor has made known those (of you) who are patient? And verily you
used to wish for death before you met it (in the field). Now you have seen it with your
eyes (and to it you are now averse)!
3:144 Muhammad is but a Messenger, Messengers (the like of whom) have passed away
before him. Will it be that when he dies or is slain, you will turn back on your heels (and
forsake Islam)? He who turns back (from Islam) harms not God, and God will reward the
thankful.
3:145 No soul can ever die except by God's leave and at a term appointed. Whoever
desires the reward of the world, We bestow on him thereof; and whoever desires the
reward of the Hereafter, We bestow on him thereof. We shall reward the thankful.
3:146-148 And with how many a Prophet have there been a number of devoted men who
fought (alongside him). But they never lost heart for that which did befall them in God's
way, nor did they weaken nor degrade themselves. God loves the patient. Their cry was
only that they said: Our Lord! Forgive us for our sins and wasted efforts, make our
foothold sure, and give us victory over the disbelieving people. So God gave them the
reward of the world and the good reward of the Hereafter. God loves those who do good
deeds.
3:149-151 O you who believe! If you obey those who disbelieve, they will make you turn
back on your heels, and you turn back (from Faith) as losers. But God is your Guardian

41

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

(and Protector), and He is the Best of helpers. We shall cast terror into the hearts of those
who disbelieve because they ascribe partners to God, for which no warrant has been
revealed. Their habitation is the Fire, and evil is the abode of the wrongdoers.
3:152 God verily made good His promise to you when you routed them by His leave, until
(the moment) He had shown you (the booty) which you love, when your courage failed
you, and you argued about the (Prophet's) order and you disobeyed. Some of you desired
the world, and some of you desired the Hereafter. Therefore He turned you away from
them, that He might test you. Yet (even with your failing) He has now forgiven you. God
is Bountiful with the believers.
3:153-154 You climbed (the hill) and paid no heed to anyone, while the Messenger, in
your rear, was calling you (to fight). Therefore He recompensed you with grief to your
grief, that (He might teach) you not to sorrow either for that which you missed or for that
which befell you. God knows what you do. Then, after grief, He sent down security for
you. As slumber overcame a party of you, while (the other) party, who were worried about
themselves thought wrongly of God according to the pagan thoughts.
They said: Have we any part in the matter? Say (O Muhammad): The matter belongs
wholly to God. They hide within themselves (a thought), which they reveal not to you,
saying: Had we had any part in the matter we should not have been slain here. Say: Even
though you had been in your houses, those for whom (God) decreed to be slain would
have gone forth to the places of their death. (All this has been) in order that God might
make apparent what is in your breasts and purify what is in your hearts. God is Aware of
what is hidden in the breasts (of people).
3:155 Lo! Those of you who turned back on the day when the two hosts met, Satan alone
it was who caused them to backslide, because of some of that which they have earned (of
sin). Now God has forgiven them. Lo! God is Forgiving, Forbearing.
3:156 O you who believe! Be not as those who disbelieved and said of their brethren who
went abroad in the land or were fighting in the field. If they had been (here) with us they
would not have died or been killed; that God may make it anguish in their hearts. God
gives life and causes death; and God is the Seer of what you do.
3:157-158 And if you be slain in God's way or die therein. Surely, forgiveness from God
and mercy are better than all that they amass. When you be slain or die, to God you are
gathered.
3:159-160 It was by the mercy of God that you were lenient with them (O Muhammad),
for if you had been severe and hard-hearted they would have forsaken you. So pardon
them and ask (God's) forgiveness for them and consult with them upon the conduct of
affairs. And when you are resolved, then put your trust in God. Lo! God loves those who
put their trust (in Him). If God is your helper none can overcome you, and if He
withdraws His help from you, who is there who can help you? In God let the believers put
their trust.
3:161-163 It is not for any Prophet to deceive. Whoever deceives will bring his deceit with
him on the Day of Resurrection. Then every soul will be paid in full what it has earned;
and they will not be wronged. Is one who follows the pleasure of God as one who has
earned condemnation from God, whose habitation is Hell, an evil journey's end? They are
in varying grades with God, and God is the Seer of what you do.
3:164 God verily has shown grace to the believers by sending to them a Messenger of their
own who recites to them His revelations, and purifies them of their sin, and teaches them
the Scripture and wisdom; although before (he came to them) they were in flagrant error.
3:165 And was it so, when a disaster smote you, though you had (previously) smitten

42

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

(them with a disaster) twice (as great), that you said: How is this? Say (to them, O
Muhammad): It is from yourselves. Lo! God is Able to do all things.
3:166-167 That which befell you, on the day when the two armies met, was by permission
of God; that He might know the true believers; and that He might know the hypocrites, to
whom it was said: Come, fight in the way of God, or defend yourselves. They answered: If
we knew of fighting we would have followed you. On that day they were nearer disbelief
than faith. They utter with their mouths a thing that was not in their hearts. God is best
Aware of what they hide.
3:168-171 Those who, while they sat at home, said of their brethren (who were fighting
for the cause of God): If they had been guided by us they would not have been slain. Say
(to them, O Muhammad): Then avert death from yourselves if you are truthful. Think not
of those, who are slain in the way of God, as dead. Nay, they are living. With their Lord,
they have provision. They rejoice in what God has bestowed upon them of His bounty,
rejoicing for the sake of those who have not yet joined them, but are left behind (not yet
martyred) that on them no fear shall come, nor shall they grieve. They rejoice because of
favor from God and kindness, and that God wastes not the reward of the believers.
3:172-175 As for those who responded to God and His Messenger after the harm befell
them (in battle); for such of them as do right and feared (God), there is great reward,
those to whom people said: Lo! The pagans have gathered against you, therefore fear
them. (The threat of danger) but increased them in Faith and they cried: God is sufficient
for us! Most Excellent is He in whom we trust! So they returned with grace and favor
from God, and no harm touched them. They followed the good pleasure of God, and
God is of infinite bounty. It is only Satan who would make (men) fear his partisans. Fear
them not; fear Me, if you are true believers.
3:176-178 Let not their conduct grieve you, who run easily to disbelief, for lo! They injure
God not at all. It is God's will to assign them no portion in the Hereafter, and theirs will
be a great punishment. Those who purchase disbelief at the price of faith harm God not at
all, but theirs will be a painful punishment. And let not those who disbelieve imagine that
the respite We give them bodes good to their souls. We only give them respite that they
may grow in sinfulness. And theirs will be a shameful punishment.
3:179 It is not (the purpose) of God to leave you in your present state till He shall separate
the wicked from the good. And it is not (the purpose of) God to let you know the unseen.
But God chooses of His Messengers, whom He wills. So believe in God and His
Messengers. If you believe and fear (God), yours will be a vast reward.
3:180 And let not those who hoard up that which God has bestowed upon them of His
bounty think that it is better for them. Nay, it is worse for them. That which they hoard
will be their collar on the Day of Resurrection. God's is the legacy of the heavens and the
earth, and God is informed of what you do.
3:181-184 Verily God heard the saying of those who said: Truly, God is poor, and we are
rich! We shall record their saying with their slaying of the Prophets without right and We
shall say: Taste you the punishment of burning (in Hell)! This is on account of that which
your own hands have sent before you (to the judgment). God shows no injustice toward
(His) slaves. (The same are) those who say: Lo! God has charged us that we believe not in
any Messenger until he brings us an offering which fire (from heaven) shall devour. Say
(to them, O Muhammad): Messengers came to you before me with miracles, and with that
(very miracle) which you describe. Why then did you slay them? (Answer that) if you are
truthful! And if they deny you, even so did they deny Messengers who were before you,
who came with miracles and with the Scriptures and with the enlightening Book.
3:185-186 Every soul will taste of death. And you will be paid on the Day of Resurrection
only that which you have fairly earned. Whoever is removed from the Fire and is made to

43

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

enter Paradise, he indeed is triumphant. The life of this world is but comfort of illusion.
Assuredly you will be tried in your property and in your persons, and you will hear much
wrong from those who were given the Scripture before you, and from the idolaters. But if
you persevere and adopt piety, then that will be from the matters of determination.
3:187-189 And (remember) when God laid a charge on those who had received the
Scripture (He said): You are to expound it to people and not to hide it. But they flung it
behind their backs and bought thereby a little gain. Verily evil is that which they have
gained thereby. Think not that those who exult in what they have given, and love to be
praised for what they have not done. Think not, they are in safety from the punishment. A
painful punishment is theirs. To God belongs the supreme power of the heavens and the
earth. God is Able to do all things.
3:190-194 Lo! In the creation of the heavens and the earth and (in) the difference of night
and day are signs for men of understanding, such as remember God, standing, sitting, and
reclining, and ponder over the creation of the heavens and the earth (and say): Our Lord!
You created not this in vain. Glory be to You! Preserve us from the punishment of Fire.
Our Lord! Whom You cause to enter the Fire: him indeed You have disgraced him. For
evildoers there will be no helpers. Our Lord! Lo! We have heard the call of one calling to
Faith: Believe you in your Lord! So we believed. Our Lord! Therefore forgive us our sins,
and expiate from us our evil deeds, and make us die the death of the righteous. Our Lord!
And give us that which You have promised to us by Your Messengers. Disgrace us not on
the Day of Resurrection. Lo! You break not the promise.
3:195 And their Lord has responded them (saying): Lo! I waste not the work of any
worker, male or female, to be lost. You are from one another. So those who migrated and
were driven from their homes and persecuted for My cause, and fought and were slain,
verily I shall expiate from them their evil deeds and verily I shall bring them into Gardens
underneath which rivers flow. A reward from God. And with God is the fairest of
rewards.
3:196-198 Let not the free disposal (and affluence) of the disbelievers throughout the land
deceive you (O Muhammad). It is but a brief comfort. And afterwards their habitation will
be Hell, an ill abode. But those who keep their duty to their Lord, for them are Gardens
underneath which rivers flow, wherein they will be forever. A gift of welcome from their
Lord. That which God has in store is better for the righteous.
3:199-200 And lo! Of the People of the Scripture there are some who believe in God and
that which is revealed to you and that which was revealed to them, humbling themselves
before God. They purchase not a trifling gain at the price of the revelations of God. Verily
their reward is with their Lord, and lo! God is Swift to take account. O you who believe!
Be patient and outdo your enemy in patience, be ready, and fear God, in order that you
may succeed.

4. An-Nisa’: The Women
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
4 :1 O people! Fear your Lord, Who created you from a single soul and from it created its
mate and from them both spread abroad a multitude of men and women. Fear God in
whom you claim (your rights) of one another, and toward the wombs (that bore you). Lo!
God has been a Watcher over you.
4:2-3 Give to orphans their wealth. Exchange not the good for the bad (in your
management thereof) nor absorb their wealth into your own wealth. Lo! That would be a
great sin. And if you fear that you will not deal fairly by the orphans, marry of women

44

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

who seem good to you, two or three or four; and if you fear that you cannot do justice (to
so many) then one (only) or (the captives) that your right hands possess. Thus it is more
likely that you will not do injustice.
4:4-5 And give to the women, (whom you marry) their dowries as a free gift; but if they of
their own accord remit to you a part thereof, then you are welcome to absorb it (in your
wealth). Give not to the incapable (what is in) your (keeping of their) wealth, which God
has given you to maintain; but feed and clothe them from it, and speak kindly to them.
4:6 Test orphans till they reach the marriageable age; then, if you find them of sound
judgment, deliver over to them their fortune; and devour it not squandering and in haste
before they should grow up. Whoever (of the guardians) is rich, let him abstain (from
taking of the property of orphans); and whoever is poor let him take thereof in a
reasonable manner (for his guardianship). And when you deliver up their fortune to the
orphans, have (the transaction) witnessed in their presence. God suffices as a Reckoner.
4:7-8 To the men (of a family) belongs a share of that which parents and near kindred
leave, and to the women a share of that which parents and near kindred leave, whether it
be little or much – a determined share. And when kinsfolk and orphans and the needy are
present at the division (of the inheritance), give them something out of it and speak kindly
to them.
4:9-10 And let those fear (in their behavior toward orphans) who if they left behind them
weak offspring would be afraid for them. So let them fear God, and speak with justice. Lo!
Those who devour the wealth of orphans wrongfully, they do but swallow fire into their
bellies, and they will be burnt in the blazing flame (of Hell).
4:11 God charges you concerning (inheritance for) your children: to the male the
equivalent of the portion of two females, and if there be women more than two, then
theirs is two-thirds of the inheritance, and if there be one (only) then half. And to his
parents a sixth of the inheritance, if he has a son; and if he has no son and his parents are
his heirs, then to his mother a third; and if he has brothers, then to his mother a sixth,
(The distribution in all cases is) after the payment of any legacy he may have bequeathed,
or debt (has been paid). Your parents or your children: You know not which of them is
nearer to you in usefulness. It is an injunction from God. Lo! God is Knower, Wise.
4:12 And to you belongs a half of that which your wives leave, if they have no children;
but if they have children then to you a fourth of that which they leave, after any legacy
they may have bequeathed, or debt (they may have contracted, has been paid). And to
them belongs a fourth of that which you leave if you have no children, but if you have a
child then an eighth of that which you leave, after any legacy you may have bequeathed, or
debt (you may have contracted, has been paid). And if a man or a woman has a distant
heir (having left neither parents nor children), and he (or she) has a brother or a sister
(only on the mother's side) then to each of them both (the brother and the sister) a sixth,
and if they be more than two, then they shall be partners in a third, after any legacy that
may have been bequeathed or debt (contracted, has been paid) so that no loss is caused (to
the heirs by willing away more than a third of the heritage). It is a commandment from
God. God is the Knower, the Forbearing.
4:13-14 These are the limits (imposed by) God. Whoever obeys God and His Messenger,
He will make him enter Gardens underneath which rivers flow, where such will dwell
forever. That will be the great success. And whoever disobeys God and His Messenger
and transgresses His (imposed) limits, He will make him enter Fire (of Hell), where such
will dwell forever; his will be a shameful punishment.
4:15 As for those of your women, who are guilty of lewdness, call to witness four of you
against them. And if they testify (to the truth of the allegation) then confine them to the
houses until death overtakes them or (until) God appoints for them a way (through new

45

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

legislation).
4:16 And as for the two of you who are guilty thereof, punish them both. And if they
repent and amend, then let them be. Lo! God is Forgiving, Merciful.
4:17-18 Forgiveness with God is toward those who do evil in ignorance (and) then turn
quickly (in repentance) to God. These are they whom God will forgive. God is ever
Knower, Wise. Repentance is not for those who do ill deeds until, when death attends
upon one of them, he says: Lo! I repent now; nor yet for those who die while they are
disbelievers. For such We have prepared a painful punishment.
4:19 O you who believe! It is not lawful for you to forcibly inherit the women (of your
deceased kinsmen), nor to hinder them (from remarrying) that you may take away a part
of that which you have given them, unless they are guilty of flagrant lewdness. But live
with them honorably, for if you hate them it may happen that you hate a thing wherein
God has placed much good.
4:20-21 And if you wish to replace one wife for another and you have given to one of
them a sum of money (however great), take nothing from it. Would you take it by the way
of calumny and manifest sin? How can you take it (back) after one of you has copulated
with the other, and they have taken a strong pledge from you?
4:22-23 And marry not those women whom your fathers married, except what has already
happened (of that nature) in the past. Lo! It was ever lewdness and abomination, and an
evil way. Forbidden to you are your mothers, and your daughters, and your sisters, and
your father's sisters, and your mother's sisters, and your brother's daughters and your
sister's daughters, and your foster mothers, and your foster sisters, and your mothers-inlaw, and your stepdaughters who are under your protection (born) of your women, to
whom you have copulated with – but if you have not copulated with them, then it is no
sin for you (to marry their daughters).and the wives of your sons who (spring) from your
own loins. And (it is forbidden to you) that you should have two sisters together (in
marriage), except what has already happened (of that nature) in the past. Lo! God is ever
Forgiving, Merciful.
4:24 And all married women (are forbidden to you except those (captives) whom your
right hands possess. It is a decree of God for you. Lawful to you are all beyond those
mentioned, so that you seek them with your wealth in honest wedlock, not debauchery.
And those of whom you seek content (by marrying them), give to them their portions
(dowry) as a duty. And there is no sin for you in what you do by mutual agreement after
the duty (has been done). Lo! God is ever Knower, Wise.
4:25 And whoso is not able to afford to marry free, believing women, let them marry from
the believing maids whom your right hands possess. God knows best (concerning) your
faith. You (proceed) one from another; so wed them by permission of their folk, and give
to them their portions (dowry) in a just manner, they being honest, not debauched nor of
loose conduct. And when they are honorably married if they commit lewdness they shall
incur half of the punishment (prescribed) for free women (in that case). This is for him
among you who fears to commit sin. But to have patience would be better for you. God is
Forgiving, Merciful.
4:26-28 God would explain to you and guide you by the examples of those who were
before you, and would turn to you in mercy. God is Knower, Wise. And God would turn
to you in mercy; but those who follow vain desires would have you go tremendously
astray. God would make the burden light for you, for man was created weak.
4:29-30 O you who believe! Squander not your wealth among yourselves in vanity, except
it be a trade by mutual consent, and kill not one another. Lo! God is ever Merciful to you.
Whoever does that through aggression and injustice, We shall cast him into Fire, and that

46

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

is ever easy for God.
4:31-32 If you avoid the great (things), which you are forbidden, We will expiate from you
your evil deeds and make you enter at a noble gate. And covet not the thing in which God
has made some of you excel others. To men, a fortune from that which they have earned,
and to women, a fortune from that which they have earned. (Envy not one another) but
ask God of His bounty. Lo! God is ever Knower of all things.
4:33 And to each We have appointed heirs of that which parents and near kindred leave;
and as for those with whom your right hands have made a covenant, give them their due.
Lo! God is ever Witness over all things.
4:34 Men are in charge of women, because God has made one of them excel the other,
and because they spend of their property (for the support of women). So good women are
the obedient, guarding in secret that which God has guarded. As for those from whom
you fear rebellion, admonish them and banish them to beds apart, and scourge them.
Then if they obey you, seek not a way against them. Lo! God is ever High Exalted, Great.
4:35 And if you fear a breach between them twain (the man and wife), appoint an arbiter
from his folk and an arbiter from her folk. If they desire
amendment God will make them of one mind. Lo! God is ever Knower, Aware.
4:36-38 And worship God. Ascribe no thing as partner to Him. (Show) kindness to
parents, and to near kindred, and orphans, and the needy, and to the neighbor who is of
kin (to you) and the neighbor who is not of kin and the fellow traveler and the wayfarer
and (the slaves) whom your right hands possess. Lo! God loves not such as are proud and
boastful, that hoard their wealth and enjoin avarice on others, and hide that which God
has bestowed upon them of His bounty. For disbelievers We prepare a shameful
punishment; and (also) those who spend their wealth in order to be seen of men, and
believe not in God nor the Last Day. Whoever takes Satan for a comrade, a bad comrade
has he.
4:39-40 What have they (to fear) if they believe in God and the Last Day and spend
(aright) of that which God has bestowed upon them. God is ever Aware of them (and all
they do). Lo! God wrongs not even of the weight of an ant; and if there is a good deed,
He will double it and will give (the doer) from Him an immense reward.
4:41-42 But how (will it be with them) when we bring of every people a witness, and We
bring you (O Muhammad) a witness against them? On that Day those who disbelieved
and disobeyed the Messenger will wish that they were level with the ground, and they can
hide no fact from God.
4:43 O you who believe! Draw not near to prayer when you are drunk, till you know that
which you utter, nor when you are polluted, except when journeying upon the road, till
you have bathed. And if you be ill, or on a journey, or one of you comes from answering
the call of nature, or you have touched women, and you find no water, than go to high
clean soil and rub your faces and your hands (therewith). Lo! God is Benign, Forgiving.
4:44-45 See you not those to whom a portion of the Scripture has been given, how they
purchase error, and seek to make you (Muslims) err from the right way? God knows best
(who are) your enemies. God is sufficient as a Guardian (and a Protector), and God is
sufficient as a Helper.
4:46 Some of those who are Jews change words from their context and say: ‘We hear and
disobey; hear you as one who hears not,’ and ‘Listen to us!’ distorting with their tongues
and slandering religion. If they had said: ‘We hear and we obey; hear you, and look at us,’
it had been better for them, and more upright. But God has cursed them for their

47

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

disbelief, so they believe not, except a few.
4:47 O you to whom the Scripture has been given! Believe in what We have revealed
concerning that which you possess, before We destroy faces so as to confound them, or
curse them as We cursed the Sabbath breakers (of the old time). The commandment of
God is always executed.
4:48 Lo! God forgives not that a partner should be ascribed to Him. He forgives (all)
except those that He wills. Whoever ascribes partners to God, he has indeed invented a
tremendous sin.
4:49-50 Have you not seen those who praise themselves for purity? Nay, God purifies
whoever He wills, and they will not be wronged even equal to the hair upon a date stone.
See, how they invent lies about God! That of itself is flagrant sin.
4:51-52 Have you not seen those to whom a portion of the Scripture has been given, how
they believe in idols and false deities, and how they say of those (idolaters) who disbelieve:
`These are more rightly guided than those who believe?' Those are the ones that God has
cursed, and he whom God has cursed; you (O Muhammad) will find no helper for him.
4:53-55 Or have they even a share in the supreme power? Then in that case, they would
not give people even the speck on a date stone. Or are they jealous of people because of
that which God of His bounty has bestowed upon them? For We bestowed upon the
house of Abraham (of old) the Scripture and Wisdom, and We bestowed on them a
mighty kingdom. And of them were (some) who believed therein and of them were
(some) who disbelieved therein. Hell is sufficient for (their) burning.
4:56-57 Lo! Those who disbelieve Our revelations, We shall expose them to the Fire. As
often as their skins are consumed We shall exchange them for fresh skins that they may
taste the torment. Lo! God is ever Mighty, Wise. And as for those who believe and do
good works, We shall make them enter Gardens underneath which rivers flow to dwell
therein forever; there for them are pure companions and We shall make them enter
plenteous shade.
4:58-59 Lo! God commands you that you restore deposits to their owners, and, if you
judge between people, that you judge with justice. Lo! Comely is this, which God
admonishes you. Lo! God is ever Hearer, Seer. O you who believe! Obey God, and obey
the Messenger and those of you who are in authority; and if you have a dispute concerning
any matter, refer it to God and the Messenger if you are (in truth) believers in God and
the Last Day. That is better and more seemly in the end.
4:60-63 Have you not seen those who pretend that they believe in that which is revealed
to you and that which was revealed before you, how they would go for judgment (in their
disputes) to false deities when they have been ordered to abjure them? Satan would
mislead them far astray. And then it is said to them: Come to that which God has revealed
and to the Messenger, you see the hypocrites turn from you with aversion. How would it
be if a misfortune smote them because of that which their own hands have sent before
(them)? Then would they come to you, swearing by God that they were seeking nothing
but harmony and kindness. Those are they, the secrets of whose hearts God knows. So
oppose them and admonish them, and address them in plain terms about their souls.
4:64 We sent; no Messenger except that he should be obeyed by God's leave. And if, when
they had wronged themselves, they had but come to you and asked forgiveness of God
and asked forgiveness of the Messenger, they would have found God Forgiving, Merciful.
4:65-68 But nay, by your Lord, they will not believe (in truth) until they make you judge of
what is in dispute between them and find within themselves no dislike of that which you
decide, and submit with full submission. And if We had decreed for them: Lay down your

48

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

lives or go forth from your dwellings, but few of them would have done it; though if they
did what they are exhorted to do, it would be better for them, and more strengthening;
and then We should bestow upon them from Ourselves an immense reward. And should
guide them to a straight path.
4:69-70 Whoso obeys God and the Messenger, they are with those to whom God has
shown favor, of the Prophets and the truthful and the martyrs and the righteous. The best
of company are they! Such is the bounty of God, and God suffices as Knower.
4:71-73 O you who believe! Take your precautions, then advance the proven ones, or
advance all together. Lo! Among you there is he who loiters; and if disaster overtook you,
he would say: God has been gracious to me since I was not present with them. And if a
bounty from God befell you, he would surely cry, as if there had been no love between
you and him: Oh, would that I had been with them, then should I have achieved a great
success!
4:74 Let those fight in the way of God who sell the life of this world for the other.
Whoever fights in the way of God, be he slain or be he victorious, on him We shall
bestow a vast reward.
4:75-76 How should you not fight for the cause of God and of the feeble among men and
of the women and the children who are crying: Our Lord! Bring us forth from out this
town of which the people are oppressors! Oh, give us from You some protector! Oh, give
us from You some defender! Those who believe do battle for the cause of God; and those
who disbelieve do battle for the cause of idols. So fight the minions of Satan. Lo! Satan's
strategy is ever weak.
4:77 Have you not seen those to whom it was said: Withhold your hands, establish
worship and pay the poor-due, but when fighting was prescribed for them behold, a party
of them fear people even as they fear of God or with greater fear, and say: Our Lord! Why
have you ordained fighting for us? If only You would give us respite yet a while! Say (to
them, O Muhammad): The comfort of this world is scant; the Hereafter will be better for
him who wards off (evil); and you will not be wronged the down upon a date stone.
4:78 wherever you may be, death will overtake you, even though you are in lofty towers.
Yet if a happy thing befalls them they say: This is from God; and if an evil thing befalls
them they say: This is of your doing (O Muhammad). Say (to them): All is from God.
What is amiss with these people that they come not near to understand a happening?
4:79-80 What ever good befalls you (O man) it is from God, and whatever ill befalls you it
is from yourself. We have sent you (Muhammad) as a Messenger to people and God is
sufficient as witness. Whoever obeys the Messenger obeys God, and whoever turns away:
We have not sent you as a warder over them.
4:81 And they say: (It is) obedience; but when they have gone forth from you, a party of
them spends the night in planning other than what you say. God records what they plan
by night. So oppose them and put your trust in God. God is sufficient as Trustee.
4:82 Will they not then ponder on the Quran? If it had been from other than God they
would have found therein much incongruity.
4:83 And if any tidings, whether of safety or fear, come to them, they noise it abroad,
whereas if they had referred it to the Messenger and such of them as are in authority,
those among them who are able to think out the matter would have known it. If it had not
been for the grace of God and His mercy, you would have followed Satan, except a few
(of you).
4:84 So fight (O Muhammad) in the way of God You are not taxed (with the responsibility

49

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

for anyone) except for yourself, and urge on the believers. Perhaps God will restrain the
might of those who disbelieve. God is stronger in might and stronger at inflicting
punishment.
4:85-87 Whoever intervenes in good cause, will have the reward thereof, and whoever
intervenes in an evil cause will bear the consequence thereof. God oversees all things.
When you are greeted with a greeting, greet you with a greeting better than it or return it.
Lo! God takes count of all things. God! None should be worshipped but God alone. He
gathers you all to a Day of Resurrection whereof there is no doubt. Who is truer in
statement than God?
4:88-89 What ails you that you have become two parties regarding the hypocrites, when
God cast them back (to disbelief) because of what they earned? Seek you to guide him
whom God has sent astray? He whom God sends astray, for him you (O Muhammad)
cannot find a road. They long that you should disbelieve as they disbelieve, that you may
be upon a level (with them). So choose not helpers (and protectors) from them till they
forsake their homes in the way of God; if they turn back (to enmity) then take them and
kill them wherever you find them, and choose neither protector nor helper from among
them,
4:90-91 Except those who seek refuge with a people between whom and you there is a
covenant, or (those who) come to you because their hearts forbid them to make war on
you or make war on their own folk. Had God willed He could have given them power
over you so that assuredly they would have fought you. So, if they hold aloof from you
and wage not war against you and offer you peace, God allows you no way against them.
You will find others who desire that they should have security from you, and security from
their own folk. So often as they are returned to hostility, they are plunged therein. If they
keep not aloof from you nor offer you peace nor hold their hands, then take them and kill
them wherever you find them. Against such We have given you clear warrant.
4:92-93 It is not for a believer to kill a believer unless (it be) by mistake. He who has killed
a believer by mistake must set free a believing slave, and pay the blood money to the
family of the slain, unless they remit it as a charity. If he (the victim) be of a people hostile
to you, and he is a believer, then (the penance is) to set free a believing slave. And if he
comes of a folk between whom and you there is a covenant, then the blood money must
be paid to his folk and (also) a believing slave must be set free. And whoever has not the
wherewithal must fast two consecutive months. A penance from God. God is Knower,
Wise. Whoever slays a believer of set purpose, his reward is Hell forever. God is wroth
against him and He has cursed him and prepared for him an awful punishment.
4:94-96 O you who believe! When you go forth (to fight) in the way of God, be careful to
discriminate, and say not to one who offers you peace: `You are not a believer;' seeking
the chance profits of this life (so that you may despoil him). With God are plenteous
spoils. Even thus (as he now is) were you before, but God has since then been gracious to
you. Therefore take care to discriminate. God is ever informed of what you do. Those of
the believers who sit still, other than those who have a (disabling) hurt, are not on equality
with those who fight hard in the way of God with their wealth and lives. God has
conferred on those who fight hard with their wealth and lives a rank above the sedentary.
To each God has promised good, but He has bestowed on those who fight a great reward
above the sedentary; degrees of rank from Him, and forgiveness and mercy. God is ever
Forgiving, Merciful.
4:97-99 Lo! As for those whom the angels take (in death) while they wrong themselves,
(the angels) will ask: In what were you engaged? They will say: We were oppressed in the
land. (The angels) will say: Was not God's earth spacious that you could have migrated
therein? As for such, their habitation will be Hell, an evil journey's end; except the feeble
among men, and the women, and the children, who are unable to devise a plan and are not
shown a way. As for such, it may be that God will pardon them. God is ever Forbearing,

50

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

Forgiving.
4:100-101 Whoever migrates for the cause of God will find much refuge and abundance in
the earth, and whoever forsakes his home, an immigrant to God and His Messenger, and
death overtakes him, his reward is then incumbent on God. God is ever Forgiving,
Merciful. And when you go forth in the land, it is no sin for you to curtail (your) worship
if you fear that those who disbelieve may attack you. In truth, the disbelievers are an open
enemy to you.
4:102 And when you (O Muhammad) are among them and arrange (their) worship for
them, let only a party of them stand with you (to worship) and let the others take their
arms. Then when they have performed their prostrations let them fall to the rear and let
another party come that has not worshipped and let them worship with you, and let the
others take their precaution and their arms. Those who disbelieve long for you to neglect
your arms and your baggage that they may attack you once and for all. It is no sin for you
to lay aside your arms, if rain impedes you or you are sick. But take your precaution. Lo!
God prepares for the disbelievers shameful punishment.
4:103 When you have performed the act of worship, remember God, standing, sitting and
reclining. And when you are in safety, observe proper worship. Worship at fixed hours has
been enjoined on the believers.
4:104 Forgive not in pursuit of the enemy. If you are suffering, lo! They suffer even as you
suffer and you have hope from God that for which they cannot hope. God is ever
Knower, Wise.
4:105-112 Lo! We reveal to you the Scripture with the truth, that you may judge between
people by that which God shows you. And be not you a pleader for the treacherous; and
seek forgiveness of God. Lo! God is ever Forgiving, Merciful. And plead not on behalf of
(people) who deceive themselves. Lo! God loves not one who is treacherous and sinful.
They seek to hide from men and seek not to hide from God. He is with them when by
night they hold discourse displeasing to Him. God ever surrounds what they do. Lo! You
are they who pleaded for them in the life of the world. But who will plead with God for
them on the Day of Resurrection, or who will then be their defender? Yet whoever does
evil or wrongs his own soul, then seeks pardon of God, will find God Forgiving, Merciful.
Whoever commits sin commits it only against himself. God is ever Knower, Wise. And
whoever commits a delinquency or a sin, then throws (the blame) thereof upon the
innocent, has burdened himself with falsehood and a flagrant sin.
4:113-114 But for the grace of God upon you (O Muhammad), and His mercy, a party of
them had resolved to mislead you, but they will mislead only themselves and they will hurt
you not at all. God revealed to you the Scripture and wisdom, and taught you that which
you knew not. The grace of God toward you has been infinite. There is no good in much
of their secret conferences except (in) him who enjoins almsgiving and goodness and
peacemaking among the people. Whoever does that, seeking the good pleasure of God;
We shall bestow on him a vast reward.
4:115 And whoever opposes the Messenger after the guidance (of God) has been
manifested to him, and follows other than the believer's way, We appoint for him that to
which he himself has turned, and expose him to Hell – an evil journey's end!
4:116 Lo! God pardons not that partners should be ascribed to him. He pardons all except
that, to whom He wills. Whoever ascribed partners to God, has wandered far astray.
4:117-121 They invoke in His stead only females (female deities); they pray to none else
than Satan, a rebel whom God cursed, and he said:(to God) Surely I will take of Your
bondmen an appointed portion, and surely I will lead them astray, and surely I will arouse
desires in them, and surely I will command them and they will cut the cattle's ears, and

51

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

surely I will command them and they will change God's creation. Whoever chooses Satan
for a patron instead of God, is verily a loser and his loss is manifest. He promises them
and stirs up desires in them, and Satan promises them only to deceive. For such, their
habitation will be Hell, and they will find no refuge therefrom.
4:122 But as for those who believe and do good works We shall bring them into Gardens
underneath which rivers flow, wherein they will abide for ever. It is a promise from God
in truth; and who can be more truthful than God in utterance?
4:123-124 It will not be in accordance with your desires, or the desires of the People of
the Scripture. He whoever does wrong, will have the recompense thereof, and will not
find against God any protector or helper. And whoever does good works, whether of male
or female, and he (or she) is a believer, such will enter Paradise and they will not be
wronged the dint in a date stone.
4:125-126 Who is better in religion than he who surrenders his purpose to God while
doing good (to men) and follows the tradition of Abraham, the upright? God (Himself)
chose Abraham for a friend. To God belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and
whatsoever is in the earth. God ever surrounds all things.
4:127 They consult you concerning women. Say: God gives to you decree concerning
them, and the Scripture which has been recited to you (gives decree), concerning female
orphans to whom you give not that which is ordained for them though you desire to
marry them, and (concerning) the weak among children, and that you should deal justly
with orphans. Whatever good you do, lo! God is ever Aware of it.
4:128-130 If a woman fears ill treatment from her husband, or desertion, it is no sin for
them twain if they make terms of peace between themselves. Peace is better. But greed has
been made present in the minds (of men). If you do good and fear (God), lo! God is ever
informed of what you do. You will not be able to do perfect justice between (your) wives,
however much you wish (to do so): But turn not altogether away (from one), leaving her
as in suspense. If you do good and fear (God), lo! God is ever Forgiving, Merciful. But if
they separate, God will compensate each out of His abundance. God is ever AllEmbracing, All-Knowing.
4:131 To God belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth And
We charged those who received the Scripture before you, and (We charge) you that you
should fear God. And if you disbelieve, lo! To God belongs whatsoever is in the heavens
and whatsoever is in the earth, and God is ever Absolute, Owner of praise.
4:132-134 To God belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth.
And God is sufficient as Defender. If He wills, He can remove you, O people, and
produce others (in your stead). God is Able to do that. Whoever desires the reward of the
world, (let him know that) with God is the reward of the world and the Hereafter. God is
ever Hearer, Seer.
4:135 O you who believe! Be you staunch in justice, witnesses for God, even though it is
against yourselves or (your) parents or (your) kindred, whether (the case be of) a rich man
or a poor man, for God is nearer to both (than you are). So follow not passion lest you
lapse (from the truth) and if you lapse or fall away, then lo! God is ever informed of what
you do.
4:136-141 O you who believe! Believe in God and His Messenger and the Scripture that
He has revealed to His Messenger, and the Scripture which He revealed aforetime.
Whoever disbelieves in God and His angels and His Scriptures and His Messengers and
the Last Day, he has verily wandered far astray, lo! Those who believe, then disbelieve and
then (again) believe, then disbelieve, and then increase in disbelief, God will never pardon
them, nor will He guide them to a way. Bear to the hypocrites the tidings that for them

52

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

there is a painful punishment, those who choose disbelievers for their helpers (and
protectors) instead of believers! Do they look for power at their hands? Lo! All power
appertains to God. He has already revealed to you in the Scripture that when you hear the
revelations of God rejected and derided: (you) sit not with them (who disbelieve and
mock) until they engage in some other conversation. Lo! In that case (if you stayed) you
would be like to them. Lo! God will gather hypocrites and disbelievers all together into
Hell; those who wait upon occasion in regard to you and, if a victory comes to you from
God, say: Are we not with you? And if the disbelievers meet with a success, say: Had we
not the mastery of you, and did we not protect you from the believers? God will judge
between you on the Day of Resurrection, and God will not give the disbelievers any way
(of success) against the believers.
4:142-143 Lo! The hypocrites seek to deceive God, but it is God who deceives them.
When they stand up to worship they perform it languidly and to be seen of men, and are
mindful of God but little, swaying between this (and that), (belonging) neither to these nor
to those. He whom God causes to go astray, you (O Muhammad) will not find a way for
him.
4:144 O you who believe! Choose not disbelievers for (your) helpers (and protectors) in
place of believers. Would you give God a clear warrant against you?
4:145-147 Lo! The hypocrites (will be) in the lowest depth of the fire, and you will find no
helper for them; except those who repent and amend and hold fast to God and make their
religion pure for God (only). Those are with the believers. And God will bestow on the
believers an immense reward. What concern has God for your punishment if you are
thankful (for His mercies) and believe (in Him)? God was ever Responsive, Aware.
4:148 God loves not the utterance of harsh speech except by one who has been wronged.
God is ever Hearer, Knower.
4:149 If you do good openly or keep it secret, or forgive evil, lo! God is Forgiving,
Powerful.
4:150-152 Lo! Those who disbelieve in God and His Messengers, and seek to make
distinction between God and His Messengers, and say: We believe in some and disbelieve
in others, and seek to choose a way in between; such are disbelievers in truth; and for
disbelievers We prepare a shameful punishment. But those who believe in God and His
Messengers and make no distinction between any of them, to them God will give their
wages; and God is ever Forgiving, Merciful.
4:153 The People of the Scripture ask of you that you should cause a (actual) Book to
descend upon them from heaven. They asked a greater thing of Moses aforetime, for they
said: Show us God plainly. The storm of lightning seized them for their transgression.
Then (even after that) they chose the calf (for worship) after clear proofs (of God's
supreme power) had come to them. And We forgave them that! And We bestowed on
Moses evident authority.
4:154-158 And We caused the Mount to tower above them at (the taking of) their
covenant: and We bade them: Enter the gate, prostrate! And we bade them: Transgress
not the Sabbath! And We took from them a firm covenant. Then because of their
breaking of their covenant, and their disbelieving in the revelations of God, and their
slaying of the Prophets wrongfully, and their saying: Our hearts are hardened – Nay, but
God has set a seal upon them for their disbelief, so that they believe not except a few –
and because of their disbelief and of their speaking against Mary a tremendous calumny;
and because of their saying: We slew the Messiah Jesus son of Mary, God's Messenger –
They slew him not nor crucified him, but it appeared so to them; and lo! Those who
disagree concerning it, and are in doubt thereof; they have no knowledge thereof except
pursuit of a conjecture; they slew him not for certain, but God took him up to Himself.

53

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

God was ever Mighty, Wise.
4:159-161 There is not one of the People of the Scripture but will believe in him before
his death, and on the Day of Resurrection he will be a witness against them – because of
the wrongdoing of the Jews We forbade them good things which were (before) made
lawful to them, and because of their much hindering from God's way, and of their taking
usury when they were forbidden it, and of their devouring people's wealth by false
pretences. We have prepared for those of them who disbelieve a painful punishment.
4:162 But those of them who are firm in knowledge and the believers believe in that
which is revealed to you, and that which was revealed before you, especially the diligent in
prayer and those who pay the poor-due, the believers in God and the Last Day. Upon
them We shall bestow immense reward.
4:163-165 Lo! We inspire you as We inspired Noah and the Prophets after him, as We
inspired Abraham and Ishmael and Isaac and Jacob and the Tribes, and Jesus and Job and
Jonah and Aaron and Solomon, and as we imparted to David the Psalms; and Messengers
We have mentioned to you before and Messengers We have not mentioned to you; and
God spoke directly to Moses; Messengers of good cheer and of warning, in order that
people might have no argument against God after the Messengers. God was ever Mighty,
Wise.
4:166 But God (Himself) testifies concerning that which He has revealed to you; in His
knowledge has He revealed it; and the angels also testify. And God is sufficient as witness.
4:167-169 Lo! Those who disbelieve and hinder (others) from the way of God, they verily
have wandered far astray. Lo! Those who disbelieve and deal in wrong, God will never
forgive them; neither will He guide them to a road, except the road of Hell, wherein they
will abide for ever. And that is ever easy for God.
4:170 O people! The Messenger has come to you with the truth from your Lord.
Therefore believe; (it is) better for you. But if you disbelieve, still, lo! To God belongs
whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth. God is ever Knower, Wise.
4:171 O People of the Scripture! Do not exaggerate in your religion nor utter anything
concerning God except the truth. The Messiah, Jesus son of Mary, was only a Messenger
of God, and His word, which He conveyed to Mary, and a spirit from Him. So believe in
God and His Messengers, and say not ‘Three’. – Cease! (It is) better for you! God is only
One God. Far is it removed from His transcendent majesty that he should have a son. His
is all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth. And God is sufficient as Defender.
4:172-173 The Messiah will never scorn to be a slave to God, nor will the favored angels.
Whoever scorns His worship and is proud, all such will He assemble to Him; then, as for
those who believed and did good works, to them will He pay their wages in full, adding to
them of His bounty; and as for those who were scornful and proud, He will punish them
with a painful punishment. And they will not find for themselves, against God, any
protector or helper.
4:174-175 O people! Now has a proof from your Lord come to you, and We have sent
down to you a clear light; as for those who believe in God, and hold fast to Him, He will
cause them to enter into His mercy and grace, and will guide them to Him by a straight
road.
4:176 They ask you for a pronouncement. Say: God has pronounced for you concerning
distant kindred. If a man dies childless and he has a sister, hers is half the heritage, and he
would have inherited from her had she died childless. And if there be two sisters, then
theirs are two-thirds of the heritage, and if they be brethren, men and women, to the male
is the equivalent of the share of two females. God expounds to you, so that you err not.

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

54

God is Knower of all things.

5. Al-Ma'idah: The Table Spread
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
5:1 O you who believe! Fulfill your undertakings. The beast of cattle is made lawful to you
(for food) except that which is announced to you (herein), game being unlawful when you
are on pilgrimage. Lo! God ordains that which pleases Him.
5:2 O you who believe! Profane not God's monuments nor the sacred month nor the
offerings nor the garlands, nor those repairing to the Sacred House, seeking the grace and
pleasure of God. But when you have left the sacred territory, then go hunting (if you will).
And let not your hatred of a folk who (once) stopped your going to the Inviolable Place of
Worship seduce you to transgress; but help you one another to piety and self-restraint.
Help not one another to sin and transgression, and fear God. Lo! God is Severe in
punishment.
5:3 Forbidden to you (for food) are carrion and blood and swine flesh, and that which has
been dedicated to any other than God, and the strangled, and the dead through beating,
and the dead through falling from a height, and that which has been killed by (the goring
of) horns, and the devoured of wild beasts, saving that which you make lawful (by the
death stroke), and that which has been immolated to idols. And (forbidden is it) that you
swear by the divining arrows. This is an abomination. This day are those who disbelieve in
despair of (ever harming) your religion; so fear them not, fear Me! This day have I
perfected your religion for you and completed My favor to you, and have chosen for you
as religion Islam. Whoever is forced by hunger, not by will, to sin: (for him) lo! God is
Forgiving, Merciful.
5:4-5 They ask you (O Muhammad) what is made lawful for them. Say: (all) good things
are made lawful for you. And those beasts and birds of prey which you have trained as
hounds are trained, you teach them that which God taught you; so eat of that which they
catch for you and mention God's name upon it, and fear God. Lo! God is Swift to take
account. This day are (all) good things made lawful for you. The food of those who have
received the Scripture is lawful for you, and your food is lawful for them. And so are the
virtuous women of the believers and the virtuous women of those who received the
Scripture before you (lawful for you) when you give them their marriage portions and live
with them in honor, not in fornication, or taking them as secret concubines. Whoever
denies the faith, his work is in vain and he will be among the losers in the Hereafter.
5:6 O you who believe! When you rise up for prayer, wash your face, and your hands up to
the elbows, and lightly rub your heads and (wash) your feet up to the ankles. And if you
are unclean, purify yourselves. And if you are sick or on a journey, or one of you comes
from answering the call of nature, or you have had contact with women, and you find not
water, then go to clean, high ground and rub your faces and your hands with some of it.
God would not place a burden on you, but He would purify you and would perfect His
grace upon you, that you may give thanks.
5:7-10 Remember God's grace upon you and His covenant by which He bound you when
you said: We hear and we obey; and fear God. God knows what is in the breasts (of men).
O you who believe! Be steadfast witnesses for God in equity, and let not hatred of any
people seduce you that you deal not justly. Be just: that is next to piety, and fear God. Lo!
God is informed of what you do. God has promised those who believe and do good
works: Theirs will be forgiveness and an immense reward. And they who disbelieve and
deny Our revelations, such are rightful inhabitants of Hell.

55

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

5:11 O you who believe! Remember God's favor to you, how a people were minded to
stretch out their hands against you but He withheld their hands from you; and fear God.
Let believers put their trust in God.
5:12-13 God made a covenant of old with the Children of Israel and We raised among
them twelve chieftains: and God said: Lo! I am with you. If you establish worship and pay
the poor-due, and believe in My Messengers and support them, and lend to God a kindly
loan, surely I shall expiate your sins, and surely I shall bring you into Gardens underneath
which rivers flow. Whoever among you disbelieves after this, will go astray from a plain
road. And because of their breaking their covenant, We have cursed them and made their
hearts hard. They change words from their context and forget a part of that whereof they
were admonished. You will not cease to discover treachery from all except a few of them.
But bear with them and pardon them. Lo! God loves those who do right.
5:14 And with those who say: `Lo! We are Christians,' We made a covenant, but they
forgot a part of that whereof they were admonished. Therefore We have stirred up enmity
and hatred among them till the Day of Resurrection, when God will inform them of their
handiwork.
5:15-16 O People of the Scripture! Now has Our Messenger come to you, expounding to
you much of that which you used to hide in the Scripture, and forgiving much. Now has
come to you light from God and a plain Scripture, whereby God guides him who seeks
His good pleasure to paths of peace. He brings them out of darkness into light by His
decree, and guides them to a straight path.
5:17 They indeed have disbelieved who say: Lo! God is the Messiah, son of Mary. Say:
Who then can do anything against God, if He had willed to destroy the Messiah, son of
Mary, and his mother and everyone on earth? God's is the supreme power of the heavens
and the earth and all that is between them. He creates what He wills. And God is Able to
do all things.
5:18 The Jews and Christians say: We are sons of God and His loved ones. Say: Why then
does He punish you or your sins? Nay, you are but mortals of His creating. He forgives
whom He wills, and punishes whom He wills. God's is the supreme power of the heavens
and the earth and all that is between them, and to Him is the journeying.
5:19 O People of the Scripture! Now has Our Messenger come to you to make things
plain after an interval (of cessation) of the Messengers, lest you should say: There came
not to us a Messenger of cheer or any warner. Now has a Messenger of cheer and a
warner come to you. God is Able to do all things.
5:20-21 And (remember) when Moses said to his people: O my people! Remember God's
favor to you, how He placed among you Prophets, and He made you kings, and gave you
that (which) He gave not to any (other) of (His) creatures. O my people! Go into the holy
land that God has ordained for you. Turn not in flight, for surely you turn back as losers:
5:22-24 They said: O Moses! Lo! A giant people (dwell) therein, and lo! We go not in, until
they go forth from there. When they go forth, then we will enter (not till then). Then out
spoke two of those who feared (their Lord, men) to whom God had been gracious: Enter
in upon them by the gate, for if you enter by it, lo! You will be victorious. So put your
trust (in God) if you are indeed believers. They said: O Moses! We will never enter (the
land) while they are in it. So go you and your Lord and fight! We will sit here.
5:25 He said: My Lord! I have control of none but myself and my brother, so distinguish
between us and the wrongdoing folk.
5:26-31 (Their Lord) said: For this the land will surely be forbidden them for forty years
that they will wander in the earth, bewildered. So grieve not over the wrongdoing folk. But

56

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

recite to them with truth the tale of the two sons of Adam, how they each offered a
sacrifice, and it was accepted from the one of them and it was not accepted from the
other. (The one) said: I will surely kill you. (The other) answered: God accepts only from
those who are pious. Even if you stretch out your hand against me to kill me, I shall not
stretch out my hand against you to kill you, lo! I fear God, the Lord of the Worlds. Lo! I
would rather you should bear the punishment of the sin against me and your own sin and
become one of the inhabitants of the Fire. That is the reward of evildoers. But (the
other's) mind imposed on him the killing of his brother, so he slew him and became one
of the losers. Then God sent a raven scratching up the ground, to show him how to hide
his brother's naked corpse. He said: Woe to me! Am I not able to be as this raven and so
hide my brother's naked corpse? And he became repentant.
5:32 For that cause We decreed for the Children of Israel that whosoever kills a human
being for other than manslaughter or corruption in the earth, it shall be as if he had killed
all humankind, and whoever saves the life of one, it shall be as if he had saved the life of
all humankind. Our Messengers came to them of old with clear proofs (of God's supreme
power), but afterwards lo! Many of them became prodigals in the earth.
5:33-34 The only reward of those who make war upon God and His Messenger and strive
after corruption in the land will be that they will be killed or crucified, or have their hands
and feet on alternate sides cut off, or will be expelled from the land. Such will be their
degradation in the world, and in the Hereafter theirs will be an awful punishment; except
those who repent, before you overpower them. For know that God is Forgiving, Merciful.
5:35 O you who believe! Fear God, and seek the way of approach to Him, and fight hard
in His way in order that you may succeed.
5:36-37 As for those who disbelieve, lo! If all that is in the earth were theirs, and as much
again therewith, to ransom them from the punishment on the Day of Resurrection, it
would not be accepted from them. Theirs will be a painful punishment. They will wish to
come out from the Fire, but they will not come from it. Theirs will be a lasting
punishment.
5:38 As for the thief, both male and female, cut off their hands. It is the reward of their
own deeds, an exemplary punishment from God. God is Mighty, Wise.
5:39-40 But whoever repents after his wrongdoing and amends, lo! God will accept his
repentance. Lo! God is Forgiving, Merciful. Know you not that to God belongs the
supreme power of the heavens and the earth? He punishes whom He wills, and forgives
whom He wills. God is Able to do all things.
5:41-42 O Messenger! Let not them grieve you who vie with one another in the race to
disbelief, those that say with their mouths: `We believe,' but their hearts believe not, and
of the Jews: listeners for the sake of falsehood, listeners on behalf of other folk who come
not to you, changing words from their context and saying: If this be given to you, receive
it but if this be not given to you, then beware! He whom God destines to sin, you (by your
efforts) will avail him nothing against God. Those are they for whom the will of God is
that He cleanses not their hearts. Theirs in the world will be humiliation, and in the
Hereafter an awful punishment, listeners for the sake of falsehood! Greedy for illicit gain!
If then they have recourse to you (Muhammad) judge between them or disclaim
jurisdiction. If you disclaim jurisdiction, then they cannot harm you at all. But if you judge,
judge between them with equity. Lo! God loves the equitable.
5:43-45 How come they to you for judgment when they have the Torah, wherein God has
delivered judgment (for them)? Yet even after that they turn away. Such (folk) are not
believers. Lo! We did reveal the Torah, wherein is guidance and a light, by which the
Prophets who surrendered (to God) judged the Jews, and the rabbis and the priests
(judged) by such of God's Scripture as they were bidden to observe, and there too were

57

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

they witnesses. So fear not people, but fear Me. And barter not My revelations for a little
gain. Whoever judges not by that which God has revealed: such are disbelievers. And We
prescribed for them therein: The life for the life, and the eye for the eye, and the nose for
the nose, and the ear for the ear, and the tooth for the tooth, and for wounds retaliation.
But whoever forgoes it (in the way of charity) it shall be expiation for him. Whoever
judges not by that which God has revealed: such are wrongdoers.
5:46-47 And We caused Jesus, son of Mary, to follow in their footsteps, confirming that
which was (revealed) before him, and We bestowed on him the Gospel wherein is
guidance and a light, confirming that which was (revealed) before it in the Torah a
guidance and an admonition to those who are pious. Let the People of the Gospel judge
by that which God has revealed therein. Whoever judges not by that which God has
revealed; such are evildoers.
5:48-50 And to you have We revealed the Scripture with the truth, confirming whatever
Scripture was before it, and a watcher over it. So judge between them by that which God
has revealed, and follow not their desires away from the truth that has come to you. For
each We have appointed a divine law and a traced out way. Had God willed He could have
made you one community. But that He may try you by that which He has given you (He
has made you as you are). So vie with one another in good works. To God you will all
return, and He will then inform you of that wherein you differ. So judge between them by
that which God has revealed, and follow not their desires, but beware of them lest they
seduce you from some part of that which God has revealed to you. And if they turn away,
then know that God's will is to smite them for some sin of theirs. Lo! Many of people are
evildoers. Is it a judgment of the time of (pagan) ignorance that they are seeking? Who is
better than God for judgment to a people who have certainty (in their belief)?
5:51-53 O you who believe! Take not the Jews and Christians for helpers (and protectors).
They are helpers (and protectors) one to another. He among you who takes them for
helpers (and protectors) is (one) of them. Lo! God guides not wrongdoing folk. And you
see those in whose heart is a disease race toward them, saying: We fear lest a change of
fortune befalls us. And it may happen that God will give (to you) the victory, or a
commandment from His presence. Then will they repent of their secret thoughts. Then
will the believers say (to the People of the Scripture): Are these they who swore by God
their most binding oaths that they were surely with you? Their works have failed, and they
have become the losers.
5:54 O you who believe! Whoever of you becomes a renegade from his religion, (know
that in his stead) God will bring a people whom He loves and who love Him, humble
toward believers, stern toward disbelievers, fight hard in the way of God and will fear not
the blame of any blamer. Such is the grace of God that He gives to whom He wills. God is
All Embracing, All Knowing.
5:55-56 Your helper (and protector) can be only God; and His Messenger and those who
believe, who establish worship and pay the poor-due, and bow down (in prayer). And
whoever takes God and His Messenger and those who believe for friend (will know that),
lo! The party of God, they are the victorious.
5:57-58 O you who believe! Choose not for helpers (and protectors) such of those who
received the Scripture before you, and of the disbelievers, as make a jest and sport of your
religion. And fear God if you are true believers. And when you call to prayer they take it
for a jest and sport. That is because they are a folk who understand not.
5:59-60 Say: O People of the Scripture! Do you blame us for anything else than that we
believe in God and that which is revealed to us and that which was revealed before, and
because most of you are evildoers? Shall I tell you of a worse (case) than theirs for
retribution with God? Worse (is the case of him) whom God has cursed, him on whom
His wrath has fallen! Worse is he of whose sort God has turned some to apes and swine,

58

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

and who worships idols. Such are in worse plight and further astray from the plain road.
5:61-63 When they come to you (Muslims), they say: We believe; but they came in unbelief
and they went out in the same; and God knows best what they were hiding. And you see
many of them vying with one another in sin and transgression and their devouring of illicit
gain. Verily evil is what they do. Why do the rabbis and the priests not forbid their
uttering sinful words and their devouring of illicit gain? Verily evil is their handiwork.
5:64 The Jews say: God's Hand is fettered. Their hands are fettered and they are accursed
for saying so. Nay, but both His hands are spread out wide in bounty. He bestows as He
wills. That which has been revealed to you from your Lord is certain to increase the
contumacy and disbelief of many of them, and We have cast among them enmity and
hatred till the Day of Resurrection. As often as they light a fire for war, God extinguishes
it. Their effort is for corruption in the land, and God loves not corrupters.
5:65-66 If only the People of the Scripture would believe and adopt piety, surely We
should expiate their sins from them and surely We should bring them into Gardens of
Delight. If they had observed the Torah and the Gospel and that which was revealed to
them from their Lord, they would surely have been nourished from above them and from
beneath their feet. Among them there are people who are moderate, but many of them are
of evil conduct.
5:67-69 O Messenger! Make known that which has been revealed to you from your Lord,
for if you do it not, you will not have conveyed His message. God will protect you from
people. Lo! God guides not the disbelieving folk. Say: O People of the Scripture! You
have nothing (of guidance) till you observe the Torah and the Gospel and that which was
revealed to you from your Lord. That which is revealed to you (Muhammad) from your
Lord is certain to increase the contumacy and disbelief of many of them. But grieve not
for the disbelieving folk. Lo! Those who believe, and those who are Jews, and Sabaeans,
and Christians – whosoever believes in God and the Last Day and does right – no fear
shall come upon them neither shall they grieve.
5:70-71 We made a covenant of old with the Children of Israel and We sent to them
Messengers. As often as a Messenger came to them with that which their souls desired not
(they became rebellious). Some (of them) they denied and some they slew. They thought
no harm would come of it, so they were willfully blind and deaf. And afterward God
turned (in mercy) toward them. Now (even after that) are many of them willfully blind and
deaf. God is the Seer of what they do.
5:72-74 They surely disbelieve who say: Lo! God is the Messiah, son of Mary. The Messiah
(himself) said: O Children of Israel, worship God, my Lord and your Lord. Lo! Whoever
ascribes partners to God, for him God has forbidden Paradise. His abode is the Fire. For
evildoers there will be no helpers. They surely disbelieve who say: Lo! God is the third of
three; when there is no God except the One God. If they desist not from saying so, a
painful punishment will fall on those of them who disbelieve. Will they not rather repent
to God and seek forgiveness of Him? For God is Forgiving, Merciful.
5:75-76 The Messiah, son of Mary, was no other than a Messenger, Messengers (the like of
whom) had passed away before him. And his mother was a truthful woman. And they
both used to eat (earthly) food. See how we make the revelations clear for them, and see
how they are turned away! Say: Worship you in place of God that which possesses for you
neither hurt nor use? God it is Who is the Hearer, the Knower.
5:77-79 Say: O People of the Scripture! Stress not in your religion other than the truth,
and follow not the vain desires of folk who erred of old and led many astray, and erred
from a plain road. Those of the Children of Israel who went astray were cursed by the
tongue of David, and of Jesus, son of Mary. That was because they rebelled and used to
transgress. They restrained not one another from wickedness. Verily evil was that they

59

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

used to do!
5:80-81 You see many of them taking as helpers (and protectors) those who disbelieve.
Surely, ill for them is that which they themselves send on before them: that God will be
wroth with them and in the punishment they will abide. If they believed in God and the
Prophet and that which is revealed to him, they would not choose them for their helpers
(and protectors). But many of them are of evil conduct.
5:82 You will find the most vehement of people in hostility to those who believe (to be)
the Jews and the idolaters. And you will find the nearest of them in affection to those who
believe (to be) those who say: Lo! We are Christians. That is because there are among
them priests and monks, and because they are not proud.
5:83-84 When they listen to that which has been revealed to the Messenger, you see their
eyes overflowing with tears because of their recognition of the Truth. They say: Our Lord,
we believe. Inscribe us as among the witnesses. How should we not believe in God and
that which has come to us of the Truth? And (how should we not) hope that our Lord will
bring us in, along with righteous folk?
5:85-86 God has rewarded them for that saying: Gardens underneath which rivers flow,
wherein they will abide forever. That is the reward of the good. But those who disbelieve
and deny Our revelations, they are inhabitants of the Hell-fire.
5:87-88 O you who believe! Forbid not the good things that God has made lawful for you,
and transgress not. Lo! God loves not transgressors. Eat of that which God has bestowed
on you as food lawful and good, and fear God in Whom you are believers.
5:89 God will not take you to task for that which is unintentional in your oaths, but He
will take you to task for the oaths which you swear in earnest. The expiation for this is the
feeding of ten of the needy with the average of what you feed your own folk, or the
clothing of them, or the liberation of a slave, and for him who finds not (the wherewithal
to do so) then a three-day fast. This is the expiation of your oaths that you have sworn;
and keep your oaths. Thus God expounds to you His revelations in order that you may
give thanks.
5:90-91 O you who believe! Strong drink and games of chance and idols and divining
arrows are only an infamy of Satan's handiwork. Leave it aside in order that you may
succeed. Satan seeks only to cast among you enmity and hatred by means of strong drink
and games of chance, and to turn you from remembrance of God and from (His) worship.
Will you then have it done?
5:92-93 Obey God and obey the Messenger, and beware! But if you turn away, then know
that the duty of Our Messenger is only plain conveyance (of the message). There shall be
no sin (imputed) to those who believe and do good works for what they may have eaten
(in the past). So fear (God), and do good works; and again: fear (God), and believe; and
once again: fear (God), and do right. God loves the good.
5:94-96 O you who believe! God will surely try you somewhat (in the matter) of the game,
which you take with your hands and your spears, that God may know him, who fears Him
in secret. Whoever transgresses after this, for him there is a painful punishment. O you
who believe! Kill no wild game while you are on the pilgrimage. Whoever of you kills it of
set purpose, he shall pay its forfeit in the equivalent of that which he has killed, of
domestic animals, the judge to be two men among you known for justice; (the forfeit) to
be brought as an offering to the Kabah; or, for expiation, he shall feed poor persons, or
the equivalent thereof in fasting, that he may taste the evil consequences of his deed. God
forgives whatever (of this kind) may have happened in the past, but whoever relapses,
God will take retribution from him. God is Mighty, Able to requite (the wrong). To hunt
and to eat the fish of the sea is made lawful for you, a provision for you and for seafarers;

60

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

but to hunt on land is forbidden you so long as you are on the pilgrimage. And fear God,
to Whom you will be gathered.
5:97-98 God has appointed the Kabah, the Sacred House, a standard for people, and the
sacred month and the offerings and the garlands. That is so that you may know that God
knows whatsoever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth, and that God is Knower
of all things. Know that God is severe in punishment, but that God (also) is Forgiving,
Merciful.
5:99-100 The duty of the Messenger is only to convey (the message) God knows what you
proclaim and what you hide. Say: Evil and good are not alike, even though the plenty of
evil attracts you. So fear God, O men of understanding that you may succeed.
5:101-102 O you who believe! Ask not of things that, if they were made known to you,
would trouble you; but if you ask of them when the Quran is being revealed, they will be
made known to you. God pardons this, for God is Forgiving, Forbearing. A folk, before
you, asked (for such disclosures) and then disbelieved therein. 5:103-104 God has not
appointed anything in the nature of a Bahirah or a Saibah or a Wasilah or a Hami , but
those who disbelieve invent a lie against God. Most of them have no sense. And when it is
said to them : Come to that which God has revealed and to the Messenger, they say :
Enough for us is that wherein we found our fathers. What! Even though their fathers had
no knowledge whatsoever, and no guidance?
5:105 O you who believe! You have charge of your own souls. He who errs cannot injure
you if you are rightly guided. To God you will all return; and then He will inform you of
what you used to do.
5:106-108 O you who believe! Let there be witnesses between you when death draws near
to one of you, at the time of bequest – two witnesses, just men from among you, or two
others from another tribe, in case you are campaigning in the land and the calamity of
death befalls you. You shall detain them both after the prayer, and if you doubt, they shall
be made to swear by God (saying): We will not take a bribe, even though it were (on
behalf of) a near kinsman nor will we hide the testimony of God, for then indeed we
should be of the sinful. But then, if it is afterwards ascertained that both of them merit
(the suspicion of) sin, let two others take their place of those nearly concerned, and let
them swear by God, (saying): Verily our testimony is truer than their testimony and we
have not transgressed (the bounds of duty), for then indeed we should be of the evildoers.
Thus it is more likely that they will hear true witness or fear that after their oath, the oath
(of others) will be taken. So fear God and hearken. God guides not the froward folk.
5:109 In the Day when God gathers together the Messengers, and says: What was your
response (from people)? They will say: We have no knowledge. Lo! You, only You are the
Knower of Things Hidden.
5:110-111 When God says: O Jesus, son of Mary! Remember My favor to you and to your
mother; how I strengthened you with the holy Spirit, so that you spoke to people in the
cradle, as in maturity; and how I taught you the Scripture and Wisdom and the Torah and
the Gospel; and how you shaped clay as it were the likeness of a bird by My permission,
and did blow upon it and it was a bird by My permission, and you did heal him who was
born blind and the leper by My permission; and how you did raise the dead, by My
permission and how I restrained the Children of Israel from (harming) you when you
came to them with clear proofs, and those of them who disbelieved exclaimed: This is
nothing other than mere magic; and when I inspired the disciples, (saying): Believe in Me
and in My Messenger, they said: We believe. Bear witness that we are Muslims (have
surrendered to Thee).
5:112-115 When the disciples said: O Jesus, son of Mary! Is your Lord able to send down
for us a table spread with food from heaven? He said: Fear God, if you are true believers.

61

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

(They said:) We wish to eat thereof, that we may satisfy our hearts and know that you have
spoken the truth to us, and that we may be witnesses. Jesus, son of Mary, said: O God,
Lord of us! Send down for us a table spread with food from heaven, that it may be a feast
for us, for the first of us and for the last of us, and a sign from You. Give us sustenance,
for You are the Best Of Sustainers. God said: Lo! I send it down for you. And whoever
disbelieves of you afterward, I will surely punish him with a punishment wherewith I have
not punished any of (My) creatures.
5:116-118 And when God says: O Jesus, son of Mary! Did you say to people: Take my
mother and me, for two gods beside God? He says: Be glorified It was not mine to utter
that to which I had no right. If I used to say it, then, You knew it. You know what is in
my mind, and I know not what is in Your mind. Lo! You, only You, are the Knower of
Things Hidden. I spoke to them only that which You commanded me, (saying): Worship
God, my Lord and your Lord. I was a witness of them while I lived among them, and
when You took me You were the Watcher over them. You are Witness over all things. If
You punish them, lo! They are Your slaves, and if You forgive them (lo! They are Your
slaves). Lo! You, only You, are the Mighty, the Wise.
5:119-120 God says: This is a day in which their truthfulness profits the truthful, for theirs
are Gardens underneath which rivers flow, wherein they are secure forever, God taking
pleasure in them and they in Him. That is the great triumph. To God belongs the supreme
power of the heavens and the earth and whatsoever is therein, and He is Able to do all
things.

6. Al-An`am: Cattle
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
6:1-3 Praise be to God, Who has created the heavens and the earth, and has appointed
darkness and light. Yet those who disbelieve ascribe rivals to their Lord. It is He, Who has
created you from clay, and has decreed a term for you. A term is fixed with Him. Yet still
you doubt! He is God in the heavens and in the earth. He knows both your secret and
your utterance, and He knows what you earn.
6:4-7 Never came there to them a revelation of the revelations of God but they did turn
away from it. And they denied the truth when it came to them. But there will come to
them the tidings of that which they used to deride. See they not how many a generation
We destroyed before them, whom We had established in the earth more firmly than We
have established you, and We shed on them abundant showers from the sky, and made the
rivers flow beneath them. Yet We destroyed them for their sins, and created after them
another generation. Had we sent down to you (Muhammad) (actual) writing upon
parchment, so that they could feel it with their hands, those who disbelieve would have
said: This is nothing else than mere magic.
6:8-9 They say: Why has not an angel been sent down to him? If We sent down an angel,
then the matter would be judged; no further time would they be allowed (for reflection).
Had We appointed an angel (Our Messenger), We assuredly had made him (as) a man
(that he might speak to men); and (thus) obscured for them (the truth) they (now)
obscure.
6:10-13 Messengers (of God) have been derided before you, but that of what they scoffed,
surrounded such of them as they did deride. Say (to the disbelievers): Travel in the land,
and see the nature of the consequence for the rejecters! Say: To whom belongs whatever is
in the heavens and the earth? Say: To God. He has prescribed for Himself mercy, that He
may bring you all together to a Day whereof there is no doubt. Those who ruin their own
souls will not believe. To Him belongs whatsoever rests in the night and the day. He is the

62

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

Hearer, the Knower.
6:14-15 Say: Shall I choose for a protector other than God, the Originator of the heavens
and the earth, who feeds and is never fed? Say: I am ordered to be the first to surrender
(to Him). And be not you (O Muhammad) of the polytheists. Say: I fear, if I rebel against
my Lord, the retribution of an Awful Day.
6:16-18 He from whom (such retribution) is averted on that Day (God) has in truth had
mercy on him. That will be the signal triumph. If God touches you with affliction, there is
none that can relieve there from except Him, and if He touches you with good fortune
(there is none that can impair it); for He is Able to do all things. He is the Omnipotent
over His slaves, and He is the Wise, the Knower.
6:19 Say (O Muhammad): What thing is of most weight in testimony? Say: God is witness
between you and me. And this Quran has been inspired in me, that I may warn you and
whomsoever it may reach with it. Do you in truth bear witness that there are gods beside
God? Say: I bear no such witness. Say: He is only One God. Lo! I am innocent of that
which you associate (with Him).
6:20 Those to whom We gave the Scripture recognize (this Revelation) as they recognize
their sons. Those who ruin their own souls will not believe.
6:21-24 Who does greater wrong than he who invents a lie against God and denies His
revelations? Lo! The wrongdoers will not be successful And on the Day We gather them
together We shall say to those who ascribed
partners (to God): Where are (now) those partners of your make-believe? Then will they
have no contention except that they will say: By God, our Lord, we never were
polytheists. See how they lie against themselves, and (how) the thing, which they devised
has failed them!
6:25-27 Of them are some who listen to you, but We have placed upon their hearts veils,
lest they should understand, and in their ears a deafness. If they saw every sign they would
not believe therein; to the point that, when they come to you to argue with you, the
disbelievers say: This is nothing else than fables of the men of old. And they forbid (men)
from it and avoid it, and they ruin none except themselves, though they perceive not. If
you could see when they are set before the Fire and they say: Oh, would that we might
return! Then would we not deny the revelations of our Lord but we would be of the
believers!
6:28-30 Nay, but that has become clear to them which before they used to hide. And if
they were sent back they would return to that which they are forbidden. Lo! They are liars.
And they say: There is nothing except our life of the world, and we shall not be raised
(again). If you could see when they are set before their Lord! He will say: Is not this real?
They will say: Yea, verily, by our Lord! He will say: Taste now the retribution for that you
used to disbelieve.
6:31-32 They indeed are losers who deny their meeting with God until, when the hour
comes on them suddenly, they cry: Alas for us, that we neglected it! They bear upon their
back their burdens. Ah, evil is that which they bear! Nothing is the life of the world except
a pastime and a sport. Far better is the abode of the Hereafter for those who keep their
duty (to God). Have you then no sense?
6:33-35 We know well how their talk grieves you, though in truth they deny not you
(Muhammad) but evildoers flout the revelations of God. Messengers indeed have been
denied before you, and they were patient under the denial and the persecution till Our
succor reached them. There is none to alter the decisions of God. Already there has
reached you (somewhat) of the tidings of the Messengers (We sent before). And if their

63

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

aversion is grievous to you, then, if you can, seek a way down into the earth or a ladder to
the sky that you may bring to them a sign (to convince them all)!.If God willed, He could
have brought them all together to the guidance. So be not you among the foolish ones.
6:36-37 Only those who hear can accept. As for the dead, God will raise them up; then to
Him they will be returned. They say: Why has no sign been sent down upon him from his
Lord? Say: Lo! God is Able to send down a sign. But most of them know not.
6:38 There is not an animal in the earth, or a flying creature, flying on two wings, but they
are peoples like you. We have neglected nothing in the Book (of Our decrees). Then to
their Lord they will be gathered.
6:39 Those who deny our revelations are deaf and dumb in darkness. Whom God wills He
sends astray, and whom He wills He places on a straight path.
6:40-41 Say: Can you see yourselves, if the punishment of God come upon you or the
Hour come upon you, calling upon other than God? Do you then call (for help) to any
other than God? (Answer that) if you are truthful. Nay, but to Him you call, and He
removes that (because) of which you call to Him, if He wills, and you forget whatever
partners you ascribed to Him.
6:42-45 We have sent already to people that were before you, and We visited them with
tribulation and adversity, in order that they might grow humble. If only, when our disaster
came on them, they had been humble! But their hearts were hardened and Satan made all
that they used to do seem fair to them! Then, when they forgot that whereof they had
been reminded, We opened to them the gates of all things till, even as they were rejoicing
in that which they were given, We seized them unawares, and lo! They were
dumbfounded. So of the people who did wrong the last remnant was cut off. Praise be to
God, Lord of the Worlds!
6:46-47 Say: Have you imagined, if God should take away your hearing and your sight and
seal your hearts, who is the God who could restore it to you except God? See how We
display the revelations to them? Yet still they turn away. Say: Can you see yourselves, if the
punishment of God comes upon you unawares or openly? Would any perish except
wrongdoing folk?
6:48-49 We send not the Messengers except as bearers of good news and warners.
Whoever believes and does right, no fear shall come upon them neither shall they grieve.
But as for those who deny Our revelations, torment will afflict them for they used to
disobey.
6:50 Say (O Muhammad to the disbelievers): I say not to you (that) I possess the treasures
of God, nor that I have knowledge of the Unseen; and I say not to you: Lo! I am an angel.
I follow only that which is inspired in me. Say: Are the blind man and the seer equal? Will
you not then take thought?
6:51-53 Warn hereby those who fear (because they know) that they will be gathered to
their Lord, for whom there is no protector nor intercessor beside Him, that they may
adopt piety. Repel not those who call upon their Lord at morn and evening, seeking His
Face. You are not accountable for them in anything, nor are they accountable for you in
anything, that you should repel them and be of the wrongdoers. And even so do We try
some of them by others, that they say: Are these they whom God favors among us? Is not
God best aware of the thanks givers?
6:54-55 And when those who believe in Our revelations come to you, say: Peace be to
you! Your Lord has prescribed for Himself mercy, that whoever of you does evil through
ignorance and repents afterward thereof and does right, (for him) lo! God is Forgiving,
Merciful. Thus do We expound the revelations that the way of the unrighteous may be

64

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

manifest.
6:56-58 Say: I am forbidden to worship those on whom you call instead of God. Say: I will
not follow your desires, for then should I go astray and I should not be of the rightly
guided. Say: I am (relying) on clear proof from my Lord, while you deny Him. I have not
that for which you are impatient. The decision is for God only. He tells the truth and He
is the Best of deciders. Say: If I had that for which you are impatient, then would the case
(ere this) have been decided between me and you. God is best aware of the wrongdoers.
6:59-60 And with Him are the keys of the invisible. None but He knows them. And He
knows what is in the land and the sea. Not a leaf falls but He knows it, not a grain amid
the darkness of the earth, nothing of wet or dry but (it is noted) in a clear record. He it is
Who gathers you at night and knows that which you commit by day. Then He raises you
again to life therein, that the term appointed (for you) may be accomplished. And
afterward to Him is your return. Then He will proclaim to you what you used to do.
6:61-62 He is the Omnipotent over His slaves. He sends guardians over you until, when
death comes to one of you, Our messengers receive him, and they neglect not. Then are
they restored to God, their Lord, the Just. Surely His is the judgment. And He is the most
swift of reckoners.
6:63-64 Say: Who delivers you from the darkness of the land and the sea? You call upon
Him humbly and in secret, (saying): If we are delivered from this (fear) we truly will be of
the thankful. Say: God delivers you from this and from all afflictions. Yet you attribute
partners to Him.
6:65-67 Say: He is able to send punishment upon you from above you or from beneath
your feet, or to bewilder you with dissension and make you taste the tyranny of one
another. See how We display the revelations so that they may understand Your people (O
Muhammad) have denied it, though it is the Truth. Say: I am not put in charge of you. For
every announcement there is a term, and you will come to know.
6:68-69 And when you see those who meddle with Our revelations, withdraw from them
until they meddle with another topic. And if Satan causes you to forget, sit not, after the
remembrance, with the congregation of wrongdoers. Those who fear (God) are not
accountable for them in anything, but the Reminder (must be given to them) that perhaps
they (too) may adopt piety.
6:70 And forsake those who take their religion for a pastime and a jest, and whom the life
of the world deceives. Remind (people) hereby lest a soul be destroyed by what it earns. It
has beside God no helpers (and protectors) nor intercessor, and though it offers every
compensation it will not be accepted from it. Those are they who perish by their own
deserts. For them is a drink of boiling water and a painful punishment, because they
disbelieved.
6:71-73 Say: Shall we cry, instead of to God, to that which neither profits us nor hurts us,
and shall we turn back after God has guided us, like one bewildered whom the satans have
infatuated in the earth, who has companions who invite him to the guidance (saying):
Come to us? Say: Lo! The guidance of God is Guidance, and we are ordered to surrender
to the Lord of the Worlds, and to establish worship and fear Him, and it is He to Whom
you will be gathered. It is He, Who created the heavens and the earth in truth. On that
Day when He says: Be! And it is. His word is the truth, and His will be the supreme power
on the Day when the trumpet is blown. Knower of the invisible and the visible, He is the
Wise, the Aware.
6:74 (Remember) when Abraham said to his father Azar: Take you idols for gods? Lo! I
see you and your folk in error manifest.

65

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

6:75-79 Thus did We show Abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth that he
might be of those possessing certainty: When the night grew dark upon him, he beheld a
star. He said: This is my Lord. But when it set, he said: I love not things that set. And
when he saw the moon uprising, he exclaimed: This is my Lord. But when it set, he said:
Unless my Lord guides me, I surely shall become one of the folk who are astray. And
when he saw the sun uprising, he cried: This is my Lord! This is greater! And when it set,
he exclaimed: O my people! Lo! I am free from all that you associate (with Him). Lo! I
have turned my face toward him Who created the heavens and the earth, as one by nature
upright, and I am not of the polytheists.
6:80-83 His people argued with him. He said: Dispute you with me concerning God when
He has guided me? I fear not at all that which you set beside Him unless my Lord wills.
My Lord includes all things in His knowledge: Will you not then remember? How should I
fear that which you set up beside Him, when you fear not to set up beside God that for
which He has revealed to you no warrant? Which of the two factions has more right to
safety? (Answer me that) if you have knowledge. Those who believe and obscure not their
belief by wrongdoing, theirs is safety; and they are rightly guided. That is Our argument.
We gave it to Abraham against his folk. We raise to degrees of wisdom of whom We will.
Lo! Your Lord is Wise, Aware.
6:84-87 And We bestowed upon him Isaac and Jacob; each of them We guided; and Noah
did We guide aforetime; and of his seed (We guided) David and Solomon and Job and
Joseph and Moses and Aaron. Thus do We reward the good. And Zachariah and John and
Jesus and Elias. Each one (of them) was of the righteous. And Ishmael and Elisha and
Jonah and Lot. Each one of them did We prefer above (Our) creatures, with some of their
forefathers and their offspring and their brethren; and We chose them and guided them to
a straight path.
6:88-90 Such is the guidance of God wherewith He guides whom He wills of His
bondmen. But if they had set up (for worship) anything beside Him, (all) that they did
would have been in vain. Those are they to whom We gave the Scripture and command
and prophethood. But if these disbelieve therein, then indeed We shall entrust it to a
people who will not be disbelievers therein. Those are they whom God guides, so follow
their guidance. Say (O Muhammad to people): I ask of you no fee for it. Lo! It is nothing
but a Reminder to (His) creatures. 6:91 And they measure not the power of God its true
measure when they say: God has revealed nothing to a human being. Say (to the Jews who
speak thus): Who revealed the Book which Moses brought, a light and guidance for
people, which you have put on parchments which you show, but you hide much (thereof),
and by which you were taught that which you knew not yourselves nor (did) your fathers
(know it)? Say: God. Then leave them to their play of caviling.
6:92 And this is a blessed Scripture which We have revealed, confirming that which (was
revealed) before it, that you may warn the Mother of Villages (Mecca) and those around
her. Those who believe in the Hereafter believe herein, and they are careful of their
worship.
6:93-94 Who is guilty of more wrong than he who forges a lie against God, or says: I am
inspired, when he is not inspired in anything; and who says: I will reveal the like of that
which God has revealed? If you could see, when the wrongdoers reach the pangs of death
and the angels stretch their hands out, saying: Deliver up your souls. This day you are
awarded a punishment of degradation for what you spoke of concerning God other than
the truth, and scorned His signs. Now have you come to Us solitary as We did create you
at the first, and you have left behind you all that We bestowed upon you, and We behold
not with you, your intercessors, of whom you claimed that they possessed a share in you.
Now is the bond between you severed, and that which you presumed has failed you.
6:95-99 Lo! God (it is) Who splits the grain of corn and the date stone (for sprouting). He
brings forth the living from the dead, and is the bringer forth of the dead from the living.

66

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

Such is God. How then are you perverted? He is the Cleaver of the Daybreak, and He has
appointed the night for stillness, and the sun and the moon for reckoning. That is the
measuring of the Mighty, the Wise. And it is He, Who has set for you the stars that you
may guide your course by them amid the darkness of the land and the sea. We have
detailed Our revelations for a people who have knowledge. And it is He, Who has
produced you from a single being, and (has given you) a habitation and a repository. We
have detailed Our revelations for a people who have understanding. It is He, Who sends
down water from the sky, and therewith We bring forth buds of every kind; We bring
forth the green blade from which we bring forth the thick clustered grain; and from the
date palm, from the pollen thereof, spring pendant bunches; and (We bring forth) gardens
of grapes, and the olive and the pomegranate, alike and unlike. Look upon the fruit
thereof, when they bear fruit, and upon it's ripening. Lo! Herein verily are signs for a
people who believe.
6:100-101 Yet they ascribe as partners to Him the jinn, although He did create them, and
impute falsely, without knowledge, sons and daughters to Him. Glorified be He and high
exalted above (all) that they ascribe (to Him). The Originator of the heavens and the earth!
How can He have a child, when there is for Him no consort, when He created all things
and is Aware of all things?
6:102-103 Such is God, your Lord. None should be worshipped but God alone, the
Creator of all things, so worship Him. And He takes care of all things. Vision
comprehends Him not, but He comprehends (all) vision. He is the Subtle, the Aware.
6:104 Proofs have come to you from your Lord, so whoever sees, it is for his own good,
and whoever is blind is blind to his own hurt. And I am not a keeper over you.
6:105 Thus do We display Our revelations that they may say (to you, O Muhammad):
`You have studied,' and that We may make (it) clear for people who have knowledge.
6:106-108 Follow that which is inspired in you from your Lord; none should be
worshipped but God alone; and turn away from the polytheists. Had God willed, they had
not been idolatrous. We have not set you as a keeper over them, nor are you responsible
for them. Revile not those to whom they pray, beside God lest they wrongfully revile God
through ignorance. Thus to every nation have We made their deed seem fair. Then to their
Lord is their return, and He will tell them what they used to do.
6:109-111 And they swear a solemn oath by God that if there comes to them a sign, they
will believe therein. Say: Signs are with God and (so is) that which tells you that if such
came to them they would not believe.
6:110 We confound their hearts and their eyes. As they believed not therein at the first,
We let them wander blindly on in their contumacy.
6:111-113 And though We should send down the angels to them, and the dead should
speak to them, and We should gather against them all things in array, they would not
believe unless God so willed. Howbeit, most of them are ignorant? Thus have We
appointed to every Prophet an adversary – devils of humankind and jinn who inspire in
one another plausible discourse through guile. If your Lord willed, they would not do so;
so leave them alone with their devising; that the hearts of those who believe not in the
Hereafter may incline thereto, and that they may take pleasure therein, and that they may
earn what they are earning.
6:114-115 Shall I seek other than God for a judge, when it is He, Who has revealed to you
(this) Scripture, fully explained? Those to whom We gave the Scripture (aforetime) know
that it is revealed from your Lord in truth. So be not you (O Muhammad) of the waverers.
Perfected is the word of your Lord in truth and justice. There is nothing that can change
His words. He is the Hearer, the Knower.

67

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

6:116-117 If you obeyed most of those on earth they would mislead you far from God's
way. They follow nothing but an opinion, and they do but guess. Lo! Your Lord, He
knows best who errs from His way; and He knows best (who are) the rightly guided.
6:118-121 Eat of that over which the name of God has been mentioned, if you are
believers in His revelations. How should you not eat of that over which the name of God
has been mentioned, when He has explained to you that which is forbidden to you, unless
you are compelled to. But lo! Many are led astray by their own lusts through ignorance.
Lo! your Lord, He is best aware of the transgressors. Forsake the outwardness of sin and
the inwardness thereof. Lo! Those who garner sin will be awarded that which they have
earned. And eat not of that on which God's name has not been mentioned, for lo! It is
abomination. Lo! The satans do inspire you
minions to dispute with you. But if you obey them, you will be in truth polytheists.
6:122-124 Is he who was dead and We have raised him to life, and set for him a light
wherein he walks among men, as him whose similitude is in utter darkness from where he
cannot emerge? Thus is their conduct made fair-seeming for the disbelievers. And thus
have We made in every city great ones of its wicked ones, that they should plot therein.
They do but plot against themselves, though they perceive not. And when a sign comes to
them, they say: We will not believe till we are given that which God's Messengers are
given. God knows best with whom to place His message. Humiliation from God and
heavy punishment will smite the guilty for their scheming.
6:125 And whomsoever it is God's will to guide, He expands his bosom to Islam
(surrender), and who ever He wills to send astray, He makes his bosom close and narrow
as if he were engaged in sheer ascent to the sky. Thus God lays humiliation upon those
who disbelieve.
6:126-127 This is the path of your Lord, a straight path. We have detailed Our revelations
for a people who take heed. For them is the abode of peace with their Lord. He is their
Guardian (and Protector) because of what they used to do.
6:128 On the Day when He will gather them together (He will say): O you assembly of the
jinn! Many of humankind did you seduce. And their adherents among humankind will say:
Our Lord! We enjoyed one another, but now we have arrived at the appointed term that
You appointed for us. He will say: Fire is your home. Abide therein forever, except him
whom God wills (to deliver). Lo! Your Lord is Wise, Aware.
6:129 Thus We let some of the wrongdoers have power over others because of what they
are wont to earn.
6:130-134 O you assembly of the jinn and humankind! Came there not to you Messengers
of
your own who recounted to you My signs and warned you of the meeting of this your
Day? They will say: We testify against ourselves. And the life of the world deceived them.
And they testify against themselves that they were disbelievers. This is because your Lord
destroys not the townships unjustly while their people are unconscious (of the wrong that
they do). For all there will be ranks from what they did. Your Lord is not unaware of what
they do. Your Lord is the Absolute, the Lord of Mercy. If He wills, He can remove you
and can cause what He will to follow after you, even as He raised you from the seed of
other folk. Lo! That which you are promised will surely come to pass, and you cannot
escape.
6:135 Say (O Muhammad): O my people! Work according to your power. Lo! I too am
working. Thus you will come to know for which of us will be the happy sequel. Lo! The
wrongdoers will not be successful.

68

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

6:136 They assign to God, of the crops and cattle that He created, a portion, and they say:
`This is God's'–in their make believe – `and this is for (His) partners in regard to us.'
Thus, that which (they assign) to His partners in regard to them, reaches not God and that
which (they assign) to God, goes to their (so called) partners. Evil is their ordinance.
6:137 Thus have their (so called) partners (of God) made the killing of their children to
seem fair to many of the polytheists, that they may ruin them and make their faith obscure
for them. Had God willed (it otherwise), they would not have done so. So leave them
alone with their devices.
6:138-139 And they say: Such cattle and crops are forbidden. No one is to eat of them
except whom we will – in their make believe – cattle whose backs are forbidden, cattle
over which they mention not the name of God. (All that is) a lie against Him. He will
repay them for that which they invent. And they say: That which is in the bellies of such
cattle is reserved for our males and is forbidden to our wives; but if it be born dead, then
they (all) may be partakers thereof He will reward them for their attribution (ordinances to
Him). Lo, He is Wise, Aware.
6:140 They are losers who besottedly have slain their children without knowledge, and
have forbidden that which God bestowed upon them, inventing a lie against God. They
indeed have gone astray and are not guided.
6:141 It is He, Who produces gardens trellised and untrellised, and the date palm, and
crops of diverse flavor, and the olive and the pomegranate, like and unlike. Eat you of the
fruit thereof when it fruits, and pay the due thereof upon the harvest day, and be not
prodigal. Lo! God loves not the prodigals.
6:142-144 And of the cattle (He produces) some for burdens, some for food. Eat of that
which God has bestowed upon you, and follow not the footsteps of Satan, for lo! He is an
open foe to you. Eight pairs: Of the sheep twain, and of the goats twain. Say: Has He
forbidden the two males or the two females, or that which the wombs of the two females
contain? Expound to me (the case) with knowledge, if you are truthful. And of the camels
twain and of the oxen twain. Say: Has He forbidden the two males or the two females, or
that which the wombs of the two females contain; or were you by to witness when God
commanded you (all) this? Then who does greater wrong than he who devises a lie
concerning God, that he may lead people astray without knowledge? Lo! God guides not
wrongdoing folk.
6:145 Say: I find not in that which is revealed to me anything prohibited to an eater that he
eat thereof, except it be carrion, or blood poured forth, or swine flesh – for that verily is
foul – or the abomination which was immolated to the name of other than God. But
whoever is compelled (thereto), neither craving nor transgressing, (for him) lo! Your Lord
is Forgiving, Merciful.
6:146-147 To those who are Jews We forbade every animal with claws. And of the oxen
and the sheep We forbade for them the fat thereof, except that upon the backs or the
entrails, or that which is mixed with the bone. That, We awarded to them for their
rebellion. And verily We are Truthful. So if they give the lie to you (O Muhammad), say:
Your Lord is the Lord of all embracing mercy, and His wrath will never be withdrawn
from guilty folk.
6:148-149 They who are idolaters will say: Had God willed, we had not ascribed (to Him)
partners neither had our fathers, nor had we forbidden anything. Thus did those who were
before them give the lie (to God's Messengers) till they tasted of the fear of Us. Say: Have
you any knowledge that you can adduce for us? Lo! You follow nothing but an opinion.
Lo! You do but guess. Say – For God's is the final argument – Had He willed He could
indeed have guided all of you.

69

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

6:150-151 Say: Come, bring your witnesses who can bear witness that God forbade (all)
this. And if they bear witness, do not you bear witness with them. Follow you not the
whims of those who deny Our revelations, those who believe not in the Hereafter and
deem (others) equal with their Lord. Say: Come, I will recite to you that which your Lord
has made a sacred duty for you: that you ascribe nothing as partner to Him and that you
do good to parents, and that you slay not your children because of penury. We provide for
you and for them – and that you draw not near to lewd things whether open or concealed.
And that you slay not the life which God has made sacred, except in the course of justice.
This He has commanded you, in order that you may discern.
6:152-153 And approach not the wealth of the orphan except with that which is better, till
he reaches maturity. Give full measure and full weight, in justice. We task not any soul
beyond its scope. And if you give your word, do justice thereto, even though it is (against)
a kinsman; and fulfill the covenant of God. This He commands you that perhaps you may
remember. And (He commands you, saying): This is My straight path, so follow it. Follow
not other ways, lest you be parted from His way: He has ordained this for you, so that you
may become pious.
6:154 Again, We gave the Scripture to Moses, complete for him who would do good, an
explanation of all things, a guidance and a mercy, that they might believe in the meeting
with their Lord.
6:155 And this is a blessed Scripture which We have revealed. So follow it and fear (God),
that you may find mercy.
6:156-157 Lest you should say: The Scripture was revealed only to two sects before us,
and we in truth were unaware of what they read; or lest you should say: If the Scripture
had been revealed to us, we surely had been better guided than they are. Now has there
come to you a clear proof from your Lord, a guidance and a mercy; and who does greater
wrong than he who denies the revelations of God, and turns away from them? We award
to those who turn away from Our revelations an evil punishment because of their
aversion.
6:158 Wait they, indeed, for nothing less than that the angels should come to them, or
your Lord should come, or there should come one of the signs from your Lord? In the
day when one of the signs from your Lord comes, its belief avails not a soul, which until
then believed not, nor in its belief earned good (by works). Say: Wait you! Lo! We (too) are
waiting.
6:159 Lo! As for those who sunder their religion and become schismatic, no concern at all
have you with them. Their case will go to God, who then will tell them what they used to
do.
6:160 Whoever brings a good deed will receive tenfold the like thereof, while whoever
brings an ill deed will be awarded but the like thereof; and they will not be wronged.
6:161-163 Say: Lo! As for me, my Lord has guided me to a straight path, a right religion,
the community of Abraham, the upright, who was no polytheist. Say: Lo! My worship and
my sacrifice and my living and my dying are for God, Lord of the Worlds. He has no
partner. This am I commanded, and I am first of those who surrender (to Him).
6:164 Say: Shall I seek other than God for Lord, when He is Lord of all things? Each soul
earns only on its own account, nor does any laden bear another's load. Then to your Lord
is your return and He will tell you that wherein you differed.
6:165 It is He, Who has placed you as viceroys of the earth and has exalted some of you in
rank above others, that He may try you by (the test of) that which He has given you. Lo!
Your Lord is swift in prosecution, and lo! He is Forgiving, Merciful.

70

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

7. Al-A`raf: The Purgatory
In the Name of God,the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
7:1-3 Alif. Lam. Mim. Sad. (It is) a Scripture that is revealed to you (O Muhammad) – so let
there be no heaviness in your heart therefrom – that you may warn thereby, and (it is) a
Reminder to believers. (Saying :) Follow that which is sent down to you from your Lord ,
and follow no helpers (and protectors) beside Him. Little do you recollect!
7:4-5 How many a township have We destroyed! As a raid by night, or while they slept at
noon, Our terror came to them. No plea had they, when Our terror came to them, except
that they said: Lo! We were wrongdoers.
7:6-7 Then verily We shall question those to whom (Our message) has been sent, and We
shall question the Messengers. Then verily We shall narrate to them (the event) with
knowledge, for verily We were not absent (when it came to pass).
7:8-9 The weighing on that Day is the true (weighing). As for those whose scale is heavy,
they are the successful. And as for those whose scale is light: They are those who lose
their souls because they disbelieved Our revelations.
7:10 And We have given you (humankind) power in the earth, and appointed for you
therein a livelihood. Little give you thanks!
7:11 And We created you, then fashioned you, then told the angels: Fall you prostrate
before Adam! And they fell prostrate, all except Iblis, who was not of those who make
prostration.
7:12-18 He said: What hindered you that you did not fall prostrate when I bade you?
(Iblis) said: I am better than him. You created me from fire while him You did create of
mud. He said: Then go down hence! It is not for you to show pride here, so go forth! Lo!
You are of those degraded. He said: Reprieve me till the day when they are raised (from
the dead). He said: Lo! You are of those reprieved. He said: Now, because You have sent
me astray, verily I shall lurk in ambush for them on Your right path. Then I shall come
upon them from before them and from behind them and from their right hands and from
their left hands, and You will not find most of them beholden (to You). He said: Go forth
from hence, degraded, banished. As for such of them as follow you, surely I will fill Hell
with all of you.
7:19 And (to man): O Adam! Dwell you and your wife in the Garden and eat from
wherever you will, but come not near this tree lest you become wrongdoers.
7:20-22 Then Satan whispered to them that he might manifest to them that which was
hidden from them of their shame, and he said: Your Lord forbade you from this tree only
lest you should become angels or become of the immortals. And he swore to them
(saying): Lo! I am a sincere adviser to you. Thus did he lead them on with guile. And when
they tasted of the tree their shame was manifest to them and they began to hide (by
heaping) on themselves some of the leaves of the Garden. And their Lord called them
(saying): Did I not forbid you from that tree and tell you: Lo! Satan is an open enemy to
you?
7:23-25 They said: Our Lord! We have wronged ourselves. If You forgive us not and have
not mercy on us, surely we are of the lost! He said: Go down (from hence), one of you a
foe to the other. There will be for you on earth a habitation and provision for a while. He
said: There shall you live, and there shall you die, and there from shall you be brought
forth.

71

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

7:26-27 O children of Adam! We have revealed to you raiment to conceal your shame, and
splendid vesture, but the raiment of righteousness, that is best. This is of the revelations of
God that they may remember. O children of Adam! Let not Satan seduce you as he caused
your (first) parents to go forth from the Garden and tore off from them their robe (of
innocence) that he might manifest their shame to them. Lo! He sees you, he and his tribe,
from where you see him not. Lo! We have made the satans helpers (and protectors) for
those who believe not.
7:28-29 And when they do some lewdness they say: We found our fathers doing it, and
God has enjoined it on us. Say: God, verily, enjoins not lewdness. Tell you concerning
God that which you know not? Say: My Lord enjoins justice. And set your faces upright
(toward Him) at every place of worship and call upon Him, making religion pure for Him
(only). As He brought you into being, so return you (to Him).
7:30 A party has He led aright, while error has just hold over (another) party, for lo! They
choose the satans for helpers (and protectors) instead of God and deem that they are
rightly guided.
7:31-32 O children of Adam! Look to your adornment at every place of worship, and eat
and drink, but be not prodigal. Lo! He loves not the prodigals. Say: Who has forbidden
the adornment of God, which He has brought forth for His bondmen, and the good
things of His providing? Say: Such, on the Day of Resurrection, will be only for those who
believed during the life of the world. Thus do We detail Our revelations for people who
have knowledge.
7:33-34 Say: My Lord forbids only indecencies, such of them as are apparent and such as
are within, and sin and wrongful oppression, and that you associate with God that for
which no warrant has been revealed, and that you tell concerning God that which you
know not. And every nation has its term, and when its term comes, they cannot put it off
an hour nor yet advance (it).
7:35-36 O children of Adam! If Messengers of your own come to you who narrate to you
My revelations, then whosoever refrains from evil and amends – no fear shall come upon
them neither shall they grieve. But they who deny Our revelations and scorn them – such
are rightful inhabitants of the Fire; they will abide therein.
7:37 Who does greater wrong than he who invents a lie concerning God or denies Our
signs. (For such) their appointed portion of the Book (of destiny) reaches them till, when
Our messengers come to gather them, they say: Where (now) is that to which you cried
beside God? They say: They have departed from us. And they testify against themselves
that they were disbelievers.
7:38-39 He says: Enter into the Fire among nations of the jinn and humankind who
passed away before you. Every time a nation enters, it curses its sister (nation) till, when
they have all been made to follow one another there, the last of them says to the first of
them: Our Lord! These led us astray, so give them double torment of the Fire. He says:
For each one there is double (torment), but you know not. And the first of them says to
the last of them: You were no whit better than us, so taste the punishment for what you
used to earn.
7:40-41 Lo! They who deny Our revelations and scorn them, for them the gates of Heaven
will not be opened nor will they enter the Garden until the camel goes through the
needle's eye. Thus do We requite the guilty. Theirs will be a bed of Hell, and over them
coverings (of Hell). Thus do We requite wrongdoers.
7:42-43 But (as for) those who believe and do good works – We tax not any soul beyond
its scope – Such are rightful inhabitants of the Garden. They abide therein. And We
remove whatever rancor may be in their hearts. Rivers flow beneath them. And they say:

72

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

The praise be to God, Who has guided us to this. We could not truly have been rightly
guided if God had not guided us. Verily the Messengers of our Lord did bring the Truth.
And it is cried to them: This is the Garden. You inherit it for what you used to do.
7:44-45 And the dwellers of the Garden cry to the dwellers of the Fire: We have found
that which our Lord promised us (to be) the Truth. Have you (too) found that which your
Lord promised the Truth? They say: Yes, verily. And a crier in between them cries: The
curse of God is on evildoers, who debar (men) from the path of God and would have it
crooked, and who are disbelievers in the Last Day.
7:46-47 Between them is a veil. And in the purgatories are men who know them all by
their marks. And they call to the dwellers of the Garden: Peace be to you! They enter it
not although they hope (to enter). And when their eyes are turned toward the dwellers of
the Fire, they say: Our Lord! Place us not with the wrongdoing folk.
7:48-49 And the dwellers in the purgatories call to men whom they know by their marks,
(saying): What did your multitude and that in which you took your pride avail you? Are
these they of whom you swore, that God, would not show them mercy? (To them it has
been said:) Enter the Garden. No fear shall come upon you nor is it you who will grieve.
7:50-51 And the dwellers of the Fire cry out to the dwellers of the Garden: Pour on us
some water or some of that wherewith God has provided you. They say: Lo! God has
forbidden both to disbelievers (in His guidance), who took their religion for a sport and
pastime, and whom the life of the world deceived. So this Day We have forgotten them
even as they forgot the meeting of this Day and as they used to deny Our signs.
7:52-53 Verily We have brought them a Scripture which We expound with knowledge, a
guidance and a mercy for a people who believe. Await they anything except the fulfillment
thereof? On the Day when the fulfillment thereof comes, those who were before, forgetful
thereof will say: The Messengers of our Lord did bring the Truth! Have we any
intercessors that they may intercede for us? Or can we be returned (to life on earth), that
we may act otherwise than we used to act? They have lost their souls, and that which they
devised has failed them.
7:54 Lo! Your Lord is God Who created the heavens and the earth in six Days, then He
mounted the Throne. He covers the night with the day, which is in haste to follow it, and
has made the sun and the moon and the stars subservient by His command. Verily His is
all creation and commandment. Blessed be God, the Lord of the Worlds!
7:55-56 (O people!) Call upon your Lord humbly and in secret. Lo! He loves not
aggressors. Work not confusion in the earth after the fair ordering (thereof), and call on
Him in fear and hope. Lo! The mercy of God is near to the good.
7:57-58 And it is He, Who sends the winds as tidings heralding His mercy, till, when they
bear a cloud heavy (with rain), We lead it to a dead land, and then cause water to descend
thereon, and thereby bring forth fruits of every kind. Thus bring We forth the dead.
Perhaps you may remember. As for the good land, its vegetation comes forth by
permission of its Lord; while as for that which is bad, only evil comes forth (from it).
Thus do We recount the signs for people who give thanks.
7:59-64 We sent Noah (of old) to his people, and he said: O my people! Worship God.
You have no other God except Him. Lo! I fear for you the retribution of an Awful Day.
The chieftains of his people said: Lo! We see you surely in plain error. He said: O my
people! There is no error in me, but I am a Messenger from the Lord of the Worlds. I
convey to you the messages of my Lord and give good counsel to you, and know from
God, that which you know not. Marvel you that there should come to you a Reminder
from your Lord by means of a man

73

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

among you, that he may warn you, and that you may fear (God), and that perhaps you may
find mercy. But they denied him, so We saved him and those with him in the ship, and We
drowned those who denied Our sign. Lo! They were blind folk.
7:65-72 And to (the tribe of) Aad (We sent) their brother, Hud. He said: O my people!
Worship God. You have no other God except Him. Will you not ward off (evil)? The
chieftains of his people, who were disbelieving, said: Lo! We surely see you in foolishness,
and lo! We deem you of the liars. He said: O my people! There is no foolishness in me,
but I am a Messenger from the Lord of the Worlds. I convey to you the message of my
Lord and am for you, a true adviser. Marvel you that there should come to you a
Reminder from your Lord by means of a man among you, that he may warn you?
Remember how He made you viceroys after Noah's folk, and gave you growth of stature.
Remember (all) the bounties of your Lord, that perhaps you may be successful. They said:
Have you come to us that we should worship God alone, and forsake what our fathers
worshipped? Then bring upon us that with which you threaten us if you are of the
truthful! He said: Terror and wrath from your Lord have already fallen on you. Would you
wrangle with me over names, which you have named, you and your fathers, for which no
warrant from God has been revealed? Then await (the consequence), lo! I (also) am of
those awaiting (it). And We saved him and those with him by a mercy from Us, and We
cut the root of those who denied Our revelations and were not believers.
7:73-79 And to (the tribe of) Thamud (We sent) their brother Salih. He said: O my people!
Worship God. You have no other God except Him. A wonder from your Lord has come
to you. Lo! This is the she-camel of God, a sign to you; so let her feed in God's earth, and
touch her not with hurt lest a painful torment seizes you. And remember how He made
you viceroys after Aad, and gave you station in the earth. You choose castles in the plains
and hew the mountains into dwellings. So remember (all) the bounties of God and do not
evil, making mischief in the earth. The chieftains of his people, who were arrogant, said to
those whom they despised, to such of them as believed: Know you that Salih is one sent
from his Lord? They said: Lo! In that with what he has been sent we are believers. Those
who were arrogant said: Lo! In that which you believe, we are disbelievers. So they
hamstrung the she camel, and they flouted the commandment of their Lord, and they said:
O Salih! Bring upon us that which you threaten if you are indeed of those sent (from
God). So the earthquake seized them, and morning found them prostrate in their dwelling
place. And Salih turned on them and said: O my people! I delivered my Lord's message to
you and gave you good advice, but you love not good advisers. 7:80-84 And Lot!
(Remember) when he said to his folk: Will you commit abomination such as no creature
ever did before you? Lo! You come with lust to men instead of women. Nay, but you are
wanton folk. And the answer of his people was only that they said (one to another): Turn
them out of your township. They are folk, forsooth, who keep pure. And We rescued him
and his household, except his wife, who was of those who stayed behind. And We rained a
rain upon them. See now the nature of the consequence for evildoers!
7:85-87 And to Midian, (We sent) their brother, Shueyb. He said: O my people! Worship
God. You have no other God except Him. Lo! A clear proof has come to you from your
Lord; so give full measure and full weight and wrong not people in their goods, and work
not confusion in the earth after the fair ordering thereof. That will be better for you, if you
are believers. Lurk not on every road to threaten (wayfarers), and to turn away from God's
path, him who believes in Him, and to seek to make it crooked. And remember, when you
were but few, how He did multiply you. And see the nature of the consequence for the
corrupters! And if there is a party of you, which believes in that with what I have been
sent, and there is a party, which believes not, then have patience until God judges between
us. He is the best of all who deal in judgment.
7:88-93 The chieftains of his people, who were arrogant, said: Surely we will drive you out,
O Shueyb, and those who believe with you, from our township, unless you return to our
religion. He said: Even though we hate it? We should have invented a lie against God if we
returned to your religion after God has rescued us from it. It is not for us to return to it

74

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

unless God should (so) will. Our Lord comprehends all things in knowledge. In God do
we put our trust. Our Lord! Decide with truth between us and our folk, for You are the
best of those who make decisions. But the chieftains of his people, who were disbelieving,
said: If you follow Shueyb, then truly we shall be the losers. So the earthquake seized
them, and morning found them prostrate in their dwelling place. Those who denied
Shueyb became as though they had not dwelt there. Those who denied Shueyb, were the
losers. So he turned from them and said: O my people! I delivered my Lord's messages to
you and gave you good advice; then how can I sorrow for a people that rejected (truth)?
7:94-102 And We sent no Prophet to any township but We did afflict its folk with
tribulation and adversity that perhaps they might grow humble. Then We changed the evil
plight for good, till they grew affluent and said: Tribulation and distress did touch our
fathers. Then We seized them unawares, when they perceived not. And if the people of
the townships had believed and kept from evil, surely We should have opened for them
blessings from the sky and from the earth. But (to every Messenger) they gave the lie, and
so We seized them on account of what they used to earn. Are the people of the townships
then secure from the coming of Our wrath upon them as a night raid while they sleep? Or
are the people of the townships then secure from the coming of Our wrath upon them in
the daytime while they play? Are they then secure from God's scheme? None deems
himself secure from God's scheme except folk that perish. Is it not an indication to those
who inherit the land after its people (who thus reaped the consequence of evildoing) that,
if We will, We can smite them for their sins and print upon their hearts so that they hear
not? Such were the townships. We relate some tidings of them to you (O Muhammad).
Their Messengers verily came to them with clear proofs (of God's supreme power), but
they could not believe because they had before denied. Thus does God print upon the
hearts of disbelievers (that they hear not). We found no (loyalty to any) covenant in most
of them. Nay, most of them We found wrongdoers.
7:103-122 Then after them, We sent Moses with Our signs to Pharaoh and his chiefs, but
they disbelieved them. Now see the nature of the consequence for the corrupters! Moses
said: O Pharaoh! Lo! I am a Messenger from the Lord of the Worlds, approved upon
condition that I speak concerning God nothing but the truth. I come to you (lord of
Egypt) with a clear proof from your Lord. So let the Children of Israel go with me.
(Pharaoh) said: If you come with a sign, then produce it, if you are of those who speak the
truth. Then he flung down his staff and lo! It was a serpent manifest; and he drew forth
his hand (from his bosom): and lo! It was white for the beholders. The chiefs of Pharaoh's
people said: Lo! This is some knowing wizard, who would expel you from your land. Now
what do you advise? They said (to Pharaoh): Put him off (a while).him and his brother –
and send into the cities summoners, to bring each knowing wizard to you. And the
wizards came to Pharaoh, saying: Surely there will be a reward for us if we are victors. He
answered: Yes, and surely you shall be of those brought near (to me). They said: O Moses!
Either throw (first) or let us be the first throwers? He said: Throw! And when they threw,
they cast a spell upon the people's eyes, and overawed them, and produced a mighty spell.
And We inspired Moses (saying): Throw your staff! And lo! It swallowed up their lying
show. Thus was the Truth vindicated and that which they were doing was made vain.
Thus were they there defeated and brought low. And the wizards fell down prostrate,
crying: We believe in the Lord of the Worlds, the Lord of Moses and Aaron. 7:123-129
Pharaoh said: You believe in Him before I give you leave! Lo! This is the plot that you
have plotted in the city that you may drive its people hence. But you shall come to know!
Surely I shall have your hands and feet cut off upon alternate sides. Then I shall crucify
you every one. They said: Lo! We are about to return to our Lord! You take vengeance on
us only because we believed the signs of our Lord when they came to us. Our Lord! Give
to us patience and make us die as men who have surrendered (to You). The chiefs of
Pharaoh's people said: (O King,) will you leave Moses and his people to make mischief in
the land, and flout you and your
gods? He said: We will slay their sons and spare their women, for lo! We are in power over
them. And Moses said to his people: Seek help in God and endure patiently. Lo! The earth
is God's. He gives it for an inheritance to whom He wills. And lo! The sequel is for those

75

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

who keep their duty (to Him). They said: We suffered hurt before you came to us, and
since you have come to us. He said: It may be that your Lord is going to destroy your
adversary and make you viceroys in the earth, so that He may see how you behave.
7:130-137 And We straitened Pharaoh's folk with famine and the dearth of fruits that
perhaps they might heed. But whenever good befell them, they said: This is ours; and
whenever evil smote them they ascribed it to the evil auspices of Moses and those with
him. Surely their evil auspice was only with God. But most of them knew not. And they
said: Whatever sign you bring with which to bewitch us, we shall not put faith in you. So
We sent them the flood and the locusts and the vermin and the frogs and the blood – a
succession of clear signs. But they were arrogant and became guilty. And when the terror
fell on them, they cried: O Moses! Pray for us to your Lord, because He has a covenant
with you. If you remove the terror from us, we verily will trust you and will let the
Children of Israel go with you. But when We removed from them the terror for a term
which they must reach, behold! They broke their covenant Therefore We took retribution
from them; therefore We drowned them in the se a: because they denied Our revelations
and were heedless of them. And We caused the folk who were devised to inherit the
eastern parts of the land and the western parts thereof which We had blessed. And the fair
word of the Lord was fulfilled for the Children of Israel because they had patience and
constancy; and We annihilated (all) that Pharaoh and his folk had done and that they had
contrived.
7:138-140 And We brought the Children of Israel across the sea, and they came to a
people who were given up to idols, which they had. They said: O Moses! Make for us a
god even as they have gods. He said: Lo! You are a folk who know not. Lo! As for these,
their way will be destroyed and all that they are doing is in vain. He said: Shall I seek for
you a god other than God when He has favored you above (all) creatures?
7:141-142 And (remember) when We delivered you from Pharaoh's folk who were
afflicting you with dreadful torment, slaughtering your sons and sparing your women.
That was a tremendous trial from your Lord. And when We did appoint for Moses thirty
nights (of solitude), and added to them ten, and he completed the whole time appointed
by his Lord of forty nights; and Moses said to his brother: Take my place among the
people. Do right, and follow not the way of mischief-makers.
7:143-147 And when Moses came to Our appointed meeting and his Lord had spoken to
him, he said: My Lord! Show me (Yourself), that I may gaze upon You. He said: You will
not see Me, but gaze upon the mountain! If it stands still in its place, then you will see Me.
And when his Lord revealed (His) glory to the mountain, He sent it crashing down. And
Moses fell down senseless. And when he awoke he said: Glory to You! I turn to You
repentant, and I am the first of the (true) believers. He said: O Moses! I have preferred
you above people by My messages and by My speaking (to you). So hold that which I have
given you, and be among the thankful. And We wrote for him, upon the tablets, the lesson
to be drawn from all things and the explanation of all things, then (bade him): Hold it fast;
and command your people (saying): Take the better (course made clear) therein. I shall
show you the abode of the evildoers. I shall turn away from My revelations those who
behave arrogantly in the earth, and if they see each sign believe it not, and if they see the
way of righteousness choose it not for (their) way, and if they see the way of error choose
it for (their) way. That is because they deny Our revelations and are used to disregard
them. Those who deny Our revelations and the meeting of the Hereafter, their works are
fruitless. Are they requited anything except what they used to do?
7:148-149 And the folk of Moses, after (he had left them), chose a calf (for worship),
(made) out of their ornaments, of saffron hue, which gave a lowing sound. Saw they not
that it spoke not to them nor guided them to any way? They chose it, and became
wrongdoers. And when they feared the consequences thereof and saw that they had gone
astray, they said: Unless our Lord has mercy on us and forgives us, we are verily of the

76

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

lost.
7:150-151 And when Moses returned to his people, angry and grieved, he said: Evil is that
(course) which you took after I had left you. Would you hasten on the judgment of your
Lord? And he cast down the tablets, and he seized his brother by the head, dragging him
toward him. He said: Son of my mother! Lo! The folk did judge me weak and almost killed
me. Oh, make not my enemies triumph over me and place me not among the evildoers!
He said: My Lord! Have mercy on me and on my brother; bring us into Your mercy, You
the Most Merciful of all who show mercy.
7:152-153 Lo! Those who chose the calf (for worship), terror from their Lord and
humiliation will come upon them in the life of the world. Thus do We requite those who
invent a lie. But those who do ill deeds and afterward repent and believe – lo! For them,
afterward, God is Forgiving, Merciful.
7:154-156 Then, when the anger of Moses abated, he took up the tablets, and in their
inscription there was guidance and mercy for all those who fear their Lord. And Moses
chose of his people seventy men for Our appointed meeting and, when the trembling
came on them, he said: My Lord! If You had willed You would have destroyed them long
before, and me with them. Will You destroy us for that which the ignorant among us did?
It is but Your trial (of us). You send whom You will astray and guide whom You will. You
are our Guardian (and Protector), therefore forgive us and have mercy on us, You, are the
Best of all who show forgiveness. And ordain for us in this world that which is good, and
in the Hereafter (that which is good), lo! We have turned to You. He said: I smite with My
punishment whom I will, and My mercy embraces all things, therefore I shall ordain it for
those who fear (God) and pay the poor-due, and those who believe Our revelations;
7:157 Those who follow the Messenger, the Prophet who can neither read nor write,
whom they will find described in the Torah and the Gospel (which are) with them. He will
enjoin on them that which is right and forbid them that which is wrong. He will make
lawful for them all good things and prohibit for them only the foul; and he will relieve
them of their burden and the fetters that they used to wear. Then those who believe in
him, and honor him and help him, and follow the light, which is sent down with him: they
are the successful.
7:158 Say (O Muhammad): O people! Lo! I am the Messenger of God to you all.(the
Messenger of) Him to whom belongs the supreme power of the heavens and the earth.
None should be worshipped but God alone. He quickens and He gives death. So believe
in God and His Messenger, the Prophet who can neither read nor write, who believes in
God and in His words and follow him that perhaps you may be led aright.
7:159-160 And of Moses' folk there are a community who lead with truth and establish
justice… We divided them into twelve tribes, nations; and We inspired Moses, when his
people asked him for water, saying: Smite with your staff the rock! And from it gushed
forth twelve springs, so that each tribe knew their drinking place. And we caused the white
cloud to overshadow them and sent down for them the manna and the quails (saying): Eat
of the good things wherewith We have provided you. They wronged Us not, but they were
wont to wrong themselves.
7:161-162 And when it was said to them: Dwell in this township and eat from wherever
you will, and say `Repentance', and enter the gate prostrate; We shall forgive you your sins;
We shall increase (reward) for the right-doers. But those of them who did wrong changed
the word which had been said to them for another saying, and We sent down upon them
wrath from heaven for their wrongdoing.
7:163 Ask them (O Muhammad) of the township that was by the sea, how they broke the
Sabbath, how their big fish came to them visibly upon their Sabbath day and on a day
when they did not keep Sabbath they did not come to them. Thus did We try them for

77

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

that they were evildoers.
7:164-166 And when a community among them said: Why preach you to a folk whom
God is about to destroy and punish with an awful punishment, they said: In order to be
free from guilt before your Lord, and that perhaps they may fear (God). And when they
forgot that which they had been reminded, We rescued those who forbade wrong, and
visited those who did wrong with dreadful punishment because they were evildoers. So
when they took pride in that which they had been forbidden, We said to them: Be you
apes despised and loathed!
7:167 And (remember) when your Lord proclaimed that He would raise against them till
the Day of Resurrection those who would lay on them a cruel torment. Lo! Verily your
Lord is swift in prosecution and lo! Verily He is Forgiving, Merciful.
7:168-169 And We have sundered them in the earth as (separate) nations. Some of them
are righteous, and some far from that. And We have tried them with good things and evil
things that perhaps they might return. And a generation has succeeded them who
inherited the Scriptures. They grasp the goods of this low life (as the price of evildoing)
and say: It will be forgiven us. And if there came to them (again) the offer of the like, they
would accept it (and would sin again). Has not the covenant of the Scripture been taken
on their behalf that they should not speak anything concerning God except the truth? And
they have studied that which is therein. And the abode of the Hereafter is better, for those
who are pious. Have you then no sense?
7:170 And as for those who make (men) keep the Scripture, and establish worship – lo!
We squander not the wages of reformers.
7:171 And when We shook the Mount above them as it were a covering, and they
supposed that it was going to fall upon them (and We said): Hold fast to that which We
have given you, and remember that which is therein, that you may fear (God).
7:172-174 And (remember) when your Lord brought forth from the children of Adam,
from their reins, their seed, and made them testify of themselves (saying): Am I not your
Lord? They said: Yes, verily. We testify. (That was) lest you should say at the Day of
Resurrection: Lo! Of this we were unaware; or lest you should say: (It is) only (that) our
fathers ascribed partners to God of old and we were (their) seed after them. Will You
destroy us on account of that which those who follow falsehood did? – Thus We detail
Our revelations, that perhaps they may return.
7:175-176 Recite to them the tale of him to whom We gave Our revelations, but he
sloughed them off, so Satan overtook him and he became of those who lead astray. And
had We willed We could have raised him by their means, but he clung to the earth and
followed his own lust. Therefore his similitude is as that of a dog; if you attack him he
pants with his tongue out, and if you leave him he pants with his tongue out. Such is the
similitude of the people who deny Our revelations. Narrate to them the history (of the
men of old), that perhaps they may take thought.
7:177-178 Evil as an example are the folk who denied Our revelations, and were wont to
wrong themselves. He whom God guides, he indeed is rightly guided, while he whom God
sends – astray they are indeed losers.
7:179 Already have We urged to Hell many of the jinn and humankind, having hearts
wherewith they understand not, and having eyes wherewith they see not, and having ears
wherewith they hear not. These are as the cattle – nay, but they are worse! These are the
neglectful.
7:180 God's are the fairest names. Invoke Him by them. And leave the company of those
who blaspheme His names. They will be requited what they do.

78

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

7:181 And of those whom We created there is a nation who guides with the Truth and
establishes justice therewith.
7:182-183 And those who deny Our revelations – step by step We lead them on from
which they know not. I give them rein (for) lo! My scheme is strong.
7:184-186 Have they not thought (that) there is no madness in their comrade? He is but a
plain warner. Have they not considered the dominion of the heavens and the earth, and
what things God has created, and that it may be that their own term draws near? In what
fact after this will they believe? Those whom God sends astray, there is no guide for them.
He leaves them to wander blindly on in their contumacy.
7:187-188 They ask you of the (destined) Hour, when will it come to port. Say: Knowledge
of that is only with my Lord. He alone will manifest it at its proper time. It is heavy in the
heavens and the earth. It comes not to you except unawares. They question you as if you
could be well informed thereof. Say: Knowledge thereof is with God only, but most of
people know not. Say: For myself I have no power to benefit, nor power to hurt, except
that which God wills. Had I knowledge of the Unseen, I should have abundance of
wealth, and adversity would not touch me. I am but a warner, and a bearer of good tidings
to folk who believe.
7:189-190 It is He, Who did create you from a single soul, and from there did make his
mate that he might take rest in her. And when he covered her she bore a light burden, and
she passed (unnoticed) with it, but when it became heavy they cried to God, their Lord,
saying: If you give to us aright we shall be of the thankful. But when He gave to them
aright, they ascribed to Him partners in respect of that which He had given them. High is
He exalted above all that they associate (with Him).
7:191-194 Attribute they as partners to God those who created nothing, but are
themselves created, and cannot give them help, nor can they help themselves? And if you
call them to the guidance, they follow you not. Whether you call them or are silent is all
one to them. Lo! Those on whom you call beside God are slaves like you. Call on them
now, and let them answer you, if you are truthful!
7:195-197 Have they feet with which they walk, or have they hands with which they hold,
or have they eyes with which they see, or have they ears with which they hear? Say: Call
upon your (so called) partners (of God), and then contrive against me, spare me not! Lo!
My Guardian (and Protector) is God who reveals the Scripture. He befriends the
righteous. They upon whom you call beside Him have no power to help you, nor can they
help themselves.
7:198-200 And if you (Muslims) call them to the guidance they hear not; and you
(Muhammad) see them looking toward you, but they see not. Keep to forgiveness (O
Muhammad), and enjoin kindness, and turn away from the ignorant. And if a slander from
Satan wounds you, then seek refuge in God. Lo! He is Hearer, Knower.
7:201-202 Lo! Those who are pious, when a glamour from Satan troubles them, they do
but remember (God's guidance) and behold them seers! Their brethren plunge them
further into error and cease not. 7:203 And when you bring not a verse for them they say:
Why have you not chosen it? Say: I follow only that which is inspired in me from my
Lord. This (Quran) is insight from your Lord, and a guidance and a mercy for a people
that believe.
7:204-206 And when the Quran is recited, give ear to it and pay heed, that you may obtain
mercy. And do you (O Muhammad) remember your Lord within yourself humbly and
with awe, below your breath, at morn and evening. And be you not of the neglectful. Lo!
Those who are with your Lord are not too proud to do Him worship, but they praise Him
and adore Him.

79

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

8. Al-Anfal: The Spoils Of War
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
8:1-4 They ask you (O Muhammad) of the spoils of war. Say: The spoils of war belong to
God and the Messenger, so fear God, and adjust the matter of your difference, and obey
God and His Messenger, if you are (true) believers. Only they are the (true) believers
whose hearts feel fear when God is mentioned, and when the revelations of God are
recited to them they increase their faith, and who trust in their Lord; who establish
worship and spend of what We have bestowed on them. Those are they who are in truth
believers. For them are grades (of honor) with their Lord, and pardon, and a bountiful
provision.
8:5-6 Even as your Lord caused you (Muhammad) to go forth from your home with the
Truth, and lo! A party of the believers were averse (to it), disputing with you of the Truth
after it had been made manifest, as if they were being driven to death visible.
8:7-10 And when God promised you one of the two bands (of the enemy) that it should
be yours, and you longed that other than the armed one might be yours. And God willed
that He should cause the Truth to triumph by His words, and cut the root of the
disbelievers; that He might cause the Truth to triumph and bring vanity to nothing,
however much the guilty might oppose; when you sought help of your Lord and He
answered you (saying): I will help you with a thousand of the angels, rank on rank. God
appointed it only as good tidings, and that your heart thereby might be at rest. Victory
comes only by the help of God. Lo! God is Mighty, Wise.
8:11-14 When he made the slumber fall upon you as a reassurance from Him and sent
down water from the sky upon you, that thereby He might purify you, and remove from
you the fear of Satan, and make strong your hearts and firm (your) feet thereby. When
your Lord inspired the angels, (saying:) I am with you. So make those who believe stand
firm. I will throw fear into the hearts of those who disbelieve. Then smite the necks and
smite of them each finger. That is because they opposed God and His Messenger.
Whoever opposes God and His Messenger, (for him) lo! God is severe in punishment.
That (is the award), so taste it, and (know) that for disbelievers is the torment of the Fire.
8:15-16 O you who believe! When you meet those in battle who disbelieve, turn not your
backs to them. Whoever on that day turns his back to them, unless maneuvering for battle
or intent to join a company, he truly has incurred wrath from God, and his habitation will
be Hell, an evil journey's end.
8:17 You (Muslims) slew them not, but God slew them. And you (Muhammad) threw not
when you did throw, but God threw, that He might test the believers by a fair test from
Him. Lo! God is Hearer, Knower.
8:18 That (is the case); and (know) that God (it is) who makes weak the plan of
disbelievers.
8:19 (O Quraish!) If you sought a judgment, now has the judgment come to you. And if
you cease (from persecuting the believers) it will be better for you, but if you return (to the
attack) We shall also return. And your host will avail you nothing, however numerous it
be, and (know) that God is with the believers (in His guidance).
8:20-23 O you who believe! Obey God and His Messenger, and turn not away from him
when you hear (him speak). Be not as those who say: We hear; and they hear not. Lo! The
worst of beasts in God's sight are the deaf, the dumb, who have no sense. Had God
known of any good in them He would have made them hear, but if He had made them

80

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

hear they would have turned away, averse.
8:24-26 O you who believe! Obey God, and the Messenger when He calls you to that
which quickens you, and know that God comes in between the man and his own heart,
and that it is He to Whom you will be gathered. And guard yourselves against a
punishment, which cannot fall exclusively on those of you who are wrongdoers, and know
that God is severe in punishment. And remember, when you were few and reckoned
feeble in the land, and were in fear lest men should extirpate you, how He gave you
refuge, and strengthened you with His help, and made provision of good things for you,
that perhaps you might be thankful.
8:27-28 O you who believe! Betray not God and His Messenger, nor knowingly betray
your trusts. And know that your possessions and your children are a test, and that with
God is immense reward.
8:29 O you who believe! If you fear God, He will give you discrimination (between right
and wrong) and will rid you of your evil thoughts and deeds, and will forgive you. God is
of infinite bounty.
8:30 And when those who disbelieve plot against you (O Muhammad) to wound you
fatally, or to kill you or to drive you forth; they plot, but God (also) plots; and God is the
best of plotters.
8:31-33 And when Our revelations are recited to them they say: We have heard. If we wish
we can speak the like of this. Lo! This is nothing but fables of the men of old. And when
they said: O God! If this is indeed the truth from You, then rain down stones on us or
bring on us some painful punishment! But God would not punish them while you were
with them, nor will He punish them while they seek forgiveness.
8:34-37 What (plea) have they that God should not punish them, when they debar (His
servants) from the Inviolable Place of Worship, though they are not its fitting guardians.
Its fitting guardians are those only who keep their duty to God. But most of them know
not. And their worship at the (Holy) House is nothing but whistling and hand clapping.
Therefore (it is said to them): Taste of the punishment because you disbelieve. Lo! Those
who disbelieve spend their wealth in order that they may debar (men) from the way of
God. They will spend it, then it will become an anguish for them, then they will be
conquered. And those who disbelieve will be gathered to Hell; that God may separate the
wicked from the good. The wicked will He place piece upon piece, and heap them all
together, and consign them to Hell. Such verily are the losers.
8:38-40 Tell those who disbelieve that if they cease (from persecution of believers) that
which is past will be forgiven them; but if they return (thereto) then the example of the
men of old has already gone (before them, for a warning). And fight them until
persecution is no more, and religion is all for God. But if they cease, then lo! God is the
Seer of what they do. And if they turn away, then know that God is your Befriender – a
transcendent Patron, and a transcendent Helper!
8:41 And know that whatever you take as spoils of war, lo! A fifth thereof is for God, and
for the Messenger, and for the kinsmen (who have need) and orphans and the needy and
the wayfarer; if you believe in God and that which We revealed to Our slave on the day of
discrimination, the day when the two armies met. And God is Able to do all things.
8:42 When you were on the near bank (of the valley) and they were on the yonder bank,
and the caravan was below you (on the coast plain). And had you promised to meet one
another you surely would have failed to keep the promise, but (it happened, as it did,
without the forethought of either of you) that God might conclude a thing that must be
done; that he who perished (on that day) might perish by a clear proof (of His supreme
power) and he who survived might survive by a clear proof (of His supreme power). Lo!

81

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

God in truth is Hearer, Knower.
8:43-44 When God showed them to you (O Muhammad) in your dream as few in number,
and if He had shown them to you as many, you (Muslims) would have faltered and would
have quarreled over the affair. But God saved (you). Lo! He knows what is in the breasts
(of men). And when He made you (Muslims), when you met (them), see them with your
eyes as few, and lessened you in their eyes, (it was) that God might conclude a thing that
must be done. To God all things are brought back.
8:45-46 O you who believe! When you meet an army, hold firm and think of God much,
that you may be successful. And obey God and His Messenger, and dispute not with one
another lest you falter and your strength departs from you; but be patient! Lo! God is with
the patient.
8:47-48 Be not as those who came forth from their dwellings boastfully and to be seen of
men, and debar (men) from the way of God, while God is surrounding all they do. And
when Satan made their deeds seem fair to them and said: No one of people can conquer
you this day, for I am your protector. But when the armies came in sight of one another,
he took flight, saying: Lo! I am guiltless of you. Lo! I see that which you see not. Lo! I fear
God. And God is severe in punishment.
8:49 When the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease said: Their religion has
deluded these.
Whoever puts his trust in God (will find that), lo! God is Mighty, Wise.
8:50-52 If you could see how the anguish receives those who disbelieve, smiting their faces
and their backs and (saying): Taste the punishment of burning! This is for that which your
own hands have sent before (to the Judgment), and (know) that God is not a tyrant to His
slaves. Their way is as the way of Pharaoh's folk and those before them; they disbelieved
the revelations of God, and God took them in their sins. Lo! God is Strong, severe in
punishment.
8:53 That is because God never changes the grace He has bestowed on any people until
they first change that which is in their hearts, and (that is) because God is Hearer,
Knower.
8:54 (Their way is) as the way of Pharaoh's folk and those before them; they denied the
revelations of their Lord, so We destroyed them in their sins. And We drowned the folk of
Pharaoh. All were evildoers.
8:55-58 Lo! The worst of beasts in God's sight are the ungrateful who will not believe;
those of them with whom you made a treaty, and, then at every opportunity they break
their treaty, and they keep not duty (to God). If you come on them in the war, deal with
them so as to strike fear in those who are behind them, that perhaps they may remember.
And if you fear treachery from any folk, then throw back to them (their treaty) fairly. Lo!
God loves not the treacherous.
8:59-61 And let not those who disbelieve suppose that they can outstrip (God's purpose).
Lo! They cannot escape. Make ready for them all you can of (armed) forces and of horses
tethered, that thereby you may dismay the enemy of God and your enemy, and others
beside them, whom you know not. God knows them. Whatever you spend in the way of
God it will be repaid to you in full, and you will not be wronged. And if they incline to
peace, incline you also to it, and trust in God. Lo! He is the Hearer, the Knower.
8:62-63 And if they would deceive you, then lo! God is sufficient for you. It is He, Who
supports you with His help and with the believers, and (as for the believers) has attuned
their hearts. If you had spent all that is in the earth you could not have attuned their

82

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

hearts, but God has attuned them. Lo! He is Mighty, Wise.
8:64-66 O Prophet! God is sufficient for you and those who follow you of the believers.
O Prophet! Exhort the believers to fight. If there be of you twenty patient they shall
overcome two hundred, and if there be of you a hundred patient they shall overcome a
thousand of those who disbelieve, because they (the disbelievers) are a folk without
intelligence. Now has God lightened your burden, for He knows that there is weakness in
you. So if there be of you a hundred, they shall overcome two hundred; and if there be of
you a thousand (patient), they shall overcome two thousand by permission of God. God is
with the patient.
8:67 It is not for any Prophet to have captives until he has made slaughter (upon God's
enemies) in the land. You desire the lure of this world and God desires (for you) the
Hereafter, and God is Mighty, Wise.
8:68-69 Had it not been for an ordinance of God which had gone before, an awful
punishment would have come upon you on account of what you took. Now enjoy what
you have won, as lawful and good, and fear God. Lo! God is Forgiving, Merciful.
8:70 O Prophet! Say to those captives who are in your hands: If God knows any good in
your hearts He will give you better than that which has been taken from you, and will
forgive you. Lo! God is Forgiving, Merciful.
8:71 And if they would betray you, they betrayed God before, and He gave (you) power
over them. God is Knower, Wise.
8:72 Lo! Those who believed and left their homes and strove with their wealth and their
lives for the cause of God, and those who took them in and helped them; these are
helpers (and protectors) of one another. And those who believed but did not leave their
homes, you have no duty to protect them till they leave their homes; but if they seek help
from you in the matter of religion then it is your duty to help (them) except against a folk
between whom and you there is a treaty. God is Seer of what you do.
8:73-75 And those who disbelieve are protectors one of another – if you do not so, there
will be confusion in the land, and great corruption. Those who believed and left their
homes and strove hard for the cause of God, and those who took them in and helped
them these are the believers in truth. For them is pardon, and a bountiful provision. And
those who afterwards believed and left their homes and strove hard for the cause of God
along with you, they are of you; and those who are akin are nearer to one another in the
ordinance of God. Lo! God is Knower of all things.

9. At-Taubah: The Repentance
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
9:1-2 Freedom from obligation (is proclaimed) from God and His Messenger toward
those of the polytheists with whom you made a treaty: Travel freely in the land four
months, and know that you cannot escape God and that God will disgrace the disbelievers
(in His guidance).
9:3-5 And a proclamation from God and His Messenger to all people on the day of the
Greater Pilgrimage that God is free from obligation to the polytheists, and (so is) His
Messenger. So, if you repent, it will be better for you; but if you are averse, then know that
you cannot escape God. Give tidings (O Muhammad) of a painful punishment to those
who disbelieve. Excepting those of the polytheists with whom you (Muslims) have a
treaty, and who have since abated nothing of your right nor have supported anyone

83

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

against you. (As for these), fulfill their treaty to them till their term. Lo! God loves those
who keep their duty (to Him). Then, when the sacred months have passed, slay the
polytheists wherever you find them, and take them (captive), and besiege them, and
prepare to ambush them. But if they repent and establish worship and pay the poor-due,
then leave their way free. Lo! God is Forgiving, Merciful.
9:6-8 And if anyone of the polytheists seeks your protection (O Muhammad), then protect
him so that he may hear the word of God; and afterward convey him to his place of
safety. That is because they are a folk who know not. How can there be a treaty with God
and with His Messenger for the polytheists except those with whom you made a treaty at
the Inviolable Place of Worship? So long as they are true to you, be true to them. Lo! God
loves those who keep their duty. How (can there be any treaty for the others) when, if
they have the upper hand of you, they regard neither pact nor honor in respect of you?
They satisfy you with their mouths while their hearts refuse. And most of them are
wrongdoers.
9:9-11 They have purchased with the revelations of God a little gain, so they debar (men)
from His way. Lo! Evil is that which they are wont to do. And they observe toward a
believer neither pact nor honor. These are they who are transgressors. But if they repent
and establish worship and pay the poor-due, then they are your brothers in religion. We
detail Our revelations for a people who have knowledge.
9:12-15 And if they break their pledges after their treaty (has been made with you) and
assail your religion, then fight the heads of disbelief – Lo! They have no binding oaths – in
order that they may desist. Will you not fight a folk who broke their solemn pledges, and
purposed to drive out the Messenger and did attack you first? What! Do you fear them?
God has more right that you should fear Him, if you are believers. Fight them! God will
punish them at your hands, and He will lay them low and give you victory over them, and
He will heal the breasts of folk who are believers. And He will remove the anger of their
hearts. God forgives toward whom He wills. God is Knower, Wise.
9:16 Or deemed you that you would be left (in peace) when God yet knows not those of
you who fight hard, choosing for familiar none except God and His Messenger and the
believers? God is informed of what you do.
9:17-19 It is not for the polytheists to tend God's sanctuaries, bearing witness against
themselves of disbelief. As for such, their works are vain and in the Fire they will abide.
Only he shall tend God's sanctuaries who believes in God and the Last Day and observes
proper worship and pays the poor-due and fears none except God. For such (only) is it
possible that they can be of the rightly guided. Count you the slaking of a pilgrim's thirst
and attendance of the Inviolable Place of Worship as (equal to the worth of him) who
believes in God and the Last Day, and fights hard in the way of God? They are not equal
in the sight of God. God guides not wrongdoing folk.
9:20-22 Those who believe, and have left their homes and fought hard with their wealth
and their lives in God's way are of much greater worth in God's sight. These are the ones
who are triumphant. Their Lord gives them good tidings of mercy from Him, and
acceptance, and Gardens where enduring pleasure will be theirs; there they will abide
forever. Lo! With God there is immense reward.
9:23-24 O you who believe! Choose for helpers (and protectors) neither your fathers nor
your brethren if they take pleasure in disbelief rather than in faith. Whoever of you, takes
them for helpers (and protectors), such are wrongdoers. Say: If your fathers, and your
sons, and your brethren, and your wives, and your tribe, and the wealth that you have
acquired, and merchandise for which you fear that there will be no sale, and dwellings you
desire are dearer to you than God and His Messenger and striving and fighting in His way:
then wait till God brings His command to pass. God guide s not wrongdoing folk.

84

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

9:25-27 God has given you victory on many fields and on the day of Huneyn, when you
exulted in your multitude but it availed you not, and the earth, vast as it is, was straitened
for you; then you turned back in flight; then God sent His peace of reassurance down
upon His Messenger and upon the believers, and sent down hosts you could not see, and
punished those who disbelieved. Such is the reward of disbelievers. Then afterward God
will forgive towards whom He will for God is Forgiving, Merciful.
9:28 O you who believe! The polytheists only are unclean. So let them not come near the
Inviolable Place of Worship after this their year. If you fear poverty (from the loss of their
merchandise) God shall preserve you of His bounty if He will. Lo! God is Knower, Wise.
9:29-31 Fight against such of those who have been given the Scripture and believe not in
God nor the Last Day, and forbid not that which God has forbidden by His Messenger,
and follow not the religion of truth, until they pay the tribute readily, being brought low.
And the Jews say: Ezra7 is the son of God, and the Christians say: The Messiah is the son
of God. That is their saying with their mouths. They imitate the saying of those who
disbelieved of old. God (himself) fights against them. How perverse are they! They have
taken as lords beside God their rabbis and their monks and the Messiah son of Mary,
when they were bidden to worship only One God. None should be worshipped but God
alone. Be He glorified from all that they ascribe as partner (to Him)!
9:32-33 Gladly they would put out the light of God with their mouths, but God disdains
(anything) except that He shall perfect His light, however much the disbelievers are averse.
It is He, who has sent His Messenger with the guidance and the Religion of Truth that He
may cause it to prevail over all religions, however much the polytheists may be averse.
9:34-35 O you who believe! Lo! Many of the (Jewish) rabbis and the (Christian) monks
devour the wealth of people wantonly and debar (men) from the way of God. They who
hoard up gold and silver and spend it not in the way of God, to them give tidings (O
Muhammad) of a painful punishment. On the Day when it will (all) be heated in the fire of
Hell, and their foreheads and their flanks and their backs will be branded therewith (and it
will be said to them): Here is that which you hoarded for yourselves. Now taste of what
you used to hoard.
9:36-37 Lo! The number of the months with God is twelve months by God's ordinance in
the Day that He created the heavens and the earth. Four of them are sacred: that is the
right religion. So wrong not yourselves in them. And wage war on all the polytheists as
they are waging war on all of you. And know that God is with those who keep their duty
(to Him). Postponement (of a sacred month) is only an excess of disbelief whereby those
who disbelieve are misled, they allow it one year and forbid it (another) year, that they may
make up the number of the months which God has hallowed, so that they allow that
which God has forbidden. The evil of their deeds is made fair-seeming to them. God
guides not the disbelieving folk.
9:38-39 O you who believe! What ails you that when it is said to you: Go forth in the way
of God, you are bowed down to the ground with heaviness. Take you pleasure in the life
of the world rather than in the Hereafter? The comfort of the life of the world is but little
in the Hereafter. If you go not forth He will afflict you with a painful punishment, and will
choose instead of you a folk other than you. You cannot harm Him at all. God is Able to
do all things.
9:40 If you help him not, still God helped him when those who disbelieve drove him
forth, the second of two; when they two were in the cave, when he said to his comrade:
Grieve not. Lo! God is with us. Then God caused His peace of reassurance to descend
7 Clearly

this refers to a certain group who, possibly at the time of the Prophet or earlier, made this claim.

85

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

upon him and supported him with hosts you cannot see, and made the word of those who
disbelieved the nethermost, while God's word it was that became the uppermost. God is
Mighty, Wise.
9:41 Go forth, light armed and heavy armed, and fight hard with your wealth and your
lives in the way of God! That is best for you if you but knew.
9:42-44 Had it been a near adventure and an easy journey they would have followed you,
but the distance seemed too far for them. Yet they will swear by God (saying): If we had
been able we would surely have set out with you. They destroy their souls, and God
knows that they verily are liars. God forgive you (O Muhammad) Wherefore did you grant
them leave ere those who told the truth were manifest to you and you did know the liars?
Those who believe in God and the Last Day ask no leave of you lest they should fight
hard with their wealth and their lives. God is Aware of those who keep their duty (to
Him).
9:45-47 They alone ask leave of you who believe not in God and the Last Day, and whose
hearts feel doubt, so in their doubt they waver. And if they had wished to go forth they
would assuredly have made ready some equipment, but God was averse to their being sent
forth and held them back and (it was said to them): Sit you with the sedentary! Had they
gone forth among you they would have added to you nothing except trouble and would
have hurried to and fro among you, seeking to cause sedition among you; and among you
there are some who would have listened to them. God is Aware of evildoers.
9:48-50 Aforetime they sought to cause sedition and raised difficulties for you till the
Truth came and the decree of God was made manifest, though they were loath. Of them
is he who says: Grant me leave (to stay at home) and tempt me not. Surely it is into
temptation that they (thus) have fallen. Lo! Hell is all around the disbelievers. If good
befalls you (O Muhammad) it afflicts them, and if calamity befalls you, they say: We took
precaution, and they turn away well pleased.
9:51-52 Say: Nothing befalls us except that which God has decreed for us. He is our
Guardian (and Protector). In God let believers put their trust! Say: Can you await for us
anything except one of two good things (death or victory in God's way)? While we await
for you, that God will afflict you with a punishment from Him or at our hands. Await
then! Lo! We are waiting with you.
9:53-55 Say: Pay (your contribution), willingly or unwillingly, it will not be accepted from
you. Lo! You were ever froward folk. And nothing prevents that their contributions
should be accepted from them except that they have disbelieved in God and in His
Messenger, and they come not to worship except as idlers, and pay not (their contribution)
except reluctantly. So let not their riches nor their children please you (O Muhammad).
God thereby intends but to punish them in the life of the world and that their souls shall
pass away while they are disbelievers.
9:56-59 And they swear by God that they are in truth of you, when they are not of you,
but they are folk who are afraid. Had they but found a refuge, or caverns, or a place to
enter, they would surely have resorted to it as swift as runaways. And of them is he who
defames you in the matter of the alms. If they are given thereof they are content, and if
they are not given thereof, behold! They are enraged. (How much more seemly) had they
been content with that which God and His Messenger had given them and had said: God
suffices us. God will give us of His bounty, and (also) His Messenger. To God we are
suppliants.
9:60 The alms are only for the poor and the needy, and those who collect them, and those
whose hearts are to be reconciled, and to free the captives and the debtors, and for the
cause of God, and (for) the wayfarers; a duty imposed by God. God is Knower, Wise.

86

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

9:61-63 And of them are those who vex the Prophet and say: He is only a hearer. Say: A
hearer of good for you, who believes in God and has confidence in the believers, and a
mercy for such of you as believe. Those who vex the Messenger of God, for them there is
a painful punishment. They swear by God to you (Muslims) to please you, but God, with
His Messenger, has more right that they should please Him if they are believers. Know
they not that whoever opposes God and His Messenger, his portion verily is Hell, to abide
therein? That is the extreme abasement.
9:64-68 The hypocrites fear lest a Surah (chapter) should be revealed concerning them,
proclaiming what is in their hearts. Say : Scoff (your fill)! Lo! God is disclosing what you
fear. And if you ask them (O Muhammad) they will say : We did but talk and jest. Say :
was it at God and His revelations and His Messenger that you did scoff? Make no excuse.
You have disbelieved after your (confession of) belief. If We forgive a party of you, a
party of you We shall punish because they have been guilty. The hypocrites, both men and
women, proceed one from another. They enjoin the wrong, and they forbid the right, and
they withhold their hands (from spending in the cause of God) . They forget God, so He
has forgotten them. Lo! The hypocrites, they are the transgressors. God promises the
hypocrites, both men and women, and the disbelievers, the fire of Hell for their abode. It
will suffice them. God curses them, and theirs is lasting torment.
9:69 Even as those before you were mightier than you in strength, and more affluent than
you in wealth and children. They enjoyed their lot a while, so you enjoy your lot a while
even as those before you did enjoy their lot a while. And you prate even as they prated.
Such are they whose works have perished in the world and the Hereafter. Such are they
who are the losers.
9:70 Has not the fame of those before them reached them – the folk of Noah, Aad,
Thamud, the folk of Abraham, the dwellers of Midian and the disasters (which befell them
– Lot's people)? Their Messengers (from God) came to them with proofs (of God's
supreme power). God surely wronged them not, but they did wrong themselves.
9:71 And the believers, men and women, are helpers (and protectors) of one another; they
enjoin the right and forbid the wrong, and they establish worship and they pay the poordue, and they obey God and His Messenger. As for these, God will have mercy on them.
Lo! God is Mighty, Wise.
9:72 God promises to the believers, men and women, Gardens underneath which rivers
flow, wherein they will abide – blessed dwellings in Gardens of Eden. And greater (far)!
.Acceptance from God. That is the supreme triumph.
9:73-74 O Prophet! Fight hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites! Be harsh with
them. Their ultimate abode is Hell, an evil journey's end. They swear by God that they said
nothing (wrong), yet they did say the word of disbelief, and did disbelieve after their
acceptance of Islam (surrender to God). And they purposed that, which they could not
attain, and they sought revenge only that God and His Messenger should enrich them of
His bounty. If they repent it will be better for them; and if they turn away, God will afflict
them with a painful punishment in the world and the Hereafter, and they have no
protector nor helper in the earth.
9:75-78 And of them is he who made a covenant with God (saying): If He gives us of His
bounty we will give alms and become of the righteous. Yet when He gave them of His
bounty, they hoarded it and turned away, averse; so He has made the consequence (to be)
hypocrisy in their hearts until the day when they shall meet Him, because they broke their
word to God that they promised Him, and because they lied. Know they not that God
knows both their secret and the thoughts that they confide, and that God is the Knower
of Things Hidden?
9:79-80 Those who point at such of the believers as give the alms willingly and such as can

87

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

find nothing to give but their endeavors, and deride them – God (Himself) derides them.
Theirs will be a painful punishment. Ask forgiveness for them (O Muhammad), or ask not
forgiveness for them; though you ask forgiveness for them seventy times God will not
forgive them. That is because they disbelieved in God and His Messenger, and God guides
not wrongdoing folk.
9:81-84 Those who were left behind rejoiced at sitting still behind the Messenger of God,
and were averse to fighting hard with their wealth and their lives in God's way. And they
said: Go not forth in the heat! Say: The fire of Hell is more intense of heat, if they but
understood. Then let them laugh a little: They will weep much, as the award of what they
used to earn. If God brings you back (from the campaign) to a party of them and they ask
of you leave, to go out (to fight), then say to them: You shall never more go out with me
nor fight with me against a foe. You were content with sitting still the first time. So sit still,
with the useless. And never (O Muhammad) pray for one of them who dies, nor stand by
his grave. Lo! They disbelieved in God and His Messenger, and they died while they were
evildoers.
9:85-87 Let not their wealth nor their children please you! God purposes only to punish
them thereby in the world, and that their souls shall pass away while they are disbelievers.
And when a Surah (chapter) is revealed (which says) : Believe in God and fight hard along
with His Messenger, the men of wealth among them still ask leave of you and say : Leave
us to be with those who sit (at home) . They are content that they should be with the
useless and their hearts are sealed , so that they apprehend not.
9:88-89 But the Messenger and those who believe with him fight hard with their wealth
and their lives. Such are they for whom are the good things. Such are they who are the
successful. God has made ready for them Gardens underneath which rivers flow, wherein
they will abide. That is the supreme triumph.
9:90 And those among the wandering Arabs, who had an excuse, came in order that
permission might be granted them. And those who lied to God and His Messenger sat at
home. A painful punishment will fall on those of them who disbelieve.
9:91 Not to the weak nor to the sick nor to those who can find nothing to spend is any
fault (to be imputed though they stay at home) if they are true to God and His Messenger.
Not to the good is there any road (of blame). God is Forgiving, Merciful.
9:92-93 Nor to those whom, when they came to you (asking) that you should mount them,
you did say: I cannot find whereon to mount you. They turned back with eyes flowing
with tears, for sorrow that they could not find the means to spend. The road (of blame) is
only against those who ask for leave of you (to stay at home) when they are rich. They are
content to be with the useless. God has sealed their hearts so that they know not.
9:94-96 They will make excuses to you (Muslims) when you return to them. Say: Make no
excuse, for we shall not believe you. God has told us about you. God and His Messenger
will see your conduct, and then you will be brought back to Him, Who knows the invisible
as well as the visible, and He will tell you what you used to do. They will swear by God to
you, when you return to them, that you may let them be. Let them be, for lo! They are
unclean, and their abode is Hell as the reward for what they used to earn. They swear to
you, that you may accept them. Though you accept them, God verily accepts not
wrongdoing folk.
9:97 The wandering Arabs are more severe in disbelief and hypocrisy, and more likely to
be ignorant of the limits that God has revealed to His Messenger. And God is Knower,
Wise.
9:98 And of the wandering Arabs there is he who takes that which he expends (for the
cause of God), as a loss, and he awaits (evil) turns of fortune for you (that he may be rid

88

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

of it). The evil turn of fortune will be theirs. God is Hearer, Knower.
9:99 And of the wandering Arabs there is he who believes in God and the Last Day, and
takes that which he expends and also the prayers of the Messenger as acceptable offerings
in the sight of God. Lo! Verily it is an acceptable offering for them. God will bring them
into His mercy. Lo! God is Forgiving, Merciful.
9:100 And the first to lead the way, of the Muhajirin (immigrants) and the Ansar
(supporters – the people of Al-Madinah) , and those who followed them in goodness God
is well pleased with them and they are well pleased with Him and He has made ready for
them , Gardens underneath which rivers flow, wherein they will abide forever. That is the
supreme triumph.
9:101-102 And among those around you of the wandering Arabs there are hypocrites, and
among the townspeople of Al-Madinah (there are some who) persist in hypocrisy that you
(O Muhammad) know not. We know them, and We shall punish them twice; then they
will be relegated to a painful punishment. And (there are) others who have acknowledged
their faults. They mixed a righteous action with another that was bad. It may be that God
will forgive toward them. Lo! God is Forgiving, Merciful.
9:103 Take alms of their wealth, wherewith you may sanctify them and may purify them of
their sins, and pray for them. Lo! Your prayer is an assuagement for them. God is Hearer,
Knower.
9:104 Know they not that God is He Who accepts repentance from His bondmen and
takes the alms, and that God is He Who is the Forgiving, the Merciful.
9:105-106 And say (to them): Act! God will behold your actions, and (so will) His
Messenger and the believers, and you will be brought back to the Knower of the invisible
and the visible, and He will tell you what you used to do. And (there are) others who await
God's decree, whether He will punish them or will forgive them. God is Knower, Wise.
9:107-110 And as for those who chose a place of worship out of opposition and disbelief,
and in order to cause dissent among the believers, and as an outpost for those who warred
against God and His Messenger aforetime, they will surely swear: We purposed nothing
except good. God bears witness that they verily are liars. Never stand (to pray) there. A
place of worship that was founded upon piety (to God) from the first day is more worthy
that you should stand (to pray) therein, wherein are men who love to purify themselves.
God loves the purifiers. Is he who founded his building upon piety to God and His good
pleasure better; or he who founded his building on the brink of a crumbling, overhanging
precipice so that it toppled with him into the fire of Hell? God guides not wrongdoing
folk. The building that they built will never cease to be a misgiving in their hearts unless
their hearts are torn to pieces. God is Knower, Wise.
9:111-112 Lo! God has bought from the believers their lives and their wealth because the
Garden will be theirs: they shall fight in the way of God and shall slay and be slain. It is a
promise that is binding on Him in the Torah and the Gospel and the Quran. Who fulfills
His covenant better than God? Rejoice then in your bargain that you have made, for that
is the supreme triumph. (Triumphant are) those who turn repentant (to God), those who
worship (Him), those who praise (Him), those who fast, those who bow down, those who
fall prostrate (in worship), those who enjoin the right and who forbid the wrong and those
who keep the limits (ordained) by God. And give glad tidings to believers!
9:113-115 It is not for the Prophet, and those who believe, to pray for the forgiveness of
polytheists even though they may be near of kin (to them) after it has become clear that
they are the people of the Hell-fire. The prayer of Abraham for the forgiveness of his
father was only because of a promise he had made to him, but when it had become clear
to him that he (his father) was an enemy to God he (Abraham) disowned him. Lo!

89

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

Abraham was soft of heart, lone suffering. It was never God's (part) that he should send a
folk astray after He had guided them until He had made clear to them what they should
avoid. Lo! God is Aware of all things.
9:116 Lo! God! To Him belongs the supreme power of the heavens and the earth. He
quickens and He gives death. And you have, instead of God, no protector nor helper.
9:117 God has turned in mercy to the Prophet, and to the Muhajirin (immigrants) and the
Ansar (supporters - the people of Madinah) who followed him in the hour of hardship.
After the hearts of a party of them had almost swerved aside, then turned He to them in
mercy. Lo! He is full of pity, Merciful to them.
9:118 And to the three also (did He turn in mercy) who were left behind: when the earth,
vast as it is, was straitened for them, and their own souls were straitened for them till they
realized that there is no refuge from God except toward Him. Then turned He to them in
mercy that they (too) might turn (repentant to Him). Lo! God! He is the Forgiving, the
Merciful.
9:119-123 O you who believe! Fear God, and be with the truthful. It is not for the
townsfolk of Al-Madinah and for those around them of the wandering Arabs to stay
behind the Messenger of God and prefer their lives to his life. That is because neither
thirst nor toil nor hunger afflicts them in the way of God, nor step they any step that
angers the disbelievers, nor gain they from the enemy a gain, but a good deed is recorded
for them therefore. God loses not the wages of the good. Nor spend they any spending,
small or great, nor do they cross a valley, but it is recorded for them, that God may repay
them the best of what they used to do. And the believers should not all go out to fight. Of
every troop of them, a party only should go forth, that they (who are left behind) may gain
sound knowledge in religion, and that they may warn their folk when they return to them,
so that they may beware. O you who believe! Fight those of the disbelievers who are near
to you, and let them find harshness in you, and know that God is with those who keep
their duty (to Him).
9:124-127 And whenever a Surah (chapter) is revealed there are some of them who say :
Which one of you has thus increased in faith? As for those who believe, it has increased
them in faith and they rejoice (therefore). But as for those in whose hearts is disease, it
only adds wickedness to their wickedness, and they die while they are disbelievers. See
they not that they are tested once or twice in every year? Still they turn not in repentance,
neither pay they heed. And whenever a Surah (chapter) is revealed, they look one at
another (as who should say): Does anybody see you? Then they turn away. God turns
away their hearts because they are a folk who understand not.
9:128 There has come to you a Messenger, (one) of yourselves, to whom anything that you
are overburdened with is grievous, full of concern for you, for the believers full of pity,
merciful.
9:129 Now, if they turn away (O Muhammad) say: God suffices me. None should be
worshipped but God alone. In Him have I put my trust, and He is Lord of the
Tremendous Throne.

10. Yunus: Jonah
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
10:1 Alif. Lam. Ra. These are verses of the wise Scripture.
10:2 Is it a wonder for people that We have inspired a man among them, saying: Warn

90

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

people and bring to those who believe the good tidings that they have a sure footing with
their Lord? The disbelievers say: Lo! This is a mere wizard.
10:3-4 Lo! Your Lord is God Who created the heavens and the earth in six Days, then He
established Himself upon the Throne, directing all things. There is no intercessor (with
Him) except after His permission. That is God, your Lord, so worship Him. Oh, will you
not remember? To Him is the return of all of you; it is a promise of God in truth. Lo! He
produces creation, and then reproduces it, that He may reward those who believe and do
good works with equity; while, as for those who disbelieve, theirs will be a boiling drink
and painful punishment because they disbelieved.
10:5-6 It is He, Who appointed the sun a splendor, and the moon a light, and measured
for her stages, that you might know the number of the years, and the reckoning. God
created not (all) that except in truth. He details the revelations for people who have
knowledge.
10:6 Lo! In the difference of day and night and all that God has created in the heavens and
the earth are signs, verily, for folk who fear (God).
10:7-8 Lo! Those who expect not the meeting with Us but desire the life of the world and
feel secure therein, and those who are neglectful of Our revelations, their home will be the
Fire because of what they used to earn.
10:9-10 Lo! Those who believe and do good works, their Lord guides them by their faith.
Rivers will flow beneath them in the Gardens of Delight, their prayer therein will be:
Glory is to You, O God! And their greeting therein will be: Peace. And the conclusion of
their prayer will be: Praise be to God, Lord of the Worlds!
10:11 If God were to hasten on for men the ill (that they have earned) as they would
hasten on the good, their respite would already have expired. But We leave those who
look not for the meeting with Us to wander blindly on in their contumacy.
10:12 And if misfortune touches a man he cries to Us, (while reclining) on his side, or
sitting or standing, but when We have relieved him of the misfortune he goes his way as
though he had not cried to Us because of a misfortune that afflicted him. Thus is what
they do, it is made fair (seeming) to the prodigal.
10:13-17 We destroyed the generations before you when they did wrong; and their
Messengers (from God) came to them with clear proofs (of His supreme power) but they
would not believe. Thus do We reward the guilty folk. Then We appointed you viceroys in
the earth after them, that We might see how you behave. And when Our clear revelations
are recited to them they who look not for the meeting with Us, say: Bring a Lecture other
than this, or change it. Say (O Muhammad): It is not for me to change it of my own
accord. I only follow that which is inspired in me. Lo! If I disobey my Lord I fear the
retribution of an Awful Day. Say: If God had so willed I should not have recited it to you
nor would He have made it known to you. I dwelt among you a whole lifetime before it
(came to me). Have you then no sense? Who does greater wrong than he who invents a lie
concerning God and denies His revelations? Lo! The guilty are never successful.
10:18 They worship beside God that which neither hurts them nor profits them, and they
say: These are our intercessors with God. Say: Would you inform God of (something) that
He knows not in the heavens or in the earth? Praised be He and high exalted above all
that you associate (with Him)!
10:19-21 People were but one community; then they differed; and had it not been for a
word that had already gone forth from your Lord, it had been judged between them in
respect of that wherein they differ. And they will say: If only a sign were sent down upon
him from his Lord! Then say (O Muhammad): The Unseen belongs to God. So wait! Lo, I

91

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

am waiting with you. And when We cause people to taste of mercy after some adversity
which had afflicted them, behold! They have some plot against Our revelations. Say: God
is swifter in plotting. Lo! Our messengers write down that which you plot.
10:22-23 It is He, Who makes you to go on the land and the sea until, when you are in the
ships and they sail with them with a fair breeze and they are glad therein, a stormy wind
reaches them and the wave comes to them from every side and they deem that they are
overwhelmed therein; (then) they cry to God, making their faith pure for Him only: If
You deliver us from this, we truly will be of the thankful. Yet when He has delivered
them, behold! They rebel in the earth wrongfully. O people! Your rebellion is only against
yourselves. (You have) enjoyment of the life of the world; then to Us is your return and
We shall proclaim to you what you used to do.
10:24-25 The similitude of the life of the world is only as water which We send down
from the sky, then the earth's growth of that which men and cattle eat mingles with it till,
when the earth has taken on her ornaments and is embellished, and her people deem that
they are masters of her, Our commandment comes by night or by day and we make it as
reaped corn as if it had not flourished yesterday. Thus do We expound the revelations for
people who reflect. And God summons to the abode of peace, and guides whom He wills
to a straight path.
10:26 For those who do good is the best (reward) and more (thereto). Neither dust nor
humiliation comes near their faces. Such are rightful inhabitants of the Garden; they will
abide therein.
10:27 And those who earn ill deeds, (for them) requital of each ill deed by the like thereof;
and humiliation overtakes them – They have no protector from God – as if their faces had
been covered with a cloak of darkest night. Such are rightful inhabitants of the Fire; they
will abide therein.
10:28-30 On the Day when We gather them all together, then We say to those who
ascribed partners (to Us): Stand back, you and your (pretended) partners (of God)! And
We separate them, the one from the other, and their (pretended) partners say: It was not
us you worshipped. God suffices as a witness between you, and us that we were unaware
of your worship. There does every soul experience that which it did aforetime, and they
are returned to God, their rightful Lord, and that which they used to invent has failed
them.
10:31-33 Say (to them, O Muhammad): Who provides for you from the sky and the earth,
or Who owns hearing and sight; and Who brings forth the living from the dead and brings
forth the dead from the living; and Who directs the course? They will say: God. Then say:
Will you not then fear (Him)? Such then is God, your rightful Lord. After the Truth what
is there excepting error? How then are you turned away! Thus is the Word of your Lord
justified concerning those who do wrong: that they believe not.
10:34 Say: Is there of your partners (whom you ascribe to God) one that produces
creation and then reproduces it? Say: God produces creation, and then reproduces it. How
then, are you misled!
10:35 Say: Is there of your partners (whom you ascribe to God) one that leads to the
Truth? Say: God leads to the Truth. Is He Who guides to the Truth more deserving that
He should be followed, or he who finds not the way unless he (himself) is guided. What
ails you? How judge you?
10:36 Most of them follow nothing but conjecture. Assuredly conjecture can by no means
take the place of truth. Lo! God is Aware of what they do.
10:37-39 And this Quran is not such as could ever be invented by other than God; but it is

92

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

a confirmation of that which was before it and an exposition of that which is decreed for
people – Therein is no doubt – from the Lord of the Worlds. Or say they: He has
invented it? Say: Then bring a Surah (chapter) like it , and call (for help) on all you can
besides God , if you are truthful . Nay, but they denied that, the knowledge whereof they
could not compass, and whereof the interpretation (in events) has not yet come to them.
Even so did those before them deny. Then see what was the consequence for the
wrongdoers!
10:40-44 And of them is he who believes therein, and of them is he who believes not
therein, and your Lord is best aware of the corrupters. And if they deny you, say: To me
my work, and to you your work. You are innocent of what I do, and I am innocent of
what you do. And of them are some who listen to you. But can you make the deaf hear
even though they apprehend not? And of them is he who looks toward you. But can you
guide the blind even though they see not? Lo! God wrongs not people in anything; but
people wrong themselves.
10:45-46 And on the Day when He shall gather them together, (when it will seem) as
though they had tarried but an hour of the day, recognizing one another, those will verily
have perished who denied the meeting with God and were not guided. Whether We let
you (O Muhammad) behold something of that which We promise them or (whether We)
cause you to die, still to Us is their return, and God, moreover, is Witness over what they
do.
10:47 And for every nation there is a Messenger. And when their Messenger comes (on
the Day of Judgment) it will be judged between them fairly, and they will not be wronged.
10:48-53 And they say: When will this promise be fulfilled, if you are truthful? Say: I have
no power to hurt or benefit myself, except that which God wills. For every nation there is
an appointed time. When their time comes, then they cannot put it off an hour, nor hasten
(it). Say: Have you thought: When His punishment comes to you as a raid by night, or in
the (busy) day; what is there of it that the guilty ones desire to hasten? Is it (only) then,
when it has befallen that you will believe? What! (Believe) now, when (until now) you have
been hastening it on (through disbelief)? Then will it be said to those who dealt unjustly:
Taste the torment of eternity. Are you requited anything except what you used to earn?
And they ask you to inform them (saying): Is it true? Say: Yea, by my Lord, verily it is true,
and you cannot escape.
10:54 And if each soul that does wrong had all that is in the earth it would seek to ransom
itself therewith; and they will feel remorse within them when they see the punishment. But
it has been judged between them fairly and they are not wronged.
10:55-56 Lo! Verily all that is in the heavens and the earth is God's. Lo! Verily God's
promise is true. But most of them know not. He quickens and gives death, and to Him
you will be returned.
10:57 O people! There has come to you an exhortation from your Lord, a balm for that
which is in the breasts, a guidance and a mercy for believers.
10:58-60 Say: In the bounty of God and in His mercy: therein let them rejoice. It is better
than what they hoard. Say: Have you considered what provision God has sent down for
you, how you have made it lawful and unlawful? Say: Has God permitted you, or do you
invent a lie concerning God? And what think those who invent a lie concerning God (will
be their plight) upon the Day of Resurrection? Lo! God truly is Bountiful toward people,
but most of them give not thanks.
10:61 And you (Muhammad) are not occupied with any business and you recite not a
lecture from this (Scripture), and you (people) perform no act, but We are Witness of you
when you are engaged therein. And not an atom's weight in the earth or in the sky escapes

93

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

your Lord, nor what is less than that or greater than that, but it is (written) in a clear Book.
10:62-64 Lo! Verily the friends of God are (those) on whom fear (comes) not, nor do they
grieve. Those who believe and keep their duty (to God), theirs are good tidings in the life
of the world and in the Hereafter – There is no changing the words of God – that is the
Supreme Triumph.
10:65 And let not their speech grieve you (O Muhammad). Lo! Power belongs wholly to
God. He is the Hearer, the Knower.
10:66-67 Lo! Is it not to God that belongs whoever is in the heavens and whoever is in the
earth? Those who follow anything instead of God follow not (His) partners. They follow
only a conjecture. And they do but guess. It is He, who has appointed for you the night
that you should rest therein and the day giving sight. Lo! Herein verily are signs for a folk
that take heed.
10:68-70 They say: God has taken (to Him) a son. Glorified be He! He has no needs! His
is all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth. You have no warrant for this. Tell
you concerning God that which you know not? Say: Verily those who invent a lie
concerning God will not succeed. This world's portion (will be theirs), then to Us is their
return. Then We make them taste a dreadful punishment because they used to disbelieve.
10:71-74 Recite to them the story of Noah, when he told his people: O my people! If my
sojourn (here) and my reminding you by God's revelations are an offence to you, in God
have I put my trust, so decide upon your course of action, you and your partners. Let not
your course of action be in doubt for you. Then come at me, and give me no respite. But
if you are averse I have asked of you no wage. My wage is the concern of God only, and I
am commanded to be of the Muslims (those who surrender to Him). But they denied him,
so We saved him and those with him in the ship, and made them viceroys (in the earth),
while We drowned those who denied Our revelations. See then the nature of the
consequence for those who had been warned. Then, after him, We sent Messengers to
their folk, and they brought them clear proofs. But they were not ready to believe in that
which they before denied. Thus print We on the hearts of the transgressors.
10:75-82 Then after them, We sent Moses and Aaron to Pharaoh and his chiefs with Our
revelations, but they were arrogant and were a guilty folk. And when the Truth from Us
came to them, they said: This is mere magic. Moses said: Speak you (so) of the Truth
when it has come to you? Is this magic? Now magicians thrive not. They said: Have you
come to us to pervert us from that (faith) in which we found our fathers, and that you two
may own the place of greatness in the land? We will not believe you two. And Pharaoh
said: Bring every cunning wizard to me. And when the wizards came, Moses said to them:
Cast your cast! And when they had cast, Moses said: That which you have brought is
magic. Lo! God will make it vain. Lo! God upholds not the work of mischief-makers. And
God will vindicate the Truth by His words, however much the guilty be averse.
10:83-89 But none trusted Moses, except some scions of his people, (and they were) in
fear of Pharaoh and their chiefs, that they would persecute them. Lo! Pharaoh was verily a
tyrant in the land, and lo! He verily was of the wanton. And Moses said: O my people! If
you have believed in God then put trust in Him, if you are Muslims (have indeed
surrendered to Him)! They said: In God we put trust. Our Lord! Oh, make us not a lure
for the wrongdoing folk; And, in Your mercy, save us from the folk that disbelieve. And
We inspired Moses and his brother (saying:) Appoint houses for your people in Egypt and
make your houses oratories, and establish worship. And give good news to the believers.
And Moses said: Our Lord! Lo! You have given Pharaoh and his chiefs splendor and
riches in the life of the world, Our Lord! That they may lead men astray from Your way.
Our Lord! Destroy their riches and harden their hearts so that they believe not till they see
the painful punishment. He said: Your prayer is heard. Do you twain keep to the straight
path, and follow not the road of those who have no knowledge.

94

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

10:90-92 And We brought the Children of Israel across the sea, and Pharaoh with his
hosts pursued them in rebellion and transgression, till, when the (fate of) drowning
overtook him, he exclaimed: I believe that none should be worshipped but Him in Whom
the Children of Israel believe, and I am of those who are Muslims (surrendered to Him).
What! Now! When hitherto you have rebelled and been of the wrongdoers? But this day
We save you in your body that you may be a sign for those after you. Lo! Most of people
are heedless of Our signs.
10:93 And We verily did allot to the Children of Israel a fixed abode, and did provide
them with good things; and they differed not until knowledge came to them. Lo! Your
Lord will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection concerning that wherein they
used to differ.
10:94-97 And if you (Muhammad) are in doubt concerning that which We reveal to you,
then question those who read the Scripture (that was) before you. Verily the Truth from
your Lord has come to you. So be not you of the waverers. And be not you of those who
deny the revelations of God, for then you will be of the losers. Lo! Those for whom the
word of your Lord (concerning sinners) has taken effect will not believe, though every
sign should come to them, till they see the painful punishment.
10:98 If only there had been a community (of all those that were destroyed of old) that
believed and profited by its belief as did the folk of Jonah. When they believed We drew
off from them the torment of disgrace in the life of the world and gave them comfort for
a while.
10:99-100 And if your Lord willed, all who are in the earth would have believed together.
Would you (Muhammad) compel men until they are believers? It is not for any soul to
believe except by the permission of God. He has set uncleanness upon those who have no
sense.
10:101-103 Say: Behold what is in the heavens and the earth! But revelations and warnings
avail not folk that will not believe. What expect they except the like of the days of those
who passed away before them? Say: Expect it then! I am with you among the expectant.
Then shall We save Our Messengers and the believers, in a like manner (as of old). It is
incumbent upon Us to save the believers.
10:104 Say (O Muhammad): O people! If you are in doubt of my religion, then (know
that) I worship not those whom you worship instead of God, but I worship God who
causes you to die, and I have been commanded to be of the believers.
10:105-107 And (O Muhammad) set your purpose resolutely for religion, as a man by
nature upright, and be not of those who ascribe partners (to God). And cry not, beside to
God, to that, which cannot profit you nor hurt you, for if you did so then you were of the
wrongdoers. If God afflicts you with some hurt, there is none who can remove it except
Him; and if He desires good for you, there is none who can repel His bounty. He strikes
with it whoever He wills of His bondmen. He is the Forgiving, the Merciful.
10:108 Say: O people! Now has the Truth from your Lord come to you. So whoever is
guided, is guided only for (the good of) his soul, and whoever errs, errs only against it.
And I am not a warder over you.
10:109 And (O Muhammad) follow that which is inspired in you, and forbear until God
gives judgment. And He is the Best of judges.

11. Hud: Hood

95

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
11:1-2 Alif. Lam. Ra. (This is) a Scripture the revelations whereof are perfected and then
expounded. (It comes) from One Wise, Informed, (saying :) worship none but God. Lo! I
am to you from Him a warner and a bringer of good tidings.
11:3-4 And (bidding you): Ask pardon of your Lord and turn to Him repentant. He will
cause you to enjoy a fair estate until a time appointed. He gives His bounty to every
bountiful one. But if you turn away, Lo! (Then) I fear for you the retribution of an Awful
Day. To God is your return, and He is Able to do all things.
11:5 Lo! Now they fold up their breasts that they may hide (their thoughts) from Him. At
the very moment when they cover themselves with their clothing, God knows that which
they keep hidden and that which they proclaim. Lo! He is Aware of what is in the breasts
(of men).
11:6 And there is not a beast in the earth but the sustenance thereof depends on God. He
knows its habitation and its repository. All is in a clear record.
11:7-8 And it is He Who created the heavens and the earth in six Days – and His Throne
was upon the water – that He might try which of you is best in conduct. Yet if you (O
Muhammad) say: Lo! You will be raised again after death! Those who disbelieve will surely
say: This is nothing but mere magic. And if We delay for them the punishment until a
reckoned time, they will surely say: What withholds it? Verily on the Day when it comes to
them, it cannot be averted from them, and that which they derided will surround them.
11:9-11 And if We cause man to taste some mercy from Us and afterward withdraw it
from him, lo! He is despairing, thankless. And if We cause him to taste grace after some
misfortune that has befallen him, he says: The ills have gone from me. Lo! He is exultant,
boastful; except those who persevere and do good works. Theirs will be forgiveness and a
great reward.
11:12-14 A likely thing, that you would forsake anything of that which has been revealed
to you, and that your breast should be straitened for it, because they say: Why has not a
treasure been sent down for him, or an angel come with him? You are but a warner, and
God is in charge of all things. Or they say: He has invented it. Say: Then bring ten Surah
(chapters) , the like thereof , invented , and call on everyone you can beside God , if you
are truthful! And if they answer not your prayer, then know that it is revealed only in the
knowledge of God; and that none should be worshipped but God alone. Will you then be
(of) the Muslims (those who surrender)?
11:15-16 Whoever desires the life of the world and its pomp, We shall repay them their
deeds therein, and therein they will not be wronged. Those are they for whom there is
nothing in the Hereafter except the Fire. (All) that they contrive here is in vain and (all)
that they are wont to do is fruitless.
11:17 Are those who rely on a clear proof from their Lord and a witness (Gabriel) from
Him reciting it (like those who disbelieve)? And before it came the Book of Moses, an
example and a mercy. Such believe therein. And whoever disbelieves therein of the clans,
the Fire is his appointed place. So be not you in doubt concerning it. Lo! It is the Truth
from your Lord; but most of people believe not.
11:18-22 Who does greater wrong than he who invents a lie concerning God? Such will be
brought before their Lord, and the witnesses will say: These are they who lied concerning
their Lord. Now the curse of God is upon wrongdoers, who debar (men) from the way of
God and would have it crooked, and who are disbelievers in the Hereafter. Such will not
escape in the earth, nor have they any helpers (and protectors) beside God. For them the
torment will be double. They could not bear to hear, and they used not to see. Such are

96

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

they who have lost their souls, and that which they used to invent has failed them.
Assuredly in the Hereafter they will be the greatest losers.
11:23 Lo! Those who believe and do good works and humble themselves before their
Lord: such are rightful inhabitants of the Garden; they will abide therein.
11:24 The similitude of the two parties is as the blind and the deaf and the seer and the
hearer. Are they equal in similitude? Will you not then be admonished?
11:25-34 And We sent Noah to his folk (and he said): I am a plain warner to you. That
you worship none, except God. Lo! I fear for you the retribution of a painful Day. The
chieftains of his folk, who disbelieved, said: We see you but a mortal like us, and we see
not that any follow you except the most abject among us, without reflection. We behold in
you no merit above us – nay, we deem you liars. He said: O my people! Have you not
considered, if I rely on a clear proof from my Lord and there has come to me a mercy
from Him, and it has been made obscure to you, can we compel you to accept it when you
are averse thereto? And O my people! I ask of you no wealth therefore. My reward is the
concern only of God, and I am not going to thrust away those who believe – Lo! They
have to meet their Lord – but I see you are a folk that are ignorant. And, O my people!
Who would deliver me from God if I thrust them away? Will you not then reflect? I say
not to you: `I have the treasures of God' nor `I have knowledge of the Unseen,' nor say I:
`Lo! I am an angel!' Nor say I to those whom your eyes scorn that God will not give them
good – God knows best what is in their hearts – Lo! Then indeed I should be of the
wrongdoers. They said: O Noah! You have disputed with us and multiplied disputation
with us; now bring upon us that wherewith you threaten us, if you are of the truthful. He
said: Only God will bring it upon you if He wills, and you can by no means escape. My
counsel will not profit you if I were minded to advise you, if God's will is to keep you
astray. He is your Lord and to Him you will be brought back.
11:35-41 Or say they (again) He has invented it? Say: If I have invented it, upon me be my
crimes, but I am innocent of (all) that you commit. And it was inspired in Noah (saying):
No one of the folk will believe except him who has believed already. Be not distressed
because of what they do. Build the ship under Our Eyes and by Our inspiration, and speak
not to Me on behalf of those who do wrong. Lo! They will be drowned. And he was
building the ship, and every time that the chieftains of his people passed him, they made
mock of him. He said: Though you make a mockery of us, yet we mock at you even as you
mock; and you shall know to whom a
punishment that will disgrace him comes, and upon whom a lasting punishment will fall.
(Thus it was) till, when Our commandment came to pass and the oven gushed forth water,
We said: Load therein two of every kind, a pair (the male and female), and your
household, except him against whom the word has gone forth already, and those who
believe. And but a few were they who believed with him. And he said: Embark therein! In
the name of God be its course and its mooring. Lo! My Lord is Forgiving, Merciful.
11:42-45 And it sailed with them amid waves like mountains, and Noah cried to his son –
and he was standing aloof – O my son! Come ride with us, and be not with the
disbelievers. He said: I shall betake me to some mountain that will save me from the
water. (Noah) said: This day there is none that saves from the commandment of God
except him on whom He has had mercy. And the wave came in between them, so he was
among the drowned. And it was said: O earth! Swallow your water and, O sky! Be cleared
of clouds! And the water was made to subside. And the commandment was fulfilled. And
it (the ship) came to rest upon (the mount) Al-Judi and it was said: A far removal for
wrongdoing folk! And Noah cried to his Lord and said: My Lord! Lo! My son is of my
household! Surely Your promise is the Truth and You are the Most Just of judges.
11:46-48 He said: O Noah! Lo! He is not of your household. lo! He is of evil conduct, so
ask not of Me that whereof you have no knowledge. I admonish you lest you be among

97

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

the ignorant. He said: My Lord! Lo! In You do I seek refuge (from the sin) that I should
ask of You that whereof I have no knowledge. Unless You forgive me and have mercy on
me I shall be among the lost. It was said (to him): O Noah! Go you down (from the
mountain) with peace from Us and blessings upon you and some nations (that will spring)
from those with you.
(There will be other) nations to whom We shall give enjoyment a long while and then a
painful punishment from Us will overtake them.
11:49 This is of the tidings of the Unseen that We inspire in you (O Muhammad). You
yourself knew it not, nor did your folk (know it) before this. Then have patience. Lo! The
sequel is for those who are pious.
11:50-58 And to (the tribe of) Aad (We sent) their brother, Hud. He said: O my people!
Worship God! You have no other God except Him. Lo! You do but invent! O my people!
I ask of you no reward for it. Lo! My reward is the concern only of Him Who created me.
Have you then no sense? And, O my people! Ask forgiveness of your Lord, and then turn
to Him repentant; He will cause the sky to rain abundance on you and will add more
strength to your strength. Turn not away, guilty! They said: O Hud! You have brought us
no clear proof and we are not going to forsake our gods on your (mere) saying, and we are
not believers in you. We say nothing except that one of our gods has possessed you in an
evil way. He said: I call God to witness, and do you (too) bear witness, that I am innocent
of (all) that you ascribe as partners (to God). Beside Him. So (try to) circumvent me, all of
you, give me no respite. Lo! I have put my trust in God, my Lord and your Lord. Not an
animal but He does grasp it by the forelock! Lo! My Lord is on a straight path. And if you
turn away, still I have conveyed to you that with which I was sent to you, and my Lord
will set in place of you a folk other than you. You cannot injure Him at all. Lo! My Lord is
Guardian over all things. And when Our commandment came to pass We saved Hud and
those who believed with him by a mercy from Us; We saved them from a harsh
punishment.
11:59-60 And such were Aad. They denied the revelations of their Lord and flouted His
Messengers and followed the command of every forward potentate. And a curse was made
to follow them in the world and on the Day of Resurrection. Lo! Aad disbelieved in their
Lord. A far removal for Aad, the folk of Hud!
11:61-66 And to (the tribe of) Thamud (We sent) their brother Salih. He said: O my
people! Worship God, you have no other God except Him. He brought you forth from
the earth and has made you husband it. So ask forgiveness of Him and turn to Him
repentant. Lo, my Lord is Near, Responsive. They said: O Salih! You have been among us
until now as that wherein our hope was placed. Do you ask us not to worship what our
fathers worshipped? Lo! We verily are in grave doubt concerning that to which you call us.
He said: O my people! Have you not considered: if I am (acting) on clear proof from my
Lord and there has come to me a mercy from Him,
who will save me from God if I disobey Him? You would add to me nothing except
perdition. O my people! This is the camel of God, a sign to you, so leave her to feed in
God's earth, and touch her not with harm lest a near torment seize you. But they
hamstrung her, and then he said: Enjoy life in your dwelling place three days! This is a
threat that will not be belied. So, when Our commandment came to pass, We saved Salih,
and those who believed with him, by a mercy from Us, from the humiliation of that day.
Lo, Your Lord! He is the Strong, the Mighty.
11:67-68 And the (Awful) Cry overtook those who did wrong, so that morning found
them prostrate in their dwellings, as though they had not dwelt there. Lo! Thamud
disbelieved in their Lord. A far removal for Thamud!
11:69-76 And Our messengers came to Abraham with good news. They said: Peace! He

98

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

answered: Peace! And delayed not to bring a roasted calf. And when he saw their hands
reached not to it, he mistrusted them and conceived a fear of them. They said: Fear not!
Lo! We are sent to the folk of Lot. And his wife, standing by, laughed when We gave her
good tidings (of the birth) of Isaac, and, after Isaac, of Jacob. She said: Oh, woe is me!
Shall I bear a child when I am an old woman, and this my husband, an old man? Lo! This
is a strange thing! They said: Wonder you at the commandment of God? The mercy of
God and His blessings be upon you, O people of the house! Lo! He is Owner of praise,
Owner of glory! And when the awe departed from Abraham, and the glad news reached
him, he pleaded with Us on behalf of the folk of Lot. Lo! Abraham was mild, imploring,
and penitent. (It was said) O Abraham! Forsake this! Lo! Your Lord's commandment has
gone forth, and lo! There comes to them a punishment which cannot be repelled.
11:77-83 And when Our messengers came to Lot, he was distressed and knew not how to
protect them. He said: This is a distressful day. And his people came to him, running
towards him – and before then they used to commit abominations – He said: O my
people! Here are my daughters! They are purer for you. Beware of God, and degrade me
not in (the person of) my guests. Is there not among you any upright man? They said: Well
you know that we have no right to your daughters, and well you know what we want. He
said: Would that I had strength to resist you or had some strong support (among you)!
(The messengers) said: O Lot! Lo! We are messengers of your Lord; they shall not reach
you. So travel with your people in a part of the night, and let not one of you turn
round.(all) except your wife. Lo! That which smites them will smite her (also). Lo! Their
appointed time is (for) the morning. Is not the morning near? So when Our
commandment came to pass We overthrew (that township) and rained upon it stones of
clay, one after another, marked with fire in the providence of your Lord (for the
destruction of the wicked). And they are never far from the wrongdoers.
11:84-90 And to Midian (We sent) their brother Shueyb. He said: O my people! Worship
God. You have no other God except Him! And give not short measure and short weight.
Lo! I see you well to do, and lo! I fear for you the punishment of a besetting Day. O my
people! Give full measure and full weight in justice, and wrong not people in respect of
their goods. And do not evil in the earth, causing corruption. That which God leaves with
you is better for you if you are believers; and I am not a keeper over you. They said: O
Shueyb! Does your way of prayer command you that we should forsake that which our
fathers (used to) worship, or that we (should leave off) doing what we will with our own
property. Lo! You are the mild, the guide to right behavior. He said: O my people! Have
you not considered: if I am (acting) on a clear proof from my Lord and He sustains me
with fair sustenance from Him (how can I concede anything to you)? I desire not to do
behind your backs that which I ask you not to do. I desire nothing except reform so far as
I am able. My welfare is only in God. In Him I trust and to Him I turn (repentant). And,
O my people! Let not the schism with me cause you to sin so that there befall you that
which befell the folk of Noah and the folk of Hud, and the folk of Salih; and the folk of
Lot are not far off from you. Ask pardon of your Lord and then turn to Him (repentant).
Lo! My Lord is, Merciful, Loving.
11:91-95 They said: O Shueyb! We understand not much of that you tell, and lo! We do
behold you weak among us. But for your family, we should have stoned you, for you are
not strong against us. He said: O my people! Is my family more to be honored by you than
God? And you put Him behind you, neglected! Lo! My Lord surrounds what you do. And,
O my people! Act according to your power, lo, I (too) am acting. You will soon know on
whom there comes a punishment that will abase him, and who it is that lies. And watch!
Lo! I am watcher with you. And when Our commandment came to pass we saved Shueyb
and those who believed with Him by a mercy from Us; and the (Awful) Cry seized those
who did injustice, and morning found them prostrate in their dwellings. As though they
had not dwelt there. A far removal for Midian, even as Thamud had been removed afar!
11:96-99 And verily We sent Moses with Our revelations and a clear warrant. To Pharaoh
and his chiefs, but they did follow the command of Pharaoh, and the command of

99

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

Pharaoh was no right guide. He will go before his people on the Day of Resurrection and
will lead them to the Fire for a watering-place. Ah, evil is the watering-place (whither they
are) led. A curse is made to follow them in the world and on the Day of Resurrection. Evil
is the gift (that will be) given to (them).
11:100-102 That is (something) of the tidings of the townships (which were destroyed of
old). We relate it to you (O Muhammad). Some of them are standing and some (already)
reaped. We wronged them not, but they did wrong themselves; and their gods on whom
they call beside God availed them nothing then came your Lord's command; they added
to them nothing except ruin. Even thus is the grasp of your Lord when he grasps the
townships while they are doing wrong. Lo! His grasp is painful, very strong.
11:103-107 Lo! Herein verily there is a sign for those who fear the punishment of the
Hereafter. That is a Day to which people will be gathered, and that is a Day that will be
witnessed. And We defer it only as a term already reckoned. On the Day when it comes
no soul will speak except by His permission; some among them will be wretched, (others)
glad. As for those who will be wretched (on that Day) they will be in the Fire; sighing and
wailing will be their portion therein. Abiding there so long as the heavens and the earth
endure except for that which your Lord wills. Lo! Your Lord is Doer of what He wills.
11:108 And as for those who will be glad (that Day) they will be in the Garden, abiding
there so long as the heavens and the earth endure except for that which your Lord wills: a
gift unfailing.
11:109-111 So be not you in doubt concerning that which these (folk) worship. They
worship only as their fathers worshipped aforetime. Lo! We shall pay them their whole
due unabated. And We verily gave to Moses the Scripture, and there was strife thereupon;
and had it not been for a Word that had already gone forth from your Lord, the case
would have been judged between them, and Lo! They are in grave doubt concerning it.
And lo! To each your Lord will verily repay his works in full. Lo! He is informed of what
they do.
11:112 So tread you upon the straight path as you are commanded, and those who turn (to
God) with you, and transgress not. Lo! He is Seer of what you do.
11:113 And incline not toward those who do wrong lest the Fire touch you, and you have
no helpers (and protectors) against God, and afterward you would not be helped.
11:114-115 Establish worship at the two ends of the day and in some watches of the night.
Lo! Good deeds annul ill deeds. This is a reminder for the mindful. And have patience, (O
Muhammad), for lo! God loses not the wages of the good.
11:116-119 If only there had been among the generations before you, men possessing a
remnant (of good sense) to warn (their people) of corruption in the earth, as did a few of
those whom We saved from them! The wrongdoers followed that by which they were
made sapless, and were guilty. In truth your Lord destroyed not the townships tyrannously
while their folk were doing right. And if your Lord had willed, He verily would have made
people one nation, yet they cease not differing, except him on whom your Lord has
mercy; and for that He did create them. And the Word of your Lord has been fulfilled:
Verily I shall fill Hell with the jinn and humankind together.
11:120-122 And all that We relate to you of the story of the Messengers is in order that
thereby We may make firm your heart. And herein has come to you the Truth and an
exhortation and a reminder for believers. And say to those who believe not: Act according
to your power. Lo! We (too) are acting. And wait! Lo! We (too) are waiting.
11:123 And God's is the Invisible of the heavens and the earth, and to Him the whole
matter will be returned. So worship Him and put your trust in Him. Lo! Your Lord is not

100

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

unaware of what you (mortals) do.

12. Yusuf: Joseph
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
12:1-3 Alif. Lam. Ra. These are verses of the Scripture that makes plain. Lo! We have
revealed it , a Lecture in Arabic, so that you may understand. We narrate to you (O
Muhammad) the best of narratives in that We have inspired in you this Quran, though
aforetime you were of the heedless.
12:4-6 When Joseph said to his father: O my father! Lo! I saw in a dream, eleven planets
and the sun and the moon, I saw them prostrating themselves to me. He said: O my dear
son! Tell not your brethren of your vision, lest they plot a plot against you. Lo! Satan is for
man an open foe. Thus your Lord will prefer you and will teach you the interpretation of
events, and will perfect His grace upon you and upon the family of Jacob as He perfected
it upon your forefathers, Abraham and Isaac. Lo! Your Lord is Knower, Wise.
12:7-14 Verily in Joseph and his brethren are signs (of God's supreme power) for the
inquiring. When they said: Verily Joseph and his brother are dearer to our father than we
are, many though we are. Lo! Our father is in plain aberration. (One said): Kill Joseph or
cast him to some (other) land, so that your father's favor may be all for you, and (that) you
may afterward be righteous folk. One among them said: Kill not Joseph but, if you must
be doing, fling him into the depths of the pit; some caravan will find him. They said: O
our father! Why will you not trust us with Joseph, when lo! We are good friends to him?
Send him with us tomorrow that he may enjoy
himself and play. And lo! We shall take good care of him. He said: Lo! In truth it saddens
me that you should take him with you, and I fear lest the wolf devours him while you are
heedless of him. They said: If the wolf should devour him when we are (so strong) a band,
then surely we should have already perished.
12:15-18 Then, when they led him off, and were of one mind, that they should place him
in the depth of the pit, We inspired in him: You will tell them of this deed of theirs when
they know (you) not. And they came weeping to their father in the evening. Saying: O our
father! We went racing one with another, and left Joseph by our things, and the wolf
devoured him, and you believe not our sayings even when we speak the truth. And they
came with false blood on his shirt. He said: Nay, but your minds have deceived you into
something. (My course is) comely patience. And it is God Whose help is to be sought in
that (predicament) which you describe.
12:19-20 And there came a caravan, and they sent their water-drawer. He let down his pail
(into the pit). He said: Good luck! Here is a youth. And they hid him as a treasure, and
God was Aware of what they did. And they sold him for a low price, a number of silver
coins; and they attached no value to him.
12:21-22 And he of Egypt who purchased him said to his wife: Receive him honorably.
Perchance he may prove useful to us or we may adopt him as a son. Thus We established
Joseph in the land that We might teach him the interpretation of events. And God was
predominant in his career, but most of people knew not. And when he reached his prime,
We gave him wisdom and knowledge. Thus We reward the good.
12:23-29 And she, in whose house he was, asked of him an evil act. She bolted the doors
and said: Come! He said: I seek refuge in God! Lo! He is my lord, who has treated me
honorably. Lo! Wrongdoers never prosper. She verily desired him, and he would have
desired her if it had not been that he saw the argument of his Lord. Thus it was, that We

101

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

might ward off from him evil and lewdness. Lo! He was of Our chosen slaves. And they
raced with one another to the door, and she tore his shirt from behind, and they met her
lord and master at the door. She said: What shall be his reward, who wishes evil to your
folk, except prison or a painful punishment? (Joseph) said: It was she who asked of me an
evil act. And in witness of her own folk testified: If his shirt is torn from before, then she
speaks the truth and he is of the liars. And if his shirt is torn from behind, then she has
lied and he is of the truthful. So when he saw his shirt torn from behind, he said: Lo! This
is of the guile of you women. Lo! The guile of you is very great. O Joseph! Turn away
from this, and you, (O woman!) ask forgiveness for your sin. Lo! You are of the sinful.
12:30-34 And women in the city said: The ruler's wife is asking of her slave boy an ill deed.
Indeed he has smitten her to the heart with love. We behold her in plain aberration. And
when she heard of their sly talk, she sent for them and prepared for them a cushioned
couch (to lie on at the feast) and gave to every one of them a knife and said (to Joseph):
Come out to them! And when they saw him they exalted him and cut their hands,
exclaiming: God Blameless! This is not a human being. This is no other than some
gracious angel. She said: This is he, on whose account you blamed me. I asked of him an
evil act, but he proved continent, but if he do not my behest he verily shall be imprisoned,
and verily shall be of those brought low. He said: O my Lord! Prison is dearer than that to
which they urge me, and if You fend not off their wiles from me I shall incline to them
and become of the foolish. So his Lord heard his prayer and fended off their wiles from
him. Lo! He is Hearer, Knower.
12:35-40 And it seemed good to them (the men folk) after they had seen the signs (of his
innocence) to imprison him for a time. And two young men went to prison with him. One
of them said: I dreamed that I was pressing wine. The other said I dreamed that I was
carrying upon my head bread whereof the birds were eating. Announce to us the
interpretation, for we see you of those good (at interpreting). He said: The food that you
are given (daily) shall not come to you but I shall tell you the interpretation before it
comes to you. This is of that which my Lord has taught me. Lo! I have forsaken the
religion of folk who believe not in God and are disbelievers in the Hereafter. And I have
followed the religion of my fathers, Abraham and Isaac and Jacob. It never was for us to
attribute anything as a partner to God. This is of the bounty of God to us (the seed of
Abraham) and to people; but most men, do not give thanks. O my two fellow prisoners!
Are diverse lords better, or God the One, the Almighty? Those whom you worship beside
Him are but names, which you have named, you and your fathers. God has revealed no
sanction for them. The decision rests with God only, Who has commanded you that you
worship none except Him. This is the right religion, but most men know not.
12:41-42 O my two fellow prisoners! As for one of you, he will pour out wine for his lord
to drink; and as for the other, he will be crucified so that the birds will eat from his head.
Thus is the case judged concerning that which you did inquire. And he said to him of the
twain who he knew would be released: Mention me in the presence of your lord. But
Satan caused him to forget to mention it to his lord, so he (Joseph) stayed in prison for
some years.
12:43-49 And the king said: Lo! I saw in a dream seven fat cows which seven lean were
eating, and seven green ears of corn and another (seven) dry. O notables! Expound for me
my vision, if you can interpret dreams. They answered: Jumbled dreams! And we do not
know the interpretation of dreams. And he of the two who was released, and (now) at
length remembered, said: I am going to announce to you the interpretation, therefore send
me forth. (And when he came to Joseph in the prison, he exclaimed): Joseph! O you
truthful one! Expound for us the seven fat cows that seven lean were eating and the seven
green ears of corn and another (seven) dry, so that I may return to the people, so that they
may know. He said: You shall sow seven years as usual, but that which you reap, leave it in
the ear, all except a little which you eat. Then after that will come seven hard years which
will devour all that you have prepared for them, except a little of that which you have
stored. Then, after that, will come a year when the people will have plenteous crops and

102

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

when they will press (wine and oil).
12:50-52 And the king said: Bring him to me. And when the Messenger came to him, he
(Joseph) said: Return to your lord and ask him what was the case of the women who cut
their hands. Lo! My lord knows their guile. He (the king) (then sent for those women and)
said: What happened when you asked an evil act of Joseph? They answered: God
Blameless! We know no evil of him. Said the wife of the ruler: Now the truth is out. I
asked of him an evil act, and he is surely of the truthful. (Then Joseph said: I asked for)
this, that he (my lord) may know that I betrayed him not in secret, and that surely God
guides not the snare of the betrayers.
12:53 I do not exculpate myself. Lo! The (human) soul enjoins to evil, except that
whereon my Lord has mercy. My Lord is Forgiving, Merciful.
12:54-55 And the king said: Bring him to me that I may attach him to my person. And
when he had talked with him he said: Lo! You are today in our presence established and
trusted. He said: Set me over the storehouses of the land. Lo! I am a skilled custodian.
12:56-61 Thus gave We power to Joseph in the land. He was the owner of it where he
pleased. We reach with Our mercy whom We will. We lose not the reward of the good.
And the reward of the Hereafter is better, for those who believe and fear (God). And
Joseph's brethren came and presented themselves before him, and he knew them but they
knew him not. And when he provided them with their provision, he said: Bring to me a
brother of yours from your father. See you not that I fill up the measure and I am the best
of hosts? And if you bring him not to me, then there shall be no measure for you with me,
nor shall you draw near. They said: We will try to win him from his father: that we will
surely do.
12:62-65 He said to his young men: Place their merchandise in their saddlebags, so that
they may know it when they go back to their folk, and so will come again. So when they
went back to their father they said: O our father! The measure is denied us, so send with
us our brother that we may obtain the measure, surely we will guard him well. He said:
Can I entrust him to you except as I entrusted his brother to you aforetime? God is better
at guarding, and He is the Most Merciful of those who show mercy. And when they
opened their belongings they discovered that their merchandise had been returned to
them. They said: O our father! What (more) can we ask? Here is our merchandise returned
to us. We shall get provision for our folk and guard our brother, and we shall have the
extra measure of a camel (load). This (that we bring now) is a light measure.
12:66-68 He said: I will not send him with you till you give me an undertaking in the name
of God that you will bring him back to me, unless you are surrounded. And when they
gave him their undertaking, he said: God is the Warden over what we say. And he said: O
my sons! Go not in by one gate; go in by different gates. I cannot avail you as against
God. Lo! The decision rests with God only. In Him do I put my trust, and in Him let all
the trusting put their trust. And when they entered in the manner which their father had
enjoined, it would have not availed them as against God; it was but a need of Jacob's soul
which he thus satisfied; and lo! He was a lord of knowledge because We had taught him;
but most of people know not.
12:69-75 And when they went in before Joseph, he took his brother to himself, saying: Lo!
I, even I, am your brother; therefore sorrow not for what they did. And when he provided
them with their provision, he put the drinking cup in his brother's saddlebag, and then a
crier cried: O camel riders! You are surely thieves! They cried, coming toward them: What
is it that you have lost? They said: We have lost the king's cup, and he who brings it shall
have a camel load, and I (said Joseph) am answerable for it. They said: By God, well you
know we came not to do evil in the land, and are not thieves. They said: And what shall be
the penalty for it if you prove liars? They said: The penalty for it! He in whose bag (the
cup) is found shall be the penalty for it. Thus we requite wrongdoers.

103

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

12:76 Then he (Joseph) began the search with their bags before his brother's bag, and then
he produced it from his brother's bag. Thus did We contrive for Joseph. He could not
have taken his brother according to the king's law unless God willed. We raise by grades
(of mercy) whom We will, and over every lord of knowledge there is one more knowing.
12:77-79 They said: If he steals, a brother of his stole before. But Joseph kept it secret in
his soul and revealed it not to them. He said (within himself): You are in worse case and
God knows best (the truth of) that which you allege. They said: O ruler of the land! Lo!
He has an aged father, so take one of us instead of him. Lo! We behold you of those who
do kindness. He said: God forbid that we should seize except him with whom we found
our property; then truly we should be wrongdoers.
12:80-83 So, when they despaired of (moving) him, they conferred together apart. The
eldest of them said: Know you not how your father took an undertaking from you in
God's name and how you failed in the case of Joseph aforetime? Therefore I shall not go
forth from the land until my father gives leave or God judges for me. He is the Best of
judges. Return to your father and say: O our father! Lo! Your son has stolen. We testify
only to that which we know; we are not guardians of the unseen. Ask the township where
we were, and the caravan with which we had traveled hither. Lo! We speak the truth. (And
when they came to their father and had spoken thus to him) he said: Nay, but your minds
have deceived you into something. (My course is) comely patience! It may be that God will
bring them all to me. Lo! He, only He, is the Knower, the Wise.
12:84-87 And he turned away from them and said: Alas, my grief for Joseph! And his eyes
were whitened with the sorrow that he was suppressing. They said: By God, you will never
cease remembering Joseph till your health is ruined or you are of those who perish! He
said: I expose my distress and anguish only to God, and I know from God that which you
know not. Go, O my sons, and ascertain concerning Joseph and his brother, and despair
not of the Spirit of God. Lo! None despairs of the Spirit of God except disbelieving folk.
12:88-90 And when they came (again) before him (Joseph) they said: O ruler! Misfortune
has touched us and our folk, and we bring but poor merchandise, so fill for us the
measure and be charitable to us. Lo! God will requite the charitable. He said: Know you
what you did to Joseph and his brother in your ignorance? They said: Is it indeed you who
are Joseph? He said: I am Joseph and this is my brother. God has shown us favor. Lo! He
who wards off (evil) and endures is patient (finds favor), for verily God loses not the
wages of those who do right.
12:91-98 They said: By God, verily God has preferred you above us, and we were indeed
sinful. He said: Have no fear this day! May God forgive you, and He is the Most Merciful
of those who show mercy. Go with this shirt of mine, and lay it on my father's face, he
will become (again) a seer; and come to me with all your folk. When the caravan departed,
their father had said: Truly I am conscious of the breath of Joseph, though you call me
dotard. (Those around him) said: By God, Lo! You are in your old aberration. Then, when
the bearer of glad tidings came, he laid it on his face and he became a seer once more. He
said: Said I not to you that I know from
God that which you know not? They said: O our father! Ask forgiveness of our sins for
us, for lo! We were sinful. He said: I shall ask forgiveness for you from my Lord. He is the
Forgiving, the Merciful.
12:99-100 And when they came in before Joseph, he took his parents to him, and said:
Come into Egypt safe, if God wills! And he placed his parents on the dais and they fell
down before him prostrate, and he said: O my father! This is the interpretation of my
dream of old. My Lord has made it true, and He has shown me kindness, since He took
me out of the prison and has brought you from the desert after Satan had made strife
between me and my brethren. Lo! My Lord is tender to whom He wills. He is the Knower,
the Wise.

104

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

12:101 O my Lord! You have given me (something) of power and have taught me
(something) of the interpretation of events – Creator of the heavens and the earth! You
are my Guardian (and Protector) in the world and the Hereafter. Make me to die as a
Muslim (submissive to You), and join me to the righteous.
12:102-104 This is of the tidings of the Unseen, which We inspire in you (O Muhammad).
You were not present with them when they fixed their plan and they were scheming. And
though you try much, most men will not believe. You ask them no fee for it. It is nothing
else than a reminder to the peoples.
12:105-107 How many a sign is there in the heavens and the earth, which they pass by
with face averted! And most of them believe not in God except that they attribute
partners (to Him). Deem they themselves secure from the coming on them of a pall of
God's punishment, or the coming of the Hour suddenly while they are unaware?
12:108 Say: This is my way: I call on God with sure knowledge, I and whoever follows me
– Glory be to God! And I am not of the polytheists.
12:109-110 We sent not before you (any Messengers) except men whom We inspired from
among the folk of the townships – Have they not traveled in the land and seen the nature
of the consequence for those who were before them? And verily the abode of the
Hereafter, for those who fear (God) is best. Have you then no sense? Till, when the
Messengers despaired and thought that they were denied, then came to them Our help,
and whomever We would, was saved. And our wrath cannot be warded from the guilty.
12:111 In their history verily there is a lesson for men of understanding. It is no invented
story but a confirmation of the existing (Scripture) and a detailed explanation of
everything, and a guidance and a mercy for folk who believe.

13. Ar-Ra`d: The Thunder
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
13:1 Alif. Lam. Mim. Ra. These are verses of the Scripture. That which is revealed to you
from your Lord is the Truth , but most of people believe not.
13:2 It is God, Who raised up the heavens without visible supports, then mounted the
Throne, and compelled the sun and the moon to be of service, each runs to an appointed
term; He orders the course; He details the revelations, that perhaps you may be certain of
the meeting with your Lord.
13:3 And it is He who spread out the earth and placed therein-firm hills and flowing
streams, and of all fruits He placed therein two spouses (male and female). He covers the
night with the day. Lo! Herein verily are signs for people who take thought.
13:4 And in the earth are neighboring tracts, vineyards and ploughed lands, and date
palms, like and unlike, which are watered with one water. And We have made some of
them excel others in fruit. Lo! Herein verily are signs for people who have sense.
13:5 And if you wonder, then wondrous is their saying: When we are dust, are we then
forsooth (to be raised) in a new creation? Such are they who disbelieve in their Lord; such
have carcanets on their necks; such are rightful inhabitants of the Fire, they will abide
therein.
13:6 And they bid you to hasten on the evil rather than the good, when exemplary
punishments have indeed occurred before them. But lo! Your Lord is rich in pardon for

105

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

people despite their wrong, and lo! Your Lord is strong in punishment!
13:7 Those who disbelieve say: If only a sign was sent down upon him from his Lord! You
are a warner only, and for every folk a guide.
13:8-9 God knows that which every female bears and that which the wombs absorb and
that which they grow. And everything with Him is measured. He is the Knower of the
invisible and the visible, the Great, the High Exalted.
13:10-11 Alike of you is he who hides the saying and he who noises it abroad, he who
lurks in the night and he who goes freely in the daytime. For him are angels ranged before
him and behind him who guard him by God's command. Lo! God changes not the
condition of a folk until they (first) change that which is in their hearts; and if God wills
misfortune for a folk there is none that can repel it, nor have they a defender beside Him.
13:12-13 It is He, Who shows you the lightning, a fear and a hope, and raises the heavy
clouds. The thunder hymns His praise and (so do) the angels for awe of Him. He launches
the thunderbolts and smites with them whom He wills while they dispute (in doubt)
concerning God, and He is Mighty in wrath.
13:14 To Him is the real prayer. Those unto whom they pray beside God respond to them
not at all, except as (if the response to) one who stretches forth his hands toward water
(asking) that it may come to his mouth, and it will never reach it. The prayer of
disbelievers goes (far) astray.
13:15 And to God falls prostrate whosoever is in the heavens and the earth, willingly or
unwillingly, as do their shadows in the morning and the evening hours.
13:16 Say (O Muhammad): Who is Lord of the heaven and the earth? Say: God! Say: Take
you then (others) beside Him for protectors, which, even for themselves, have neither
benefit nor hurt? Say: Is the blind man equal to the seer, or is darkness equal to light? Or
assign they to God partners? Who created the like of His creation so that the creation
(which they made and His creation) seemed alike to them? Say: God is the Creator of all
things, and He is the One, the Almighty.
13:17 He sends down water from the sky, so that valleys flow according to their measure,
and the flood bears (on its surface) swelling foam – from that which they smelt in the fire
in order to make ornaments and tools rises a foam like to it – thus God coins (the
similitude of) the true and the false. Then, as for the foam, it passes away as scum upon
the banks, while, as for that which is of use to people, it remains in the earth. Thus God
coins the similitude.
13:18 For those who answered God's call is bliss; and for those who answered not His
call, if they had all that is in the earth, and therewith the like thereof, they would proffer it
as ransom. Such will have a woeful reckoning, and their habitation will be Hell, a dire
abode.
13:19-24 Is he who knows that what is revealed to you from your Lord is the truth like
him who is blind? But only men of understanding heed; such as keep the pact of God, and
break not the covenant; such as unite that which God has commanded should be joined,
and fear their Lord, and dread a woeful reckoning. Such as persevere in seeking their
Lord's Face and are regular in prayer and spend of that which We bestow upon them
secretly and openly, and overcome evil with good. Theirs will be the sequel of the
(heavenly) Home. Gardens of Eden which they enter, along with all who do right of their
fathers and their helpmeets and their seed. The angels enter to them from every gate.
(Saying): Peace be to you because you persevered. Ah, passing sweet will be the sequel of
the (heavenly) Home.

106

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

13:25 And those who break the covenant of God after ratifying it, and sever that which
God has commanded should be joined, and make mischief in the earth: theirs is the curse
and theirs is the ill abode.
13:26 God enlarges livelihood for whom He wills, and straitens (it for whom He wills);
and they rejoice in the life of the world, whereas the life of the world is but brief comfort
as compared with the Hereafter.
13:27 Those who disbelieve say: If only a sign was sent down upon him from his Lord!
Say: Lo! God sends whom He wills astray, and guides to Himself all who turn (to Him),
13:28-29 who have believed and whose hearts have rest in the remembrance of God.
Verily in the remembrance of God do hearts find rest! Those who believe and do right:
Joy is for them, and bliss (their) journey's end.
13:30 Thus We send you (O Muhammad) to a nation, before whom other nations have
passed away, that you may recite to them that which We have inspired in you, while they
are disbelievers in the Beneficent. Say: He is my Lord; none should be worshipped but
God alone. In Him do I put my trust and to Him is my recourse.
13:31 Had it been possible for a Lecture to cause the mountains to move, or the earth to
be torn asunder, or the dead to speak, (this Quran would have done so). Nay, but God's is
the whole command. Do not those who believe know that, had God willed, He could
have guided all people? As for those who disbelieve, disaster ceases not to strike them
because of what they do, or it dwells near their home until the threat of God come to
pass. Lo! God fails not to keep the promise.
13:32 And verily Messengers (of God) were mocked before you, but long I bore with
those who disbelieved. At length I seized them, and how (awful) was My punishment!
13:33-34 Is He Who is aware of the deserts of every soul (as he who is aware of nothing)?
Yet they ascribe to God partners. Say: Name them. Is it that you would inform Him of
something which He knows not in the earth? Or is it but a way of speaking? Nay, but their
contrivance is made fair-seeming for those who disbelieve and they are kept from the right
road. He whom God sends astray, for him there is no guide. For them is torment in the
life of the world, and verily the punishment of the Hereafter is more painful, and they
have no defender from God.
13:35 A similitude of the Garden which is promised to those who keep their duty (to
God): Underneath it rivers flow; its food is everlasting, and its shade; this is the reward of
those who keep their duty, while the reward of disbelievers is the Fire.
13:36 Those to whom We gave the Scripture rejoice in that which is revealed to you. And
of the clans there are those who deny some of it. Say: I am commanded only that I
worship God and ascribe to Him no partner. To Him I cry, and to Him is my return.
13:37 Thus have We revealed it, a decisive utterance in Arabic and if you should follow
their desires after that which has come to you of knowledge, then truly would you have
from God no protector nor defender.
13:38 And verily We sent Messengers (to people) before you, and We appointed for them
wives and offspring, and it was not (given) to any Messenger that he should bring a sign
except by God's leave. For everything there is a time prescribed.
13:39 God effaces what He wills, and establishes(what He wills), and with Him is the
source of ordinance.
13:40 Whether We let you see something of that which We have promised them, or make

107

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

you die (before its happening), yours is but conveyance (of the message), Ours the
reckoning.
13:41 See they not how We visit the land, reducing it of its outlying parts? God punishes
there is none that can postpone His punishment, and He is swift at reckoning.
13:42 Those who were before them plotted; but all plotting is God's. He knows that
which each soul earns. The disbelievers will come to know for whom will be the sequel of
the (heavenly) Home.
13:43 They who disbelieve say: You are no Messenger (of God). Say: God, and whosoever
has true knowledge of the Scripture, is sufficient witness between me and you.

14. Ibrahim: Abraham
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
14:1 Alif. Lam. Ra. (This is) a Scripture which We have revealed to you (O Muhammad)
that thereby you may bring forth people from darkness to light, by the permission of their
Lord, to the path of the Mighty, the Owner of Praise.
14:2-3 God, to Whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth.
And woe to the disbelievers from an awful punishment. Those who love the life of the
world more than the Hereafter, and debar (men) from the way of God and would have it
crooked: such are far astray.
14:4 And We never sent a Messenger except with the language of his folk, that he might
make (the message) clear for them. Then God sends whom He wills astray, and guides
whom He wills. He is the Mighty, the Wise.
14:5-8 We verily sent Moses with Our revelations, saying: Bring your people forth from
darkness to light. And remind them of the days of God. Lo! Therein are revelations for
each patient thankful (heart). And (remind them) how Moses said to his people:
Remember God's favor to you when He delivered you from Pharaoh's folk who were
afflicting you with dreadful torment, and were slaying your sons and sparing your women;
that was a tremendous trial from your Lord. And when your Lord proclaimed: If you give
thanks, I will give you more; but if you are thankless, lo! My punishment is dire. And
Moses said: Though you and all who are in the earth prove thankless, lo! God verily is
Absolute, Owner of praise.
14:9 Has not the history of those before you reached you: the folk of Noah, and (the
tribes of) Aad and Thamud, and those after them? None except God knows them. Their
Messengers came to them with clear proofs, but they thrust their hands into their mouths,
and said: Lo! We disbelieve in that wherewith you have been sent, and lo! We are in grave
doubt concerning that to which you call us.
14:10-12 Their Messengers said: Can there be doubt concerning God, the Creator of the
heavens and the earth? He calls to you that He may forgive you your sins and reprieve you
to an appointed term. They said: You are but mortals like us, who would fain turn us away
from what our fathers used to worship. Then bring some clear warrant. Their Messengers
said to them: We are but mortals like you, but God gives grace to whomever He wills of
His slaves. It is not ours to bring you a warrant unless by the permission of God. In God
let believers put their trust! How should we not put our trust in God when He has shown
us our ways? We surely will endure the trouble you may cause us. In God let the trusting
put their trust!

108

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

14:13-14 And those who disbelieved said to their Messengers: Verily we will drive you out
from our land, unless you return to our religion. Then their Lord inspired them (saying):
Verily We shall destroy the wrongdoers, and verily We shall make you dwell in the land
after them. This is for him who fears My Majesty and fears My threats.
14:15-17 And they sought help (from their Lord) and every froward potentate was
brought to nothing; Hell is before him, and he is made to drink a festering water, which he
sips but can hardly swallow, and death comes to him from every side while yet he cannot
die, and before him is a harsh punishment.
14:18 A similitude of those who disbelieve in their Lord: Their works are as ashes, which
the wind blows hard upon a stormy day. They have no control of anything that they have
earned. That is the extreme failure.
14:19-20 Have you not seen that God has created the heavens and the earth with truth? If
He will, He can remove you and bring (in) some new creation. And that is no great matter
for God.
14:21 They all come forth to their Lord. Then those who were despised say to those who
were arrogant: We were to you a following, can you then avert from us anything of God's
punishment? They say: Had God guided us, we should have guided you. Whether we rage
or patiently endure is (now) all one for us: we have no place of refuge.
14:22 And Satan says, when the matter has been decided: Lo! God promised you a
promise of truth; and I promised you, and then failed you. And I had no power over you
except that I called to you and you obeyed me. So blame me not, but blame yourselves. I
cannot help you, nor can you help me. Lo! I disbelieved in your associating me with God.
Lo! For wrongdoers is a painful punishment.
14:23 And those who believed and did good works are made to enter Gardens underneath
which rivers flow, therein abiding by permission of their Lord, their greeting therein:
Peace!
14:24-26 See you not how God coins a similitude: A goodly saying, as a goodly tree, its
root set firm, its branches reaching into heaven, giving its fruit at every season by
permission of its Lord? God coins the similitudes for people in order that they may
reflect. And the similitude of a bad saying is as a bad tree, uprooted from upon the earth,
possessing no stability.
14:27 God confirms those who believe by a firm saying in the life of the world and in the
Hereafter, and God sends wrongdoers astray. And God does what He wills.
14:28-30 Have you not seen those who gave the grace of God in exchange for
thanklessness and led their people down to the Abode of Loss, (even to) Hell? They are
exposed thereto. An evil end! And they set up rivals to God that they may mislead (men)
from His way. Say: Enjoy life (while you may) for lo! Your journey's end will be the Fire.
14:31 Tell My bondmen who believe to establish worship and spend of that which We
have given them, secretly and publicly, before a day comes wherein there will be neither
traffic nor befriending.
14:32-34 God is He Who created the heavens and the earth, and causes water to descend
from the sky, thereby producing fruits as food for you, and makes the ships to be of
service to you, that they may run upon the sea at His command, and has made of service
to you the rivers; and makes the sun and the moon, constant in their courses, to be of
service to you, and has made of service to you the night and the day. And He gives you of
all you ask of Him, and if you would count the bounty of God you cannot reckon it. Lo!
Man is verily a wrongdoer, an ingrate.

109

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

14:35-41 And when Abraham said: My Lord! Make safe this territory, and preserve me and
my sons from worshipping idols. My Lord! Lo! They have led many of people astray. But
whoever follows me, he verily is of me. And whoever disobeys me, still You are Forgiving,
Merciful. Our Lord! Lo! I have settled some of my posterity in an uncultivable valley near
to Your Holy House, our Lord! That they may establish proper worship; so incline some
hearts of men that they may yearn toward them, and provide You them, with fruits in
order that they may be thankful. Our Lord! Lo! You know that which we hide and that
which we proclaim. Nothing in the earth or in the heaven is hidden from God. Praise be
to God Who has given me, in my old age, Ishmael and Isaac! Lo! My Lord is indeed the
Hearer of prayer. My Lord! Make me establish proper worship, and some of my posterity
(also), our Lord! And accept my prayer. Our Lord! Forgive me and my parents and
believers on the Day when the account is cast.
14:42-44 Deem not that God is unaware of what the unjust do. He but gives them a
respite till a day when eyes will stare (in terror). As they come hurrying on in fear, their
heads upraised, their gaze returning not to them, and their hearts as air. And warn people
of a Day when the punishment will come upon them, and those who did wrong will say:
Our Lord! Reprieve us for a little while. We will obey Your call and will follow the
Messengers. (It will be answered:) Did you not swear before that there would be no end
for you?
14:45-47 And (have you not) dwelt in the dwellings of those who wronged themselves (of
old) and (has it not) become plain to you how We dealt with them, and made examples for
you? Verily they have plotted their plot, and their plot is with God, though their plot was
one whereby the mountains should be moved. So think not that God will fail to keep His
promise to His Messengers. Lo! God is Mighty, Able to Requite (the wrong).
14:48-51 On the Day when the earth will be changed to other than the earth, and the
heavens (also will be changed) and they will come forth to God, the One, the Almighty.
You will see the guilty on that Day linked together in chains. Their raiment of pitch, and
the Fire covering their faces. That God may repay each soul what it has earned. Lo! God is
swift at reckoning.
14:52 This is a clear message for people in order that they may be warned thereby, and
that they may know that He is only One God, and that men of understanding may take
heed.

15. Al-Hijr: Al Hijr Valley
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
15:1 Alif. Lam. Ra. These are verses of the Scripture and a plain Reading.
15:2-5 It may be that those who disbelieve wish ardently that they were Muslims. Let them
eat and enjoy life, and let (false) hope deceive them. They will come to know! And We
destroyed no township but there was a known decree for it. No nation can outstrip its
term nor can they lag behind.
15:6-7 And they say: O you to whom the Reminder is revealed, lo! You are indeed a
madman! Why bring you not angels to us, if you are of the truthful?
15:8-9 We send not down the angels except with the Fact, and in that case (the
disbelievers) would not be tolerated. Lo! We, even We, reveal the Reminder, and lo! We
verily are it's Guardian.
15:10-15 We verily sent (Messengers) before you among the factions of the men of old.

110

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

And never came there to them a Messenger but they did mock him. Thus do We make it
traverse the hearts of the guilty: They believe not therein, though the example of the men
of old has gone before. And even if We opened to them a Gate of Heaven and they kept
mounting through it. They would say: Our sight is wrong – nay, but we are folk
bewitched.
15:16-18 And verily in the heaven We have set mansions of the stars, and We have
beautified it for beholders. And We have guarded it from every outcast devil, except him
who steals the hearing, and them does a clear flame pursue.
15:19-23 And the earth have We spread out, and placed therein firm hills, and caused each
seemly thing to grow therein. And We have given to you livelihoods therein, and to those
for whom you provide not. And there is not a thing but with Us are the stores thereof.
And We send it not down except in appointed measure. And We send the winds
fertilizing, and cause water to descend from the sky, and give it you to drink. It is not you
who are the holders of the store thereof. Lo! And it is We, even We, Who quicken and
give death, and We are the Inheritor.
15:24-25 And verily We know the eager among you and verily We know the laggards. Lo!
Your Lord will gather them together. Lo! He is Wise, Aware.
15:26-31 Verily We created man of potter's clay of black mud altered, and the jinn did We
create aforetime of essential fire. And (remember) when your Lord said to the angels: Lo!
I am creating a mortal out of potter's clay of black mud altered. So, when I have made him
and have breathed into him of My spirit, do you fall down, prostrating yourselves to him.
So the angels fell prostrate, all of them together. Except Iblis. He refused to be among the
prostrate.
15:32-44 He said: O Iblis! What ails you that you are not among the prostrate? He said:
Why should I prostrate myself to a mortal whom You have created out of potter's clay of
black mud altered? He said: Then go you forth from hence, for verily you are outcast. And
lo! The curse shall be upon you till the Day of Judgment. He said: My Lord! Reprieve me
till the Day when they are raised. He said: Then lo! You are of those reprieved till an
appointed time. He said: My Lord! Because You have sent me astray, I verily shall adorn
the path of error for them in the earth, and shall mislead them every one. Except such of
them as are Your perfectly devoted slaves. He said: This is a right course incumbent upon
Me: Lo! As for My slaves, you have no power over any of them except such of the
froward as follow you, and lo! For all such, Hell will be the promised place. It has seven
gates, and each gate has an appointed portion.
15:45-50 Lo! Those who fear (God) are among Gardens and water springs. (And it is said
to them): Enter them in peace, secure. And We remove whatever rancor may be in their
breasts. As brethren, face-to-face, (they rest) on couches raised. Toil comes not to them
there, nor will they be expelled from thence. Announce, (O Muhammad) to My slaves that
verily I am the Forgiving, the Merciful, and that My punishment is the dolorous
punishment.
15:51-56 And tell them of Abraham's guests, (how) when they came to him, and said:
Peace. He said: Lo! We are afraid of you. They said: Be not afraid! Lo! We bring you good
tidings of a boy possessing wisdom. He said: Bring you me good tidings (of a son) when
old age has overtaken me? Of what then can you bring good tidings? They said: We bring
you good tidings in truth. So be not you of the despairing. He said: And who despairs of
the mercy of his Lord except those who are astray?
15:57-60 He said: And afterward what is your business, O you messengers (of God)? They
said: We have been sent to a guilty folk, (All) except the family of Lot. Them we shall
deliver everyone, except his wife, of whom We had decreed that she should be of those
who stay behind.

111

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

15:61-66 And when the messengers came to the family of Lot, he said: Lo! You are folk
unknown (to me). They said: Nay, but we bring you that concerning which they keep
disputing, and bring you the Truth, and lo! We are truthful. So travel with your household
in a portion of the night, and follow you their backs. Let none of you turn round, but go
whither you are commanded. And We made plain the case to him, that the root of them
(who did wrong) was to be cut at early morn.
15:67-77 And the people of the city came, rejoicing at the news (of new arrivals). He said:
Lo! They are my guests. Affront me not! And keep your duty to God, and shame me not!
They said: Have we not forbidden you from (entertaining) anyone? He said: Here are my
daughters, if you must be doing (so). By your life (O Muhammad) they moved blindly in
the frenzy of approaching death. Then the (Awful) Cry overtook them at the sunrise. And
We utterly confounded them, and We rained upon them stones of heated clay. Lo!
Therein verily are signs for those who read (the signs). And lo! It is upon a road
established. Lo! Therein is indeed a sign for believers.
15:78-79 And the dwellers in the wood indeed were evildoers. So, We took vengeance on
them and lo! They both are on a high road plain to see.
15:80-84 And the dwellers in Al-Hijr indeed denied (Our) Messengers. And We gave them
Our revelations, but they were averse to them. And they used to hew out dwellings from
the hills, (wherein they dwelt) secure. But the (Awful) Cry overtook them at the morning
hour, and that which they were wont to count as gain availed them not.
15:85-86 We created not the heavens and the earth and all that is between them except
with truth, and lo! The Hour is surely coming. So forgive (O Muhammad) with a gracious
forgiveness. Lo! Your Lord! He is the All-Wise Creator.
15:87-93 We have given you seven of the oft-repeated (verses) and the great Quran. Strain
not your eyes toward that which We cause some wedded pairs among them to enjoy, and
be not grieved on their account, and lower your wing (in tenderness) for the believers.
And say: Lo! I, even I, am a plain warner, such as We send down for those who make
division, those who break the Quran into parts. Them, by your Lord, We shall question,
every one, of what they used to do.
15:94-99 So proclaim that which you are commanded, and withdraw from the polytheists.
Lo! We defend you from the scoffers, who set some other god along with God. But they
will come to know. We well know that your bosom is at times oppressed by what they say,
but hymn the praise of your Lord, and be of those who make prostration (to Him). And
worship your Lord till the inevitability of death comes to you.

16. An-Nahl: The Bee
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
16:1 The commandment of God will come to pass, so seek not you to hasten it. Glorified
and Exalted be He above all that they associate (with Him).
16:2 He sends down the angels with the Spirit of His command to whom He wills of His
bondmen (saying): Warn people that none should be worshipped but Me, so keep your
duty to Me.
16:3 He has created the heavens and the earth with truth. High be He exalted above all
that they associate (with Him).
16:4-7 He has created man from a drop of fluid, yet behold! He is an open opponent. And

112

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

He has created, the cattle , from which you have warm clothing and uses, and whereof you
eat. And wherein is beauty for you, when you bring them home, and when you take them
out to pasture. And they bear your loads for you to a land you could not reach except with
great trouble to yourselves. Lo! Your Lord is full of pity, Merciful.
16:8 And horses and mules and asses (has He created) that you may ride them, and for
ornament. And He creates that which you know not.
16:9 And God's is the direction of the way, and some (roads) go not straight. And had He
willed He would have led you all aright.
16:10-11 It is He, Who sends down water from the sky, from which you have drink, and
trees on which you send your beasts to pasture. Therewith He causes crops to grow for
you, and the olive and the date palm and grapes and all kinds of fruit. Lo! Herein is indeed
a sign for people who reflect.
16:12-13 And he has constrained the night and the day and the sun and the moon to be of
service to you, and the stars are made subservient by His command. Lo! Herein indeed are
signs for people who have sense. And whatsoever He has created for you in the earth of
diverse hues, lo! Therein is indeed a sign for people who take heed.
16:14 And it is He, Who has constrained the sea to be of service that you eat fresh meat
from therein, and bring forth from there ornaments which you wear. And you see the
ships plowing it that you (people) may seek of His bounty, and that perhaps you may give
thanks.
16:15-18 And He has cast into the earth firm hills that it quakes not with you, and streams
and roads that you may find your way. And landmarks (too), and by the star they find their
way. Is He then Who creates as him who creates not? Will you not then remember? And if
you would count the favor of God you cannot reckon it. Lo! God is indeed Forgiving,
Merciful.
16:19-23 And God knows that which you keep hidden and that which you proclaim.
Those to whom they cry to besides God created nothing, but are themselves created.
(They are) dead, not living. And they know not when they will be raised. Your God is One
God. But as for those who believe not in the Hereafter their hearts refuse to know, for
they are arrogant. Assuredly God knows that which they keep hidden and that which they
proclaim. Lo! He loves not the arrogant.
16:24-25 And when it is said to them: What has your Lord revealed? They say: (Mere)
fables of the men of old. That they may bear their burdens undiminished on the Day of
Resurrection, with somewhat of the burdens of those whom they mislead without
knowledge. Ah! Evil is that which they bear!
16:26-29 Those before them plotted, so God struck at the foundations of their building,
and then the roof fell down upon them from above them, and the punishment came on
them whence they knew not; then on the Day of Resurrection He will disgrace them and
will say: Where are My partners, for whose sake you opposed (My Guidance)? Those who
have been given knowledge will say: Disgrace this day and evil are upon the disbelievers,
whom the angels cause to die while they are wronging themselves. Then will they make
full submission (saying): We used not to do any wrong. Nay! Surely God is Knower of
what you used to do. So enter the Gates of Hell, to dwell therein forever. Woeful indeed
will be the lodging of the arrogant.
16:30-32 And it is said to those who are pious: What has your Lord revealed? They say:
Good. For those who do good in this world there is a good (reward) and the home of the
Hereafter will be better. Pleasant indeed will be the home of those who are pious –
Gardens of Eden that they enter, underneath which rivers flow, wherein they have what

113

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

they will. Thus God repays those who are pious, those whom the angels cause to die
(when they are) good. They say: Peace be to you! Enter the Garden because of what you
used to do.
16:33-34 Await they anything except that the angels should come to them or your Lord's
command should come to pass? Even so did those before them. God wronged them not,
but they did wrong themselves, so that the evil of what they did, smote them, and that
which they used to mock surrounded them.
16:35 And the idolaters say: Had God willed, we had not worshipped anything beside
Him, we and our fathers, nor had we forbidden anything without (command from) Him.
Even so did those before them. Are the Messengers charged with anything except plain
conveyance (of the message)?
16:36 And verily We have raised in every nation a Messenger, (proclaiming): Worship God
and shun false gods. Then some of them (there were) whom God guided, and some of
them (there were) upon whom error had just hold. Do but travel in the land and see the
nature of the consequence for the deniers!
16:37-39 Even if you (O Muhammad) desire their right guidance, still God assuredly will
not guide him who misleads. Such have no helpers. And they swear by God their most
binding oaths (that) God will not raise up him who dies. Nay, but it is a promise (binding)
upon Him in truth, but most of people know not, that he may explain to them that
wherein they differ, and that those who disbelieved may know that they were liars.
16:40 And Our word to a thing, when We intend it, is only that We say to it: Be! And it is.
16:41-42 And those who became fugitives for the cause of God after they had been
oppressed, We shall verily give them goodly lodging in the world, and surely the reward of
the Hereafter is greater, if they but knew; such as are patient and put their trust in God.
16:43-44 And We sent not (as Our Messengers) before you other than men whom We
inspired – Ask the followers of the Remembrance if you know not! – With clear proofs
and writings; and We have revealed to you the Remembrance that you may explain to
people that which has been revealed for them, and that perhaps they may reflect.
16:45-47 Are they who plan ill deeds then secure that God will not cause the earth to
swallow them, or that the punishment will not come on them whence they know not? Or
that He will not seize them in their going to and fro that there be no escape for them? Or
that He will not seize them with a gradual wasting? Lo! Your Lord is indeed full of pity,
Merciful!
16:48-50 Have they not observed all things that God has created, how their shadows
incline to the right and to the left, making prostration to God, and they are lowly? And to
God makes prostration whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth of
living creatures, and the angels (also), and they are not proud. They fear their Lord above
them, and do what they are bidden.
16:51-52 God has said: Choose not two gods. There is only One God. Therefore be in
awe of Me, only Me. To Him belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth, and
religion is His forever. Will you then fear any other than God?
16:53-56 And whatever of comfort you enjoy, it is from God. Then, when misfortune
reaches you, to Him you cry for help. And afterward, when He has rid you of the
misfortune, behold! A set of you attributes partners to their Lord, so as to deny that which
We have given them. Then enjoy life (while you may), for you will come to know. And
they assign a portion of that which We have given them to what they know not. By God!
But you will indeed be asked concerning (all) that you used to invent.

114

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

16:57-59 And they assign to God daughters–Be He glorified!–And to themselves what
they desire; when if one of them receives tidings of the birth of a female, his face remains
darkened, and he is wroth inwardly. He hides himself from the folk because of the evil of
that whereof he has bad tidings, (asking himself): Shall he keep it in contempt, or bury it
beneath the dust. Verily, evil is their judgment.
16:60 For those who believe not in the Hereafter is an evil similitude, and God's is the
Sublime Similitude. He is the Mighty, the Wise.
16:61-62 If God were to take people to task for their wrongdoing, he would not leave a
living creature, but He reprieves them to an appointed term, and when their term comes
they cannot put (it) off an hour nor (yet) advance (it). And they assign to God that which
they (themselves) dislike, and their tongues expound the lie that the better portion will be
theirs. Assuredly theirs will be the Fire, and they will be abandoned.
16:63-64 By God, We verily sent Messengers to the nations before you, but Satan made
their deeds fair seeming to them. So he is their patron this day, and theirs will be a painful
punishment. And we have revealed the Scripture to you only that you may explain to them
that wherein they differ, and (as) a guidance and a mercy for a people who believe.
16:65-69 God sends down water from the sky and therewith revives the earth after her
death! Lo! Herein is indeed a sign for a folk who hear. And lo! In the cattle there is a
lesson for you. We give you to drink of that which is in their bellies, from betwixt the
refuse and the blood, pure milk palatable to the drinkers. And of the fruits of the date
palm, and grapes, with which you derive strong drink and (also) good nourishment. Lo!
Therein, is indeed a sign for people who have sense. And your Lord inspired the bee,
saying: Choose you habitations in the hills and in the trees and in that which they thatch;
then eat of all fruits, and follow the ways of your Lord, made smooth (for you). There
comes forth from their bellies a drink diverse of hues, wherein is healing for people. Lo!
Herein is indeed a sign for people who reflect.
16:70 And God creates you, and then causes you to die, and among you is he who is
brought back to the most abject stage of life, so that he knows nothing after (having had)
knowledge. Lo! God is Knower, Powerful.
16:71 And God has favored some of you above others in provision. Now those who are
more favored will by no means hand over their provision to those (slaves) whom their
right hands possess, so that they may be equal with them in respect thereof. Is it then the
grace of God that they deny?
16:72 And God has given you wives of your own kind, and has given you, from your
wives, sons and grandsons, and has made provision of good things for you. Is it then in
vanity that they believe and in the grace of God that they disbelieve?
16:73-74 And they worship beside God that which owns no provision whatsoever for
them from the heavens nor the earth, nor have they (whom they worship) any power. So
coin not similitudes for God. Lo! God knows; you know not.
16:75 God coins a similitude: (on the one hand) a (mere) chattel slave, who has control of
nothing, and (on the other hand) one on whom We have bestowed a fair provision from
Us, and he spends thereof secretly and openly. Are they equal? Praise be to God! But most
of them know not.
16:76 And God coins a similitude: Two men, one of them dumb, having control of
nothing, and he is a burden on his owner; wherever he directs him to go, he brings no
good. Is he equal with one who enjoins justice and follows a straight path (of conduct)?
16:77 And to God belongs the Unseen of the heavens and the earth, and the matter of the

115

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

Hour (of Judgment) is but as a twinkling of the eye, or it is nearer still. Lo! God is Able to
do all things.
16:78 And God brought you forth from the wombs of your mothers knowing nothing,
and gave you hearing and sight and hearts that perhaps you might give thanks.
16:79 Have they not seen the birds obedient in midair? None holds them except God. Lo!
Herein, verily, are signs for a people who believe.
16:80-81 And God has given you in your houses an abode, and has given you (also), of the
hides of cattle, houses which you find light (to carry) on the day of migration and on the
day of pitching camp; and of their wool and their fur and their hair, caparison and comfort
for a while. And God has given you, of that which He has created, shelter from the sun;
and has given you places of refuge in the mountains, and has given you coats to ward off
the heat from you, and coats (of armor) to save you from your own foolhardiness. Thus
does He perfect His favor to you, in order that you may surrender (to Him).
16:82-83 Then, if they turn away, your duty (O Muhammad) is but plain conveyance (of
the message). They know the favor of God and then deny it. Most of them are ingrates.
16:84-88 And (have you not considered of) the Day when We raise up of every nation a
witness, then there is no leave for disbelievers, nor are they allowed to make amends. And
when those who did wrong behold the punishment, it will not be made light for them, nor
will they be reprieved. And when those who ascribed partners to God behold those
partners of theirs, they will say: Our Lord! These are our partners to whom we used to cry
instead of You. But they will fling them the saying: Lo! You verily are liars! And they
proffer to God submission on that Day, and all that they used to invent has failed them.
For those who disbelieve and debar (men) from the way of God, We add punishment to
punishment because they wrought corruption.
16:89 And (have you not considered of) the Day when We raise in every nation a witness
against them of their own folk, and We bring you (O Muhammad) as a witness against
these. And We reveal the Scripture to you as an exposition of all things, and a guidance
and a mercy and good tidings for those who are Muslims (have surrendered to God).
16:90-91 Lo! God enjoins justice and kindness and giving to kinsfolk, and forbids
lewdness and abomination and wickedness. He exhorts you in order that you may take
heed. Fulfill the covenant of God when you have covenanted, and break not your oaths
after the asseveration of them, and after you have made God surety over you. Lo! God
knows what you do.
16:92 And be not like to her who unravels the thread, after she has made it strong, to thin
filaments, making your oaths a deceit between you because of a nation being more
numerous than (another) nation. God only tries you thereby, and He verily will explain to
you on the Day of Resurrection that wherein you differed.
16:93 Had God willed He could have made you (all) one nation, but He sends whom He
wills astray and guides whom He wills, and you will indeed be asked of what you used to
do.
16:94 Make not your oaths a deceit between you, lest a foot should slip after being firmly
planted and you should taste evil because you debarred (men) from the way of God, and
yours should be an awful punishment.
16:95-97 And purchase not a small gain at the price of God's covenant. Lo! That which
God has is better for you, if you did but know. That which you have wastes away, and that
which God has remains. And verily We shall pay those who are patient, a recompense in
proportion to the best of what they used to do. Whosoever does right, whether male or

116

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

female, and is a believer, him verily We shall quicken with good life, and We shall pay
them a recompense in proportion to the best of what they used to do.
16:98-100 And when you recite the Quran, seek refuge in God from Satan the outcast. Lo!
He has no power over those who believe and put trust in their Lord. His power is only
over those who make a friend of him, and those who ascribe partners to Him (God).
16:101-102 And when We put a revelation in place of (another) revelation – and God
knows best what He reveals – they say: Lo! You are but inventing. Most of them know
not. Say: The Holy Spirit has revealed it from your Lord with truth, that it may confirm
(the faith of) those who believe, and as guidance and good tidings for Muslims (those who
have surrendered to God).
16:103-105 And We know well that they say: Only a man teaches him. The speech of him
at whom they falsely hint is outlandish, and this is clear Arabic speech. Lo! Those who
disbelieve the revelations of God, God guides them not and theirs will be a painful
punishment. Only they invent falsehoods that believe not God's revelations, and (only)
they are the liars.
16:106-109 Whoever disbelieves in God after his belief – except him who is forced thereto
and whose heart is still content with Faith – but whoever finds ease in disbelief: On them
is wrath from God. Theirs will be an awful punishment. That is because they have chosen
the life of the world rather than the Hereafter, and because God guides not the
disbelieving folk. Such are they whose hearts and ears and eyes God has sealed. And such
are the heedless. Assuredly in the Hereafter they are the losers.
16:110 Then lo! Your Lord – for those who become fugitives after they had been
persecuted, and then fought and were patient – lo! Your Lord afterward is (for them)
indeed Forgiving, Merciful
16:111 On the Day when every soul will come pleading for itself, and every soul will be
repaid for what it did, and they will not be wronged.
16:112-113 God coins a similitude: a township that dwelt secure and well content, its
provision coming to it in abundance from every side, but it disbelieved in God's favors, so
God made it experience the garb of dearth and fear because of what they used to do. And
verily there had come to them a Messenger from among them, but they had denied him,
and so the torment seized them while they were wrongdoers.
16:114-115 So eat of the lawful and good food, which God has provided for you, and
thank the bounty of your Lord if it is Him you worship. He has forbidden for you only
carrion and blood and swine flesh and that which has been immolated in the name of any
other than God; but he who is driven thereto, neither craving nor transgressing, lo! Then
God is Forgiving, Merciful.
16:116-117 And speak not, concerning that which your own tongues qualify (as clean or
unclean), the falsehood: `This is lawful, and this is forbidden,' so that you invent a lie
against God. Lo! Those who invent a lie against God will not succeed. A brief enjoyment
(will be theirs); and theirs is a painful punishment.
16:118 And to those who are Jews We have forbidden that which We have already related
to you. And We wronged them not, but they were wont to wrong themselves.
16:119 Then lo! Your Lord – for those who do evil in ignorance and afterward repent and
amend – lo! (For them) your Lord is afterward indeed Forgiving, Merciful.
16:120-123 Lo! Abraham was obedient to God, by nature upright, and he was not of the
polytheists; thankful for His bounties; He chose him and He guided him to a straight path.

117

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

And We gave him good in the world, and in the Hereafter he is among the righteous. And
afterward We inspired you (Muhammad, saying): Follow the religion of Abraham, as one
by nature upright. He was not of the polytheists.
16:124 The Sabbath was appointed only for those who differed concerning it, and lo!
Your Lord will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection concerning that wherein
they used to differ.
16:125 Call to the way of your Lord with wisdom and fair exhortation, and reason with
them in the better way. Lo! Your Lord is Best Aware of him who strays from His way, and
He is Best Aware of those who are guided. 16:126-128 If you punish, then punish with the
like of that wherewith you were afflicted. But if you endure patiently, verily it is better for
the patient. Endure you patiently (O Muhammad). Your endurance is only by (the help of)
God. Grieve not for them, and be not in distress because of that which they devise. Lo!
God is with those who keep their duty to Him and those who are doers of good.

17. Al-Isra: The Children of Israel
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
17:1 Glorified be He Who carried His servant by night from the Inviolable Place of
Worship to the Far Distant Place of Worship, the neighborhood that We have blessed,
that We might show him of Our signs! Lo! He, only He, is the Hearer, the Seer.
17:2-7 We gave to Moses the Scripture, and We appointed it a guidance for the Children
of Israel, saying: Choose no guardian beside Me. (They were) the seed of those whom We
carried (in the ship) along with Noah. Lo! He was a grateful slave. And We decreed for the
Children of Israel in the Scripture: You verily will work corruption in the earth twice, and
you will become great tyrants. So when the time for the first of the two came, We roused
against you slaves of Ours of great might who ravaged (your) country, and it was a threat
performed. Then we gave you once again your turn against them, and We aided you with
wealth and children and made you more in soldiery, (saying): If you do good, you do good
for your own souls, and if you do evil, it is for them (in like manner). So, when the time
for the second (of the judgments) came (We roused against you others of Our slaves) to
ravage you, and to enter the Mosque even as they entered it the first time, and to lay waste
all that they conquered with an utter wasting.
17:8 It may be that your Lord will have mercy on you, but if you repeat (the crime) We
shall repeat (the punishment), and We have appointed Hell a dungeon for the disbelievers.
17:9-11 Lo! This Quran guides to that which is straightest, and gives tidings to the
believers who do good works that theirs will be a great reward. And that those who
believe not in the Hereafter, for them We have prepared a painful punishment. Man prays
for evil as he prays for good, for man was ever hasty.
17:12 And we appoint the night and the day two signs. Then We make dark the sign of the
night, and We make the sign of the day sight giving, that you may seek bounty from your
Lord, and that you may know the computation of the years, and the reckoning; and
everything have We expounded with a clear expounding.
17:13-14 And every man's augury have We fastened to his own neck, and We shall bring
forth for him on the Day of Resurrection a book which he will find wide open. (And it
will be said to him): Read your book. Your soul suffices as a reckoner against you this day.
17:15 Whosoever goes right, it is only for (the good of) his own soul that he goes right,
and whosoever errs, errs only to its hurt. No laden soul can bear another's load. We never

118

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

punish until We have sent a Messenger.
17:16-17 And when We would destroy a township We send commandment to its folk who
live at ease, and afterward they commit abomination therein, and so the Word (of
punishment) has effect for it, and We annihilate it with complete annihilation. How many
generations have we destroyed since Noah! And God suffices as Knower and Beholder of
the sins of His slaves.
17:18-22 Whoever desires that (life) which hastens away, We hasten for him therein that
which We will, for whom We please. And afterward We have appointed for him Hell; he
will endure the heat thereof, condemned, rejected. And whoever desires the Hereafter and
strives for it with the effort necessary, being a believer; for such, their effort finds favor
(with their Lord). Each do We supply, both these and those, from the bounty of your
Lord. And the bounty of your Lord can never be walled up. See how We prefer one above
another, and verily the Hereafter will be greater in degrees and greater in preferment. Set
not up with God any other god (O man) lest you sit down reproved, forsaken.
17:23-25 Your Lord has decreed, that you worship none except Him, and (that you show)
kindness to parents. If one of them or both of them were to attain old age with you, say
not `Fie' to them nor repulse them, but speak to them a gracious word. And lower to
them the wing of submission through mercy, and say: My Lord! Have mercy on them
both, as they did care for me when I was little. Your Lord is best aware of what is in your
minds. If you are righteous, then lo! He is ever Forgiving to those who turn (to Him).
17:26-30 Give the kinsman his due, and the needy, and the wayfarer, and squander not
(your wealth) in wantonness. Lo! The squanderers were ever brothers of the satans, and
Satan was ever an ingrate to his Lord. But if you turn away from them, seeking mercy
from your Lord, for which you hope, then speak to them a reasonable word. And let not
your hand be chained to your neck nor open it with a complete opening, lest you sit down
rebuked, denuded. Lo! Your Lord enlarges the provision for whom He wills, and straitens
(it for whom He wills). Lo, He was ever Knower, Seer of His slaves.
17:31-39 Slay not your children, fearing a fall to poverty, We shall provide for them and
for you. Lo! The slaying of them is great sin. And come not near to adultery. Lo! It is an
abomination and an evil way. And slay not the life, which God has forbidden except with
right. Whoever is slain wrongfully, We have given power to his heir, but let him not
commit excess in slaying. Lo! He will be helped. Come not near the wealth of the orphan
except with that which is better till he comes to strength; and keep the covenant. Lo! Of
the covenant it will be asked. Fill the measure when you measure, and weigh with a right
balance; that is honest, and better in the end. (O man), follow not that whereof you have
no knowledge. Lo! The hearing and the sight and the heart of each of these it will be
asked. And walk not in the earth exultant. Lo! You cannot rend the earth, nor can you
stretch to the height of the hills. The evil of that is hateful in the sight of your Lord. This
is (part) of that wisdom with which your Lord has inspired you (O Muhammad). And set
not up with God any other god, lest you be cast into Hell, reproved, abandoned.
17:40-41 Has your Lord then distinguished you (O men of Mecca) by giving you sons, and
has chosen for Himself females from among the angels? Lo! Verily you speak an awful
word! We verily have displayed (Our warnings) in this Quran that they may take heed, but
it increases them in nothing except aversion.
17:42-43 Say (O Muhammad to the disbelievers): If there were other gods along with Him,
as they say, then had they sought a way against the Lord of the Throne. Glorified is He,
and High Exalted above what they say!
17:44 The seven heavens and the earth and all that is therein praise Him, and there is not a
thing but hymns his praise; but you understand not their praise. Lo! He is ever Forbearing,
Forgiving.

119

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

17:45-48 And when you recite the Quran We place between you, and those who believe
not in the Hereafter a hidden barrier; and We place upon their hearts veils lest they should
understand it, and in their ears a deafness; and when you make mention of your Lord
alone, in the Quran, they turn their backs in aversion. We are best aware of what they wish
to hear when they give ear to you and when they take secret counsel, when the evildoers
say: You follow but a man bewitched. See what similitudes they coin for you, and thus are
they all astray, and cannot find a road!
17:49-52 And they say: When we are bones and fragments, shall we, forsooth, be raised up
as a new creation? Say: Be you stones or iron. Or some created thing that is yet greater in
your thoughts! Then they will say: Who shall bring us back (to life). Say: He who created
you at the first. Then will they shake their heads at you, and say: When will it be? Say: It
will perhaps be soon; a day when He will call you and you will answer with His praise, and
you will think that you have tarried but a little while.
17:53-54 Tell My bondmen to speak that, which is kindlier. Lo! Satan sows discord among
them. Lo! Satan is for man an open foe. Your Lord is best aware of you. If He will, He
will have mercy on you, or if He will, He will punish you. We have not sent you (O
Muhammad) as a warden over them.
17:55 And your Lord is best aware of all who are in the heavens and the earth. And we
preferred some of the Prophets above others, and to David We gave the Psalms.
17:56-57 Say: Cry to those (saints and angels) whom you assume (to be gods) beside Him,
yet they have no power to rid you of misfortune or to change. Those to whom they cry
seek the way of approach to their Lord, which of them shall be the nearest; they hope for
His mercy and they fear His punishment. Lo! The punishment of your Lord is to be
shunned.
17:58-60 There is not a township but We shall destroy it ere the Day of Resurrection, or
punish it with dire punishment. That is set forth in the Book (of Our decrees). Nothing
hinders Us from sending signs except that the folk of old denied them. And We gave
Thamud the she camel – a clear sign – but they did wrong in respect to her. We send not
signs except to warn. And (it was a warning) when We told you: Lo! Your Lord
encompasses people, and We appointed the vision which We showed you as an ordeal for
people, and (likewise) the Accursed Tree in the Quran. We warn them, but it increases
them in nothing except gross impiety.
17:61-65 And when We said to the angels: Fall down prostrate before Adam and they fell
prostrate all except Ibis, he said: Shall I fall prostrate before that which You have created
of clay? He said: See You this (creature) whom You have honored above me, if You give
me grace until the Day of Resurrection I verily will seize his seed, except but a few. He
said: Go, and whoever of them follows you – lo! Hell will be your payment, ample
payment. And excite any of them whom you can with your voice, and urge your horse and
foot against them, and be a partner in their wealth and children, and promise them. Satan
promises them only to deceive. Lo! My (faithful) bondmen – over them you have no
power, and your Lord suffices as (their) guardian.
17:66-70 (O people!) your Lord is He Who drives for you the ship upon the sea that you
may seek of His bounty. Lo! He was ever Merciful toward you. And when harm touches
you upon the sea, all to whom you cry for succor) fail except Him (alone), but when He
brings you safe to land, you turn away, for man was ever thankless. Feel you then secure
that He will not cause a slope of the land to engulf you, or send a sandstorm, upon you,
and then you will find that you have no protector? Or feel you secure that He will not
return you to that (plight) a second time, and send against you a hurricane of wind and
drown you for your thanklessness, and then you will not find therein that you have any
avenger against Us? Verily We have honored the children of Adam. We carry them on the
land and the sea, and have made provision of good things for them, and have preferred

120

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

them above many of those whom We created with a marked preferment.
17:71-72 On the Day when We shall summon ill men with their record, whoever is given
his book in his right hand – such will read their book and they will not be wronged a
shred. Whoever is blind here will be blind in the Hereafter, and yet further from the road.
17:73-77 And they indeed strove hard to deceive you (O Muhammad) away from that
wherewith We have inspired you, that you should invent other than it against Us; and then
would they have accepted you as a friend. And if We had not made you wholly firm you
might almost have inclined to them a little. Then had We made you taste a double
(punishment) of living and a double (punishment) of dying, then had you found no helper
against Us. And they indeed wished to scare you from the land that they might drive you
forth from there, and then they would have stayed (there) but a little after you. (Such was
Our) method in the case of those whom We sent before you (to people), and you will not
find for Our method any of power to change.
17:78-81 Establish worship at the going down of the sun until the dark of night, and (the
recital of) the Quran at dawn. Lo! (The recital of) the Quran at dawn is ever witnessed.
And some part of the night awake for it, a largesse for you. It may be that your Lord will
raise you to a praised estate. And say: My Lord! Let me enter in truth and cause me to go
forth in truth. And give me from You a sustaining power. And say: Truth has come and
falsehood has vanished away. Lo! Falsehood is ever bound to vanish.
17:82-84 And We reveal of the Quran that which is a healing and a mercy for believers
though it increases the evildoers in nothing except ruin. And when We make life pleasant
to man, he turns away and is averse; and when ill touches him he is in despair. Say: Each
one does according to his rule of conduct, and your Lord is Best Aware of him whose way
is right.
17:85 They will ask you concerning the spirit. Say: The spirit is by command of my Lord,
and of knowledge you have been given but little.
17:86-87 And if We willed We could withdraw that which We have revealed to you, then
would you find no guardian for you against Us in respect thereof. (It is nothing) except
mercy from your Lord. Lo! His kindness to you was ever great.
17:88-89 Say: Verily, though humankind and the jinn should assemble to produce the like
of this Quran, they could not produce the like thereof though they were helpers of one
another. And verily We have displayed for people in this Quran all kinds or similitude, but
most of people refuse anything except disbelief.
17:90-93 And they say: We will not put faith in you till you cause a spring to gush forth
from the earth for us; or you have a garden of date palms and grapes, and cause rivers to
gush forth therein abundantly; or you cause the heaven to fall upon us piecemeal, as you
have pretended, or bring God and the angels as a warrant; or you have a house of gold; or
you ascend up into heaven, and even then we will put no faith in your ascension till you
bring down for us a book that we can read. Say (O Muhammad): My Lord be glorified!
Am I nothing except a mortal Messenger?
17:94-96 And nothing prevented people from believing when the guidance came to them
except that they said: Has God sent a mortal as (His) Messenger? Say: If there were in the
earth angels walking secure, We had sent down for them from heaven an angel as
Messenger. Say: God suffices for a witness between me and you Lo! He is Knower and
Seer of His slaves.
17:97-99 And he whom God guides, he is rightly guided ; while , as for him whom He
sends astray, for them you will find no helpers (and protectors) beside Him , and We shall
assemble them on the Day of Resurrection on their faces , blind , dumb and deaf; their

121

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

habitation will be Hell; whenever it abates, We increase the flame for them . That is their
reward because they disbelieved Our revelations and said: When we are bones and
fragments shall we, forsooth, be raised up as a new creation? Have they not seen that God
Who created the heavens and the earth is able to create the like of them, and has
appointed for them an end of which there is no
doubt? But the wrongdoers refuse anything except disbelief.
17:100 Say (to them): If you possessed the treasures of the mercy of my Lord, you would
surely hold them back for fear of spending, for man was ever grudging.
17:101-104 And verily We gave to Moses nine signs, clear proofs (of God's supreme
power). Do but ask the Children of Israel how he came to them, then Pharaoh said to
him: Lo! I deem you one bewitched, O Moses. He said: In truth you know that none sent
down these (signs) except the Lord of the heavens and the earth as proofs, and lo! (For
my part) I deem you lost, O Pharaoh. And he wished to scare them from the land, but We
drowned him and those with him, all together. And We said to the Children of Israel after
him: Dwell in the land; but when the promise of the Hereafter comes to pass we shall
bring you as a crowd gathered out of various nations.
17:105-109 With truth have We sent it down, and with truth has it descended. And We
have sent you as nothing else except a bearer of good tidings and a warner. And (it is) a
Quran that We have divided, that you may recite it to people at intervals, and We have
revealed it by (successive) revelation. Say: Believe therein or believe not, lo! Those who
were given knowledge before it, when it is read to them, fall down prostrate on their faces,
adoring, saying: Glory to our Lord! Verily the promise of our Lord must be fulfilled. They
fall down on their faces, weeping, and it increases humility in them.
17:110-111 Say (to people): Cry to God, or cry to the Beneficent, to whichever you cry (it
is the same). His
are the most beautiful names. And you (O Muhammad), be not loud voiced in your
worship nor yet silent therein, but follow a way between. And say: Praise be to God, Who
has not taken to Himself a son, and Who has no partner in the supreme power, nor has
He any helper (and protector) through dependence. And magnify Him with all
magnificence.

18. Al-Kahf: The Cave
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
18:1-5 Praise be to God Who has revealed the Scripture to His slave, and has not placed
therein any crookedness, (But has made it) straight, to give warning of stern punishment
from Him, and to bring to the believers who do good works the news that theirs will be a
fair reward, wherein they will abide forever; and to warn those who say: God has chosen a
son, (a thing) of which they have no knowledge, nor (had) their fathers. Dreadful is the
word that comes out of their mouths. They speak nothing but a lie.
18:6-8 Yet it may be, if they believe not in this statement, that you (O Muhammad) will
torment your soul with grief over their footsteps. Lo! We have placed all that is in the
earth as an ornament of that which we may try them: which of them is best in conduct.
And lo! We shall make all that is therein a barren mound.
18:9-12 Or deem you that the People of the Cave and the inscription are a wonder among
Our signs? When the young men fled for refuge to the Cave and said: Our Lord! grant us
mercy from You and shape for us right conduct in our plight. Then We sealed up their

122

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

hearing in the Cave for a number of years. And afterward We raised them up that We
might know which of the two parties would best calculate the time that they had tarried.
18:13-16 We narrate to you their story with truth. Lo! They were young men who believed
in their Lord, and We increased them in guidance. And We made firm their hearts when
they stood forth and said: Our Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth. We cry to
no god beside Him, for then should we utter an enormity. These, our people, have chosen
(other) gods beside Him though they bring no clear warrant (given) to them. And who
does greater wrong than he who invents a lie concerning God? And when you withdraw
from them and that which they worship except God, then seek refuge in the Cave; your
Lord will spread for you of His mercy and will prepare for you a pillow in your plight.
18:17-18 And you might have seen the sun when it rose, move away from their cave to the
right; and when it set, go past them on the left, and they were in the cleft thereof. That
was (one) of the signs of God. He whom God guides, he indeed is rightly guided, and he
whom He sends astray, for him you will not find a guiding friend. And you would have
deemed them waking though they were asleep, and we caused them to turn over to the
right and the left, and their dog stretching out his paws on the threshold. If you had
observed them closely you had assuredly turned away from them in flight, and had been
filled with awe of them.
18:19-20 And in like manner We awakened them that they might question one another. A
speaker from among them said: How long have you tarried? They said: We have tarried a
day or some part of a day. (Others) said: Your Lord best knows what you have tarried.
Now send one of you with this your silver coin to the city, and let him see what food is
purest there and bring you a supply thereof. Let him be courteous and let no man know of
you. For they, if they should come to know of you, will stone you or turn you back to
their religion; then you will never prosper.
18:21 And in like manner We disclosed them (to the people of the city) that they might
know that the promise of God is true, and that, as for the Hour, there is no doubt
concerning it. When (the people of the city) disputed of their case among themselves, they
said: Build over them a building; their Lord knows best concerning them. Those who won
their point said: We verily shall build a place of worship over them.
18:22 (Some) will say: They were three, their dog the fourth, and (some) say: Five, their
dog the sixth, guessing at random; and (some) say: Seven, and their dog the eighth. Say (O
Muhammad): My Lord is best aware of their number. None know them except a few. So
contend not concerning them except with an outward contending, and ask not any of
them to pronounce concerning them.
18:23-24 And say not of anything: Lo! I shall do that tomorrow, except if God wills. And
remember your Lord when you forget, and say: It may be that my Lord guides me to a
nearer way of truth than this.
18:25-27 And (it is said) they tarried in their Cave three hundred years and add nine. Say:
God is best aware how long they tarried. His is the Invisible of the heavens and the earth.
How clear of sight is He and keen of hearing! They have no helper (and protector) beside
Him, and He makes none to share in His government. And recite that which has been
revealed to you of the Scripture of your Lord. There is none who can change His words,
and you will find no refuge beside Him.
18:28 Restrain yourself along with those who cry to their Lord at morn and evening,
seeking His Face; and let not your eyes overlook them, desiring the pomp of the life of the
world; and obey not him whose heart We have made heedless of Our remembrance, who
follows his own lust and whose case has been abandoned.
18:29 Say: (It is) the truth from the Lord of you (all). Then whosoever wills, let him

123

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

believe, and whosoever wills, let him disbelieve. Lo! We have prepared for disbelievers
Fire. Its tent encloses them. If they ask for showers, they will be showered with water the
like to molten lead, which burns the faces. Calamitous the drink and ill the resting place!
18:30-31 Lo! As for those who believe and do good works – Lo! We waste not the reward
of one whose work is goodly to be lost. As for such, theirs will be Gardens of Eden,
wherein rivers flow beneath them; therein they will be given armlets of gold and will wear
green robes of finest silk and gold embroidery, reclining upon thrones therein. Blessed the
reward, and fair the resting place!
18:32-44 Coin for them a similitude: Two men, one, of whom We had assigned two
gardens of grapes, and We had surrounded both with date palms and had put between
them tillage. Each of the gardens gave its fruit and withheld nothing thereof. And We
caused a river to gush forth therein. And he had fruit. And he said to his comrade, when
he spoke with him: I am more than you in wealth, and stronger in respect of men. And he
went into his garden, while he (thus) wronged himself. He said: I think not that all this will
ever perish. I think not that the Hour will ever come, and if indeed I am brought back to
my Lord I surely shall find better than this as a resort. And his comrade, while he disputed
with him, exclaimed: Disbelieve you in Him Who created you of dust, then of a drop (of
seed), and then fashioned you a man? But He is God, my Lord, and I ascribe to my Lord
no partner. If only, when you entered your garden, you had said: That which God wills
(will come to pass)! There is no strength except in God! Though you see me as less than
you in wealth and children, yet it may be that my Lord will give me better than your
garden, and will send on it a bolt from heaven, and some morning it will be a smooth
hillside, or some morning the water thereof will be lost in the earth so that you cannot
make search for it. And his fruit was beset (with destruction). Then he began to wring his
hands for all that he had spent upon it, when (now) it was all ruined on its trellises, and to
say: Would that I had ascribed no partner to my Lord! And he had no troop of men to
help him as against God, nor could he save himself. In this case is protection only from
God, the True. He is best for reward, and best for consequence.
18:45 And coin for them the similitude of the life of the world as water which We send
down from the sky, and the vegetation of the earth mingles with it and then becomes dry
twigs that the winds scatter. God is Able to do all things.
18:46 Wealth and children are an ornament of life of the world. But the good deeds,
which endure are better in your Lord's sight for reward, and better in respect of hope.
18:47-49 And (have you not considered of) the Day when We remove the hills and you
see the earth emerging, and We gather them together so as to leave not one of them
behind. And they are set before your Lord in ranks (and it is said to them): Now verily
have you come to Us as We created you at the first. But you thought that We had set no
meeting for you. And the Book is placed, and you see the guilty fearful of that which is
therein, and they say: What kind of a book is this that leaves neither a small thing nor a
great thing but has counted it! And they find all that they did confronting them, and your
Lord wrongs no one.
18:50-51 And (remember) when We said to the angels: Fall prostrate before Adam, and
they fell prostrate, all except Iblis. He was of the jinn, so he rebelled against his Lord's
command. Will you choose him and his seed for your helpers (and protectors) instead of
Me, when they are an enemy to you? Calamitous is the exchange for evildoers! I made
them not to witness the creation of the heavens and the earth, nor their own creation; nor
choose I misleaders for (My) helpers.
18:52-53 And (be mindful of) the Day when He will say: Call those partners of Mine
whom you pretended. Then they will cry to them, but they will not hear their prayer, and
We shall set a barrier of destruction between them. And the guilty behold the Fire and
know that they are about to fall therein, and they find no way of escape it .

124

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

18:54-55 And verily We have displayed for people in this Quran all manner of similitudes,
but man is more than anything contentious. And nothing hinders people from believing
when the guidance comes to them, and from asking for forgiveness of their Lord, unless
(it be that they wish) that the judgment of the men of old should come upon them or
(that) they should be confronted with the punishment.
18:56-57 We send not the messengers except as bearers of good news and warners. Those
who disbelieve contend with falsehood in order to refute the truth thereby. And they take
Our revelations and that with which they are threatened as a jest And who does greater
wrong than he who has been reminded of the revelations of his Lord, yet turns away from
them and forgets what his hands send forward (to the Judgment)? Lo! On their hearts We
have placed coverings so that they understand not, and in their ears a deafness. And
though you call them to the guidance, in that case they can never be led aright.
18:58-59 Your Lord is the Forgiver, full of mercy. If He took them to task (now) for what
they earn, He would hasten on the punishment for them; but theirs is an appointed term
from which they will find no escape. And (all) those townships, We destroyed them when
they did wrong, and We appointed a fixed time for their destruction.
18:60-65 And when Moses said to his servant: I will not give up until I reach the point
where the two rivers meet, though I march on for ages. And when they reached the point
where the two met, they forgot their fish, and it took its way into the waters, being free.
And when they had gone further, he said to his servant: Bring us our breakfast. Verily we
have found fatigue in this journey of ours. He said: Did you see, when we took refuge on
the rock, and I forgot the fish – and none but Satan caused me to forget to mention it –
it took its way into the waters by a marvel. He said: This is that which we have been
seeking they retraced their steps again. Then they found one of Our slaves, to whom We
had given mercy from Us, and had taught him knowledge from Us.
18:66-70 Moses said to him: May I follow you, to the end that you may teach me right
conduct of that which you have been taught? He said: Lo! You cannot have patience with
me. How can you have patience with that which you cannot compass any knowledge? He
said: God willing, you, shall find me patient and I shall not gainsay you in anything: He
said: Well, if you go with me, ask me not concerning anything till I myself make mention
of it to you.
18:71-73 So the twain set out till, when they were in the ship, he made a hole therein.
(Moses) said: Have you made a hole in there, so that the folk drown? You verily have
done a dreadful thing. He said: Did I not tell you that you could not have patience with
me? (Moses) said: Be not wroth with me that I forgot, and be not hard upon me for my
fault.
18:74 So the twain journeyed on, till, when they met a lad, he slew him. (Moses) said:
What! Have you slain an innocent soul who has slain no man? Verily you have done a
horrid thing.
18:75-76 He said: Did I not tell you that you could not have patience with me? (Moses)
said: If I ask you after this concerning anything, keep not company with me. You have
received an excuse from me.
18:77-82 So they twain journeyed on, till when they came to the folk of a certain township,
they asked its folk for food, but they refused to make them guests. And they found therein
a wall upon the point of falling into ruin, and he repaired it. (Moses) said: If you had
wished, you could have taken payment for it. He said: This is the parting between you and
me! I will announce to you the interpretation of that which you could not bear with
patience. As for the ship, it belonged to poor people working on the river, and I wished to
mar it, for there was a king behind them who is taking every (good) ship by force. And as
for the lad, his parents were believers and we feared lest he should oppress them by

125

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

rebellion and disbelief. And we intended that their Lord should change him for them to
one better in purity and nearer to mercy. And as for the wall, it belonged to two orphan
boys in the city, and there was beneath it a treasure belonging to them and their father had
been righteous, and your Lord intended that they should come to their full strength and
should bring forth their treasure as a mercy from their Lord; and I did it not upon my own
command. Such is the interpretation of that with which you could not have patience.
18:83-84 They will ask you of Dhul-Qarneyn. Say: I shall recite to you a remembrance of
him. Lo! We made him strong in the land and gave to every thing a road.
18:85-88 And he followed a road till, when he reached the setting place of the sun, he
found it setting in a muddy spring, and found a people thereabout: We said: O DhulQarneyn! Either punish them or show them kindness. He said: As for him who does
wrong, we shall punish him, and then he will be brought back to his Lord, Who will
punish him with an awful punishment! But as for him who believes and does right, good
will be his reward, and we shall speak to him a mild command.
18:89-91 Then he followed a road till, when he reached the rising place of the sun, he
found it rising on a people for whom We had not appointed any helper. So, (it was) and
We knew all concerning him.
18:92-93 Then he followed a road till, when he came between the two mountains, he
found upon their hither side a folk that scarce could understand a saying.
18:94-98 They said: O Dhul-Qarneyn! Lo! Gog and Magog are spoiling the land. So may
we pay you tribute on condition that you set a barrier between us and them? He said: That
wherein my Lord has established me is better (than your tribute). Do but help me with
strength (of men), I will set between you and them a bank. Give me pieces of iron – till,
when he had leveled up (the gap) between the cliffs, he said: Blow! – till, when he had
made it a fire, he said: Bring me molten copper to pour thereon. And (Gog and Magog)
were not able to surmount, nor could they pierce (it). He said: This is a mercy from my
Lord; but when the promise of my Lord comes to pass, He will lay it low, for the promise
of my Lord is true.
18:99 And on that Day We shall let some of them surge against others, and the trumpet
will be blown. Then We shall gather them together in one gathering.
18:100-102 On that Day We shall present Hell to the disbelievers, plain to view; those
whose eyes were hoodwinked from My reminder, and who could not bear to hear. Do the
disbelievers reckon that they can choose My bondmen as helpers (and protectors) beside
Me? Lo! We have prepared Hell as a welcome for the disbelievers.
18:103-106 Say: Shall We inform you as to who will be the greatest losers by their works?
Those whose effort goes astray in the life of the world, and yet they reckon that they do
good work. Those are they who disbelieve in the revelations of their Lord and in the
meeting with Him. Therefore their works are vain, and on the Day of Resurrection We
assign no weight to them. That is their reward: Hell, because they disbelieved, and made a
jest of Our revelations and Our messengers.
18:107-108 Lo! Those who believe and do good works, theirs are the Gardens of Paradise,
for welcome, wherein they will abide, with no desire to be removed from there.
18:109 Say: Though the sea became ink for the Words of my Lord, verily the sea would be
used up before the Words of my Lord were exhausted, even though We brought the like
thereof to help.
18:110 Say: I am only a mortal like you. My Lord inspires in me that your God is only One
God. And whoever hopes for the meeting with his Lord, let him do righteous work, and

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

126

make none sharer of the worship due to his Lord.

19. Maryam: Mary
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
19:1 Kaf. Ha. Ya. Ain. Sad.
19:2-6 A mention of the mercy of your Lord to His servant Zachariah. When he cried to
his Lord, a cry in secret, saying: My Lord! Lo! The bones of me wax feeble and my head is
shining with grey hair, and I have never been unblessed in prayer to You, my Lord. Lo! I
fear my kinsfolk after me, since my wife is barren. Oh, give me from You a successor,
who shall inherit of me and inherit (also) of the house of Jacob. And make him, my Lord,
acceptable (to You).
19:7-9 (It was said to him): O Zachariah! Lo! We bring you tidings of a son whose name is
John; We have given the same name to none before (him). He said: My Lord! How can I
have a son when my wife is barren and I have reached infirm old age? He said: So (it will
be). Your Lord says: It is easy for Me, even as I created you before, when you were
nothing.
19:10-11 He said: My Lord! Appoint for me some sign. He said: Your sign is that you,
with no bodily defect, shall not speak to people three nights. Then he came forth to his
people from the sanctuary, and signified to them: Glorify your Lord at break of day and
fall of night.
19:12-15 (And it was said to his son): O John! Hold the Scripture. And We gave him
wisdom when he was only a child. And compassion from Us, and purity; and he was
devout, and dutiful toward his parents. And he was not arrogant, rebellious. Peace on him
the day he was born, and the day he dies and the day he shall be raised alive!
19:16-21 And make mention of Mary in the Scripture, when she had withdrawn from her
people to a chamber looking east, and had chosen seclusion from them. Then We sent to
her Our spirit and it assumed for her the likeness of a perfect man. She said: Lo! I seek
refuge in the Beneficent One from you, if you are God fearing. He said: I am only a
messenger of your Lord that I may bestow on you a faultless son. She said: How can I
have a son when no mortal has touched me, neither have I been unchaste! He said: So (it
will be). Your Lord says: It is easy for Me. And (it will be) that We may make of him a
revelation for people and a mercy from Us, and it is a thing ordained.
19:22-26 And she, conceived him, and she withdrew with him to a place. And the pangs of
childbirth drove her to the trunk of the palm tree. She said: Oh, would that I had died ere
this and had become a thing of nonexistence, forgotten! Then (one) cried to her from
below her, saying: Grieve not! Your Lord has placed a rivulet beneath you, and shake the
trunk of the palm tree toward you, you will cause ripe dates to fall upon you. So eat and
drink and be consoled. And if you meet any mortal, say: Lo! I have vowed a fast to the
Beneficent, and may not speak this day to any mortal.
19:27-33 Then she brought him to her own folk, carrying him. They said: O Mary! You
have come with an amazing thing. Oh sister of Aaron! Your father was not a wicked man
nor was your mother a harlot. Then she pointed to him. They said: How can we talk to
one who is in the cradle, a young boy? He spoke: Lo! I am the slave of God. He has given
me the Scripture and has appointed me a Prophet, and has made me blessed wherever I
may be, and has enjoined upon me prayer and almsgiving so long as I remain alive, and
(has made me) dutiful toward her who bore me, and has not made me arrogant, unblessed.
Peace on me the day I was born, and the day I die, and the day I shall be raised alive!

127

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

19:34 Such was Jesus, son of Mary: (this is) a statement of the truth concerning which they
doubt.
19:35-36 It befits not (the Majesty of) God that He should take to Himself a son. Glory be
to Him! When He decrees a thing, He says to it only: Be! And it is. And lo! God is my
Lord and your Lord. So worship Him. That is the right path.
19:37-40 The sects among them differ: but woe to the disbelievers from the meeting of an
Awful Day. See and hear them on the Day they come to Us! Yet the evildoers are today in
error manifest. And warn them of the Day of anguish when the case has been decided.
Now they are in a state of carelessness, and they believe not. Lo! We inherit the earth and
all who are thereon, and to Us they are returned.
19:41-50 And make mention (O Muhammad) in the Scripture of Abraham. Lo! He was
sure of faith, a Prophet. When he said to his father: O my father! Why do you worship
that which neither hears, not nor sees, nor can avail you in anything? O my father! Lo!
There has come to me of knowledge that which came not to you. So follow me, and I will
lead you on a right path. O my father! Worship not Satan. Lo! Satan is a rebel to the
Beneficent. O my father! Lo! I fear lest a punishment from the Beneficent should overtake
you so that you become a comrade of Satan. He said: Reject you my gods, O Abraham? If
you cease not, I shall surely stone you. Depart from me a long while! He said: Peace be to
you! I shall ask forgiveness of my Lord for you. Lo! He is ever gracious to me. I shall
withdraw from you and that to which you pray beside God, and I shall pray to my Lord. It
may be that, in prayer to my Lord, I shall not be unblessed. So, when he had withdrawn
from them and that which they were worshipping beside God. We gave him Isaac and
Jacob. Each of them We made a Prophet. And We gave them of Our mercy, and
bestowed upon them lofty and true praise.
19:51-53 And make mention in the Scripture of Moses. Lo! He was chosen, and he was a
Messenger (of God), a Prophet. We called him from the right slope of the Mount, and
brought him near in communion. And We bestowed upon him of Our mercy his brother
Aaron, a Prophet (likewise).
19:54-55 And make mention in the Scripture of Ishmael. Lo! He was a keeper of his
promise, and he was a Messenger, (of God) a Prophet. He enjoined upon his people
worship and almsgiving, and was acceptable in the sight of his Lord.
19:56-57 And make mention in the Scripture of Idris. Lo! He was a sure of faith, a
Prophet; and We raised him to high station.
19:58 These are they to whom God showed favor from among the Prophets, of the seed
of Adam and of those whom We carried (in the ship) with Noah, and of the seed of
Abraham and Israel, and from among those whom We guided and chose. When the
revelations of the Beneficent were recited to them, they fell down, adoring and weeping.
19:59-63 Now there has succeeded them a later generation who have ruined worship and
have followed lusts. But they will meet deception. Except him who shall repent and
believe and do right. Such will enter the Garden and they will not be wronged in anything.
Gardens of Eden, which the Beneficent has promised to His slaves in the Unseen. Lo! His
promise is ever sure of fulfillment – They hear therein no idle talk, but only Peace; and
therein they have food for morn and evening. Such is the Garden, which We cause the
devout among Our bondmen to inherit.
19:64-65 We (angels) come not down except by commandment of your Lord. To Him
belongs all that is before us and all that is behind us and all that is between those two, and
your Lord was never forgetful – Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between
them! Therefore, worship Him and be patient in His worship. Know you one that can be
named along with Him?

128

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

19:66-67 And man says: When I am dead, shall I forsooth be brought forth alive? Does
not man remember that We created him before, when he was nothing?
19:68-70 And, by your Lord, verily We shall assemble them and the satans, then We shall
bring them, crouching, around Hell. Then We shall pluck out from every sect whichever
of them was most stern in rebellion to the Beneficent. And surely We are Best Aware of
those most worthy to be burned therein.
19:71-72 There is not one of you but shall approach it. That is a fixed ordinance of your
Lord. Then We shall rescue those who kept from evil, and leave the evildoers crouching
there.
19:73-75 And when Our clear revelations are recited to them those who disbelieve say to
those who believe: Which of the two parties (yours or ours) is better in position, and more
imposing as an army? How many a generation have We destroyed before them, who were
more imposing in respect of gear and outward seeming! Say: As for him who is in error,
the Beneficent will verily prolong his span of life until, when they behold that which they
were promised, whether it be punishment (in the world), or the Hour (of Judgment), they
will know who is worse in position and who is weaker as, an army.
19:76 God increases in right guidance those who walk aright, and the good deeds, which
endure are better in your Lord's sight for reward, and better for resort.
19:77-80 Have you seen him who disbelieves in Our revelations and says: Assuredly I shall
be given wealth and children! Has he perused the Unseen, or has he made a pact with the
Beneficent? Nay, but We shall record that which he says and prolong for him a span of
torment. And We shall inherit from him that whereof he spoke, and he will come to Us,
alone (without his wealth and children).
19:81-84 And they have chosen (other) gods beside God that they may be a power for
them. Nay, but they will deny their worship of them, and become opponents to them. See
you not that We have sent the satans on the disbelievers to confound them with
confusion? So make no haste against them (O Muhammad). We do but number to them a
sum (of days).
19:85-87 On the Day when We shall gather the righteous to the Beneficent, a goodly
company. And drive the guilty to Hell, a weary herd; they will have no power of
intercession, except him who has made a covenant with his Lord.
19:88-92 And they say: The Beneficent has taken to Himself a son. Assuredly you utter a
disastrous thing, whereby the heavens are almost torn, and the earth is split asunder and
the mountains fall in ruins, that you ascribe to the Beneficent a son, when it is not
appropriate for (the Majesty of) the Beneficent that He should choose a son.
19:93-96 There is none in the heavens and the earth but comes to the Beneficent as a
slave. Verily He knows them and numbers them with (right) numbering. And each one of
them will come to Him on the Day of Resurrection, alone. Lo! Those who believe and do
good works, the Beneficent will appoint for them love.
19:97 And We make (this Scripture) easy on your tongue, (O Muhammad) only that you
may bear good tidings therewith to those who are pious, and warn therewith the froward
folk. 19:98 And how many a generation before them have We destroyed! Can you (O
Muhammad) see a single man of them, or hear from them the slightest sound?

20. Ta-Ha

129

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
20:1-5 Ta. Ha. We have not revealed to you (O Muhammad) this Quran that you should
be distressed, but as a reminder to him who fears, a revelation from Him Who created the
earth and the high heavens , the Beneficent One, Who is established on the Throne.
20:6-8 To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth, and
whatever is between them, and whatever is beneath the sod. And if you speak aloud, then
Lo! He knows the secret (thought) and (that which is yet) more hidden. God! None
should be worshipped but God alone. His are the most beautiful names.
20:9-14 Has there come to you the story of Moses? When he saw a fire and said to his
folk: Wait! I see a fire far off. Perhaps I may bring you a brand from there, or may find
guidance at the fire. And when he reached it, he was called by name: O Moses! Lo! I
indeed am your Lord. So take off your shoes, for Lo! You are in the holy valley of Tuwa.
And I have chosen you, so hearken to that which is inspired. Lo! Indeed I am God. None
should be worshipped but Me. So worship Me and establish worship for My
remembrance.
20:15-16 Lo! The Hour is surely coming. But I will, to keep it hidden, that every soul may
be rewarded for that which it strives (to achieve). Therefore, let not him turn you aside
from (the thought of) it who believes not therein but follows his own desire, lest you
perish.
20:17-24 And what is that in your right hand, O Moses? He said: This is my staff whereon
I lean, and wherewith I beat down branches for my sheep, and wherein I find other uses.
He said: Cast it down, O Moses! So he cast it down, and Lo! It was a serpent, gliding. He
said: Grasp it and fear not. We shall return it to its former state. And thrust your hand
within your armpit, it will come forth white without hurt, (that will be) another sign. That
We may show you (some) of Our greater signs, go you to Pharaoh! Lo! He has
transgressed (the bounds).
20:25-35 (Moses) said: My Lord! Open my chest, and ease my task for me; and loose a
knot from my tongue, that they may understand my saying. Appoint for me a henchman
from my folk, Aaron, my brother. Confirm my strength with him. And let him share my
task, that we may glorify You much. And much remember You. Lo! You are ever Seeing
us.
20:36-37 He said: You are granted your request, O Moses. And indeed, another time,
already We have shown you favor:
20:38-39 When We inspired in your mother that which is inspired, saying: Throw him into
the ark, and throw it into the river, then the rivers hall throw it onto the bank, and there
an enemy to Me and an enemy to him shall take him. And I endued you with love from
Me that you might be trained according to My will.
20:40-41 When your sister went and said: Shall I show you one who will nurse him? And
We restored you to your mother that her eyes might be refreshed and might not sorrow.
And you did kill a man and We delivered you from great distress, and tried you with a
heavy trial. And you did tarry years among the folk of Midian. Then come you (hither) by
(My) providence, O Moses, and I have attached you to Myself.
20:42-44 Go, you and your brother, with My signs, and be not faint in remembrance of
Me. Go, both of you, to Pharaoh. Lo! He has transgressed (the bounds). And speak to
him a gentle word that perhaps he may heed or fear.
20:45 They said: Our Lord! Lo! We fear that he may be beforehand with us or that he may
play the tyrant. 20:46-48 He said: Fear not. Lo! I am with you twain, Hearing and Seeing.

130

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

So go you to him and say: Lo! We are two Messengers of your Lord. So let the Children of
Israel go with us, and torment them not. We bring you a sign from your Lord. And peace
will be for him who follows right guidance. Lo! It has been revealed to us that the
punishment will be for him who denies and turns away.
20:49-54 (Pharaoh) said: Who then is the Lord of you twain, O Moses? He said: Our Lord
is He Who gave to everything its nature, and then guided it aright. He said: What then is
the state of the generations of old? He said: The knowledge thereof is with my Lord in a
Record. My Lord neither errs nor forgets. Who has appointed the earth as a bed and has
threaded roads for you therein and has sent down water from the sky and thereby We
have brought forth diverse kinds of vegetation, (saying): Eat you and feed your cattle. Lo!
Herein verily are signs for those endowed with understanding.
20:55-56 Thereof We created you, and thereto we return you and then We bring you forth
a second time. And We verily did show him all Our signs, but he denied them and refused.
20:57-59 He said: Have you come to drive us out from our land by your magic, O Moses?
But we surely can produce magic the like thereof; so appoint a meeting between us and
you, which neither we nor you shall fail to keep, at a place convenient (to us both).
(Moses) said: Your meeting shall be on the day of the feast, and let the people assemble
when the sun has risen high.
20:60-61 Then Pharaoh went and gathered his strength, then came (to the appointed
meeting). Moses said to them: Woe to you! Invent not a lie against God, lest He extirpate
you by some punishment. He who lies fails miserably.
20:62-64 Then they debated one with another what they must do, and they kept their
counsel secret. They said: Lo! These are two wizards who would drive you out from your
country by their magic, and destroy your best traditions; so arrange your plan, and come in
battle line. Whoever is uppermost this day will be indeed successful.
20:65-67 They said: O Moses! Either throw first, or let us be the first to throw? He said:
Nay, do you throw! Then Lo! Their cords and their staves, by their magic, appeared to
him as though they ran. And Moses conceived a fear in his mind.
20:68-70 We said: Fear not! Lo! You are the higher. Throw that which is in your right
hand! It will eat up that which they have made. Lo! That which they have made is but a
wizard's artifice, and a wizard shall not be successful to whatever point (of skill) he may
attain. Then the wizards were (all) flung down prostrate, crying: We believe in the Lord of
Aaron and Moses.
20:71 (Pharaoh) said: You put faith in him before I give you leave. Lo! He is your chief
who taught you magic. Now surely I shall cut off your hands and your feet alternately, and
I shall crucify you on the trunks of palm trees, and you shall know for certain, which of us
has a sterner and more lasting punishment.
20:72-73 They said: We choose you not above the clear proofs that have come to us, and
above Him Who created us. So decree what you will decree. You will end for us only the
life of the world. Lo! We believe in our Lord, that He may forgive us our sins and the
magic to which you did force us. God is better and more lasting.
20:74-76 Lo! Whoever comes guilty to his Lord, verily for him is Hell. There he will
neither die nor live. But whoever comes to Him a believer, having done good works, for
such are the high stations; Gardens of Eden underneath which rivers flow, wherein they
will abide forever. That is the reward of them who purify themselves.
20:77-79 And verily We inspired Moses, saying: Take away My slaves by night and strike
for them a dry path in the sea, fearing not to be overtaken, neither being afraid (of the

131

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

sea). Then Pharaoh followed with his hosts and there covered them that which did cover
them of the sea. And Pharaoh, led his folk astray, he did not guide them.
20:80-82 O Children of Israel! We delivered you from your enemy, and We made a
covenant with you on the holy mountain's side, and sent down on you the manna and the
quails (saying): Eat of the good things wherewith We have provided you, and transgress
not in respect thereof lest My wrath come upon you; and he on whom My wrath comes,
he is lost indeed. And lo! Verily I am Forgiving toward him who repents and believes and
does good, and afterward walks aright.
20:83-85 And (it was said): What has made you hasten from your folk, O Moses? He said:
They are close upon my track. I hastened to You that You might be well pleased. He said:
Lo! We have tried your folk in your absence, and As-Samiri has misled you.
20:86 Then Moses went back to his folk, angry and sad. He said: O my people! Has not
your Lord promised you a fair promise? Did the time appointed then appear too long for
you, or did you wish that wrath from your Lord should come upon you, that you broke
promise with me?
20:87 They said: We broke not promise with you of our own will, but we were laden with
burdens of ornaments of the folk, and then cast them (in the fire), for thus As-Samiri
proposed.
20:88-89 Then he produced for them a calf, of saffron hue, which gave forth a lowing
sound. And they cried: This is your God and the God of Moses, but he has forgotten. See
they not, that it returns no saying to them, and possesses for them neither hurt nor use?
20:90-91 And Aaron indeed had told them beforehand: O my people! You are but being
seduced therewith, for lo! Your Lord is the Beneficent, so follow me and obey my order.
They said: We shall by no means cease to be its votaries till Moses returns to us.
20:92-94 He (Moses) said: O Aaron! What held you back when you did see them gone
astray, that you followed me not? Have you then disobeyed my order? He said: O son of
my mother! Clutch not my beard nor my head! I feared lest you should say: You have
caused division among the Children of Israel, and have not waited for my word.
20:95-96 (Moses) said: And what has you to say, O Samiri? He said: I perceived what they
perceive not, so I seized a handful from the footsteps of the messenger, and then threw it
in. Thus my soul commended to me. 20:97 (Moses) said: Then go! And lo! In this life it is
for you to say: Touch me not! And lo! There is for you a promise you cannot break. Now
look upon your god of which you have remained a votary. Verily we will burn it and will
scatter its dust over the sea.
20:98 Your God is only God, either than Whom there is no other God He embraces all
things in His knowledge.
20:99-101 Thus relate We to you (Muhammad) some tidings of that which happened of
old, and We have given you from Us a Reminder. Whoever turns away from it, he verily
will bear a burden on the Day of Resurrection, abiding under it – an evil burden for them
on the Day of Resurrection.
20:102-104 The Day when the Trumpet is blown. On that Day we assemble the guilty
white-eyed (with terror), murmuring among themselves: You have tarried but ten (days).
We are best aware of what they utter when their best in conduct say: You have tarried but
a day.
20:105-107 They will ask you of the mountains (on that Day). Say: My Lord will break
them into scattered dust. And leave it as an empty plain, wherein you see neither curve nor

132

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

ruggedness.
20:108-111 On that Day they follow the summoner that deceives not, and voices are
hushed for the Beneficent, and you hear but a faint murmur. On that Day no intercession
avails except (that of) him to whom the Beneficent has given leave and whose word He
accepts. He knows (all) that is before them and (all) that is behind them, while they cannot
compass it in knowledge. And faces humble themselves, before the Living, the Eternal.
And he who bears (a burden of) wrongdoing is indeed a failure (on that Day).
20:112-113 And he who has done some good works, being a believer, he fears neither
injustice nor begrudging (of his wage). Thus We have revealed it as a lecture in Arabic, and
have displayed therein certain threats, that perhaps they may fear (God) or that it may
cause them to take heed.
20:114 Then exalted be God, the True King! And hasten not (O Muhammad) with the
Quran ere its revelation has been perfected to you, and say: My Lord! Increase me in
knowledge.
20:115-121 And verily We made a covenant of old with Adam, but he forgot, and We
found no constancy in him. And when We said to the angels: Fall prostrate before Adam,
they fell prostrate (all) except Iblis; he refused. Therefore We said: O Adam! This is an
enemy to you and to your wife, so let him not drive you both out of the Garden so that
you come to toil. It is (given) to you that you hunger not therein nor are naked, and you
thirst not therein nor are exposed to the sun's heat. But Satan whispered to him, saying: O
Adam! Shall I show you the tree of immortality and power that wastes not away? Then
they twain ate thereof, so that their shame became apparent to them, and they began to
hide by heaping on themselves some of the leaves of the Garden. And Adam disobeyed
his Lord, and went astray.
20:122-123 Then his Lord chose him, and forgave him, and guided him. He said: Go
down hence, both of you, one of you a foe to the other. But if there come to you from Me
a guidance, then whoever follows My guidance, he will not go astray nor come to grief.
20:124-127 But he who turns away from remembrance of Me, his will be a narrow life,
and I shall bring him blind to the assembly on the Day of Resurrection. He will say: My
Lord! Wherefore have You gathered me (hither) blind, when I was wont to see? He will
say: So (it must be). Our revelations came to you but you did forget them. In like manner
you are forgotten this Day. Thus do We reward him who is prodigal and believes not the
revelations of his Lord; and verily the punishment of the Hereafter will be sterner and
more lasting. 20:128-129 Is it not a guidance for them (to know) how many a generation
We destroyed before them, amid whose dwellings they walk? Lo! Therein verily are signs
for those endowed with understanding. And but for a decree that had already gone forth
from your Lord, and a term already fixed, the judgment would (have) been inevitable (in
this world).
20:130-132 Therefore (O Muhammad), have patience with what they say, and celebrate
the praises of your Lord ere the rising of the sun and ere the going down thereof. And
glorify Him some hours of the night and at the two ends of the day, so that you may find
acceptance. And strain not your eyes toward that which We cause some wedded pairs
among them to enjoy, the flower of the life of the world, that We may try them thereby.
The provision of your Lord is better and more lasting. And enjoin upon your people
worship, and be constant therein. We ask not of you a provision: We provide for you.
And (the fruit of) the Hereafter is for righteousness.
20:133-134 And they say: If only he would bring us a miracle from his Lord! Has there not
come to them the proof of what is in the former Scriptures? And if We had destroyed
them with some punishment before it, they would assuredly have said: Our Lord! If only

133

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

You had sent to us a Messenger, so that we might have followed Your revelations before
we were (thus) humbled and disgraced!
20:135 Say: Each is waiting; so await you! You will come to know who are the owners of
the path of equity, and who is right.

21. Al-Anbiya': The Prophets
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
21:1-4 Their reckoning draws near for people, while they turn away in heedlessness. Never
comes there to them a new reminder from their Lord but they listen to it while they play.
With hearts preoccupied. And they confer in secret. The wrongdoers say: Is this other
than a mortal like you? Will you then succumb to magic when you see (it)? He said: My
Lord knows what is spoken in the heaven and the earth. He is the Hearer, the Knower.
21:5 Nay, say they, (these are but) muddled dreams; nay, he has but invented it; nay, he is
but a poet. Let him bring us a sign even as those of old (who were God's Messengers)
were sent (with signs).
21:6-9 Not a township believed of those, which We destroyed before them (though We
sent them signs):
would they then believe? And We sent not (as Our Messengers) before you other than
men whom We inspired. Ask the people of the previous Scriptures if you know not? We
gave them not bodies that would not eat food, nor were they immortals. Then We fulfilled
the promise to them. So We delivered them and whom We would, and We destroyed the
prodigals.
21:10 Now We have revealed to you a Scripture wherein is your Reminder. Have you then
no sense?
21:11-15 How many a community that dealt unjustly have We shattered, and raised up
after them another folk! And, when they felt Our might, behold them fleeing from it! (But
it was said to them:) Flee not, but return to that (existence) which emasculated you and to
your dwellings, that you may be questioned. They cried: Alas for us! Lo! We were
wrongdoers. And this their crying ceased not till We made them as reaped corn, extinct.
21:16-18 We created not the heaven and the earth and all that is between them in play. If
We had wished to find a pastime, We could have found it in Us – if We ever did. Nay,
but We hurl the true against the false, and it does break its head and lo! It vanishes. And
yours will be woe for that which you ascribe (to Him).
21:19-20 To Him belongs whoever is in the heavens and the earth. And those who are
near Him are not too proud to worship Him nor do they weary; they glorify (Him) night
and day; they flag not.
21:21-22 Or have they chosen gods from the earth who raise the dead? If there were
therein gods beside God, then verily both (the heavens and the earth) had been
disordered. Glorified be God, the Lord of the Throne, from all that they ascribe (to Him).
21:23 He will not be questioned as to that which He does, but they will be questioned.
21:24 Or have they chosen other gods beside Him? Say: Bring your proof (of their
godhead). This is the Reminder of those with me and those before me, but most of them
know not the Truth and so they are averse.

134

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

21:25 And We sent no Messenger before you but We inspired him (saying): None should
be worshipped but Me, so worship Me.
21:26-29 And they say: The Beneficent has taken to Himself a son. Be He glorified! Nay,
but (those whom they call sons) are honored slaves; they speak not until He has spoken,
and they act by His command. He knows what is before them and what is behind them,
and they cannot intercede except for him whom He accepts, and they quake for awe of
Him. And one of them who should say: Lo! I am a god beside Him, that one We should
repay with Hell. Thus We repay wrongdoers.
21:30-33 Have not those who disbelieve known that the heavens and the earth were of
one piece, then We parted them, and We made every living thing of water? Will they not
then believe? And We have placed in the earth firm hills lest it quake with them, and We
have placed therein ravines as roads that perhaps they may find their way. And We have
made the sky a roof withheld (from them). Yet they turn away from its signs. And it is He,
Who created the night and the day, and the sun and the moon. They float, each in an
orbit.
21:34-35 We appointed immortality for no mortal before you. What! If you die, can they
be immortal? Every soul must taste of death, and We try you with evil and with good, for
ordeal. And to Us you will be returned.
21:36 And when those who disbelieve behold you, they but choose you out for mockery
(saying): Is this he who makes mention of your gods? And they would deny all mention of
the Beneficent.
21:37-40 Man is made of haste. I shall show you My signs, but ask Me not to hasten. And
they say: When will this promise (be fulfilled), if you are truthful? If those who disbelieved
but knew the time when they will not be able to drive off the fire from their faces and
from their backs, and they will not be helped! Nay, but it will come upon them unawares
so that it will stupefy them, and they will be unable to repel it, neither will they be
reprieved.
21:41 Messengers before you, indeed, were mocked, but that which they mocked
surrounded those who scoffed at them.
21:42-44 Say: Who guards you in the night or in the day from the Beneficent? Nay, but
they turn away from mention of their Lord, or have they gods who can shield them from
Us? They cannot help themselves nor can they be defended from Us. Nay, but We gave
these and their fathers ease until life grew long for them. See they not how we visit the
land, reducing it of its outlying parts? Can they then be the victors?
21:45-46 Say (O Muhammad to people): I warn you only by the Inspiration. But the deaf
hear not the call when they are warned. And if a breath of your Lord's punishment were to
touch them, they assuredly would say: Alas for us! Lo! We were wrongdoers.
21:47 And We set a just balance for the Day of Resurrection so that no soul is wronged in
anything. Though it be of the weight of a grain of mustard seed, We bring it. And We
suffice for reckoners.
21:48-50 And We verily gave Moses and Aaron the criterion (of right and wrong) and a
light and a reminder for those who are pious, those who fear their Lord in secret and who
dread the Hour (of Judgment). This is a blessed Reminder that We have revealed: Will you
then reject it?
21:51-70 And We verily gave Abraham of old his proper course, and We were Aware of
him, when he said to his father and his folk: What are these images to which you pay
devotion? They said: We found our fathers worshippers of them. He said: Verily you and

135

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

your fathers were in plain error. They said: Bring you to us the truth, or are you some
jester? He said: Nay, but your Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth, Who created
them; and I am of those who testify to that. And, by God, I shall circumvent your idols
after you have gone away and turned your backs. Then he reduced them to fragments, all
except the chief of them, that perhaps they might have recourse to it. They said: Who has
done this to our gods? Surely it must be some evildoer. They said: We heard a youth called
Abraham make mention of them. They said: Then bring him (hither) before the people's
eyes that they may testify. They said: Is it you who has done this to our gods, O Abraham?
He said: But this, their chief has done it. So question them, if they can speak. Then
gathered they apart and said: Lo! You yourselves are the wrongdoers. And they were
utterly confounded, and they said: Well you know that these speak not. He said: Worship
you then instead of God that which cannot profit you at all, nor harm you? Fie on you and
all that you worship instead of God! Have you then no sense? They cried: Burn him and
stand by your gods, if you will be doing. We said: O fire, be coolness and peace for
Abraham. And they wished to set a snare for him, but We made them the greater losers.
21:71-75 And We rescued him and Lot (and brought them) to the land, which We have
blessed for (all) peoples. And We bestowed upon him Isaac, and Jacob as a grandson.
Each of them We made righteous. And We made them chiefs who guide by Our
command, and We inspired in them the doing of good deeds and the right establishment
of worship and the giving of alms and they were worshippers of Us (alone). And to Lot
We gave judgment and knowledge, and We delivered him from the community that did
abominations. Lo! They were folk of evil, lewd. And We brought him in to Our mercy.
Lo! He was of the righteous.
21:76-77 And Noah, when he cried of old, We heard his prayer and saved him and his
household from the great affliction. And delivered him from the people who denied Our
revelations. Lo! They were folk of evil, therefore We drowned them all.
21:78-82 And David and Solomon, when they gave judgment concerning the field, when
people's sheep had strayed and browsed therein by night; and We were witnesses to their
judgment. And We made Solomon understand (the case); and to each of them We gave
judgment and knowledge. And We subdued the hills and the birds to hymn (His) praise
along with David. We were the doers (thereof). And We taught him the art of making
garments (of mail) to protect you in your daring. Are you then thankful? And to Solomon
(We subdued) the wind in it's raging. It set by His command toward the land, which We
had blessed. And of everything We are aware. And of the evil ones (subdued We to him)
some who dived (for pearls) for him and did other work, and We were warders to them.
21:83-84 And Job, when he cried to his Lord (saying): Lo! Adversity afflicts me, and You
are Most Merciful of all who show mercy. Then We heard his prayer and removed that
adversity from which he suffered, and We gave him his household (that he had lost) and
the like thereof along with them, a mercy from Our store, and a remembrance for the
worshippers;
21:85-86 And (mention) Ishmael, and Idris, and Dhul-Kifl. All were of the patient. And
We brought them in to Our mercy. Lo! They are among the righteous.
21:87-88 And (mention) Dhun-Nun, when he went off in anger and deemed that We had
no power over him, but he cried out in the darkness, saying: None should be worshipped
but God alone. Be You glorified! I have been a wrongdoer. Then We heard his prayer and
saved him from the anguish. Thus We save believers.
21:89-90 And Zachariah, when he cried to his Lord: My Lord! Leave me not childless,
though You are the best of inheritors. Then We heard his prayer, and bestowed upon him
John, and adjusted his wife (to bear a child) for him. Lo! They used to vie one with the
other in good deeds, and they cried to Us in longing and in fear, and were submissive to
Us.

136

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

21:91 And she who was chaste, therefore We breathed into her (something) of Our spirit
and made her and her son a sign for (all) peoples.
21:92-94 Lo! This, your religion, is one religion, and I am your Lord, so worship Me. And
they have broken their religion (into fragments) among them, (yet) all are returning to Us.
Then whoever does good works and is a believer, there will be no rejection of his effort.
Lo! We record (it) for him.
21:95-97 And there is a ban upon any community which We have destroyed: that they
shall not return, until, when Gog and Magog are let loose, and they hasten out of every
mound. And the true promise draws near; then behold them, staring wide (in terror), the
eyes of those who disbelieve! (They say:) Alas for us! We (lived) in forgetfulness of this.
Ah, but we were wrongdoers!
21:98-100 Lo! You (idolaters) and that which you worship beside God are the fuel of Hell.
Thereto you will come. If these had been gods they would not have come there, but all
will abide therein. Therein wailing is their portion, and therein they hear not.
21:101-103 Lo! Those to whom kindness has gone forth before from Us, they will be far
removed from there.. They will not hear the slightest sound thereof, while they abide in
that which their souls desire. The Supreme Horror will not grieve them, and the angels
will welcome them (saying:) This is your day, which you were promised;
21:104-106 The day when We shall roll up the heavens as a recorder rolls up a written
scroll. As We began the first creation, We shall repeat it. (It is) a promise (binding) upon
Us. Lo! We are to perform it. And verily We have written in the Scripture, after the
Reminder: My righteous slaves will inherit the earth. Lo! There is a plain statement for
folk who are devout in worship.
21:107 We sent you not except as a mercy for the peoples.
21:108-112 Say: It is only inspired in me that your God is One God. Will you then
surrender (to Him)! But if they are averse, then say: I have warned you all alike, although I
know not whether near or far is that which you are promised. Lo! He knows that which is
said openly, and that which you conceal. And I know not but that this may be a trial for
you, and enjoyment for a while. He says: My Lord! Judge You with truth. Our Lord is the
Beneficent, Whose help is to be implored against that which you ascribe (to Him).

22. Al-Hajj: The Pilgrimage
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.
22:1-2 O people! Fear your Lord. Lo! The earthquake of the Hour (of Judgment) is a
tremendous thing. On the Day when you behold it, every nursing mother will forget her
nursling and every pregnant one will be delivered of her burden, and you (O Muhammad)
will see people as drunken, yet they will not be drunken, but the punishment of God will
be strong (upon them).
22:3-4 Among people is he who disputes concerning God without knowledge, and follows
each forward devil; for him it is decreed that whoever takes him for a friend, will verily be
misled by him and he will guide him to the punishment of the Flame.
22:5-7 O people! If you are in doubt concerning the Resurrection, then lo! We have
created you from dust, then from a drop of seed, then from a clot, then from a little lump
of flesh shapely and shapeless, that We may make (it) clear for you. And We cause what
We will to remain in the wombs for an appointed time, and afterward We bring you forth

137

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

as infants, then (give you growth) that you attain your full strength. And among you there
is he who dies (young), and among you there is he who is brought back to the most abject
time of life, so that, after knowledge, he knows nothing. And you (O Muhammad) see the
earth barren, but when We send down water thereon, it does thrill and swell and put forth
every lovely kind (of growth). That is because God, He is the Truth. Lo! He quickens the
dead, and lo! He is Able to do all things; and because the Hour will come, there is no
doubt thereof; and because God will raise those who are in the graves.
22:8-10 And among people is he who disputes concerning God without knowledge or
guidance or a Scripture giving light. Turning away in pride to deceive (men) from the way
of God. For him in this world is humiliation, and on the Day of Resurrection We make
him taste the punishment of burning. (And to him it will be said:) This is for that which
your two hands have sent before, and because God is no oppressor of His slaves.
22:11-13 And among people is he who worships God upon a narrow margin so that if
good befalls him he is content with it, but if a trial befalls him, he falls away utterly. He
loses both the world and the Hereafter. That is the sheer loss. He calls, beside God, to
that which neither hurts him nor benefits him. That is the far error. He calls to him whose
harm is nearer than his benefit; verily an evil patron and verily an evil friend!
22:14 Lo! God causes those who believe and do good works to enter the Gardens
underneath which rivers flow. Lo! God does what He intends.
22:15-16 Whoever is wont to think (through envy) that God will not give him
(Muhammad) victory in the world and the Hereafter (and is enraged at the thought of his
victory), let him stretch a rope up to the roof (of his dwelling), and let him hang himself.
Then let him see whether his strategy dispels that at which he rages! Thus We reveal it as
plain revelations, and verily God guides whom He wills.
22:17 Lo! Those who believe (this Revelation), and those who are Jews, and the Sabaeans
and the Christians and the Magians and the idolaters – Lo! God will decide between them
on the Day of Resurrection. Lo! God is Witness over all things.
22:18 Have you not seen that to God pays adoration whoever is in the heavens and
whoever is in the earth, and the sun, and the moon, and the stars, and the hills, and the
trees, and the beasts, and many of people, while there are many to whom the punishment
is justly due. He whom God scorns, there is none to give him honor. Lo! God does what
He wills.
22:19-22 These twain (the believers and the disbelievers) are two opponents who contend
concerning their Lord. But as for those who disbelieve, garments of fire will be cut out for
them; boiling fluid will be poured down on their heads. Whereby that which is in their
bellies, and their skins too, will be melted; and for them are
hooked rods of iron. Whenever, in their anguish, they would go forward from there they
are driven back to it and (it is said to them): Taste the punishment of burning.
22:23-24 Lo! God will cause those who believe and do good works to enter Gardens
underneath which rivers flow, wherein they will be allowed armlets of gold, and pearls,
and their raiment therein will be silk. They are guided to gentle speech; they are guided to
the path of the Glorious One.
22:25 Lo! Those who disbelieve and bar (people) from the way of God and from the
Inviolable Place of Worship, which We have appointed for people together, the dweller
therein and the nomad; who ever inclines to evil actions, We shall cause him to taste a
painful punishment.
22:26-33 And (remember) when We prepared for Abraham the place of the (Holy) House,

138

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

saying: Ascribe you no thing as partner to Me, and purify My House for those who make
the round (thereof) and those who stand and those who bow and make prostration. And
proclaim to people the pilgrimage. They will come to you on foot and on every lean camel;
they will come from every deep ravine. That they may witness things that are of benefit to
them, and mention the name of God on appointed days over the beast of cattle that He
has bestowed upon them. Then eat thereof and feed with it the poor unfortunate. Then let
them make an end of their unkemptness and pay their vows and go around the Ancient
House. That (is the command). And whoever magnifies the sacred things of God, it will
be well for him in the sight of his Lord. The cattle are lawful to you except that which has
been told to you. So shun the filth of idols, and shun lying speech. Turning to God (only),
not ascribing partners to Him; for whoever ascribes partners to God, it is as if he had
fallen from the sky and the birds had snatched him or the wind had blown him to a far off
place. That (is the command). And whoever magnifies the offerings consecrated to God, it
surely is from piety of the heart. Therein are benefits for you for an appointed term; and
afterward they are brought for sacrifice to the Ancient House.
22:34-35 And for every nation We have appointed a ritual, that they may mention the
name of God over the beast of cattle that He has given them for food; and your God is
One God, therefore surrender to Him. And give good tidings (O Muhammad) to the
humble. Whose hearts fear when God is mentioned, and the patient of whatever may
befall them, and those who establish worship and who spend of that which We have
bestowed on them.
22:36-38 And the camels! We have appointed them among the ceremonies of God.
Therein you have much good. So mention the name of God over them when they are
drawn up in lines. Then when their flanks fall (dead), eat thereof and feed the beggar and
the suppliant. Thus have We made them subject to you, that perhaps you may give thanks.
Their flesh and their blood reach not God, but your piety reaches Him. Thus have We
made them subject to you that you may magnify God that He has guided you. And give
good tidings (O Muhammad) to the good. Lo! God defends those who are true. Lo! God
loves not each treacherous ingrate.
22:39-41 Sanction is given to those who fight because they have been wronged; and God
is indeed Able to give them victory; those who have been driven from their homes
unjustly only because they said: Our Lord is God – For had it not been for God's
repelling some men by means of others, cloisters and churches and oratories and
mosques, wherein the name of God is oft mentioned, would assuredly have been pulled
down. Verily God helps one who helps Him. Lo! God is Strong, Almighty. Those who, if
We give them power in the land, establish worship and pay the poor-due and enjoin what
is right and forbid what is wrong. And God's is the sequel of events.
22:42-44 If they deny you (Muhammad), even so the folk of Noah, and (the tribes of) Aad
and Thamud, before you, denied (Our Messengers); and the folk of Abraham and the folk
of Lot; (and) the dwellers in Midian. And Moses was denied; but I indulged the
disbelievers a long while, then I seized them, and how (terrible) was My abhorrence!
22:45-47 How many a township have We destroyed while it was sinful, so that it lies (to
this day) in ruins, and (how many) a deserted well and lofty tower! Have they not traveled
in the land, and have they hearts with which to feel and ears with which to hear? For
indeed it is not the eyes that grow blind, but it is the hearts, which are within the bosoms,
that grow blind. And they will bid to you hasten on the punishment, and God fails not His
promise, but lo! A Day with God is as a thousand years of what you reckon.
22:48 And how many a township did I suffer long though it was sinful! Then I grasped it.
To Me is the return.
22:49-51 Say: O people! I am only a plain warner to you. Those who believe and do good
works, for them is pardon and a rich provision; while those who strive to thwart Our

139

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

revelations, such are rightful inhabitants of the Fire.
22:52 Never sent We a Messenger or a Prophet before you but when He recited (the
message) Satan proposed (opposition) in respect of that which he recited thereof. But
God abolishes that which Satan proposes. Then God establishes His revelations. God is
Knower, Wise.
22:53-54 That He may make that which Satan proposes a temptation for those in whose
hearts is a disease, and those whose hearts are hardened – Lo! The evildoers are in open
schism – and those that have been given knowledge may know that it is the truth from
your Lord, so that they may believe therein, and their hearts may submit humbly to Him.
Lo! God verily is guiding those who believe to a right path.
22:55-57 And those who disbelieve will not cease to be in doubt thereof until the Hour
comes upon them unawares, or there comes to them the punishment of a disastrous day.
The supreme power on that Day will be God's. He will judge between them. Then those
who believed and did good works will be in Gardens of Delight, while those who
disbelieved and denied Our revelations, for them will be a shameful punishment.
22:58 Those who migrated for the cause of God and then were slain or died, verily God
will provide for them a good provision. Lo! God, verily He is Best of all who make
provision.
22:59 Assuredly He will cause them to enter by an entry that they will love. Lo! God verily
is the Knower, the Forbearing.
22:60 That (is so). And whoever has retaliated with the like of that which he was made to
suffer and then has (again) been wronged, God will succor him. Lo! God verily is, Mild,
Forgiving.
22:61 That is because God makes the night, pass into the day, and makes the day pass into
the night, and because God is Hearer, Seer.
22:62 That is because God, is the True, and that whereon they call instead of Him, it is the
False, and because God, He is the High, the Great.
22:63 See you not how God sends down water from the sky and then the earth becomes
green upon the morrow? Lo! God is Subtle, Aware.
22:64 To Him belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth. Lo! God, verily
He is the Absolute, the Owner of praise.
22:65 Have you not seen how God has made all that is in the earth subservient to you?
And the ship runs upon the sea by His command, and He holds back the heaven from
falling on the earth unless by His leave. Lo! God is, for people, full of pity, Merciful.
22:66 And it is He, Who gave you life, then He will cause you to die, and then will give
you life (again). Lo! Man is verily an ingrate.
22:67-70 To each nation have We given sacred rites which they are to perform; so let them
not dispute with you of the matter, but summon you to your Lord. Lo! You indeed follow
right guidance. And if they wrangle with you, say: God is Best Aware of what you do. God
will judge between you on the Day of Resurrection concerning that wherein you used to
differ. Have you not known that God knows all that is in the heaven and the earth? Lo! It
is in a record. Lo! That is easy for God.
22:71-72 And they worship instead of God that for which no warrant has been revealed to
them, and that whereof they have no knowledge. For evildoers there is no helper. And

140

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

when Our revelations are recited to them, you know the denial in the faces of those who
disbelieve; they all but attack those who recite Our revelations to them. Say: Shall I
proclaim to you worse than that? The Fire! God has promised it for those who disbelieve.
An evil journey's end!
22:73-74 O people! A similitude is coined, so pay you heed to it: Lo! Those on whom you
call beside God will never create a fly though they combine together for the purpose. And
if the fly took something from them, they could not rescue it. So weak are (both) the
seeker and the sought! They measure not God His rightful measure. Lo! God is Strong,
Almighty.
22:75 God chooses from the angels Messengers, and (also) from humankind. Lo! God is
Hearer, Seer.
22:76 He knows all that is before them and all that is behind them, and to God all things
are returned.
22:77-78 O you who believe! Bow down and prostrate yourselves, and worship your Lord,
and do good, that perhaps you may prosper. And fight hard for God with the endeavor,
which is His right. He has chosen you and has not laid upon you in religion any hardship
the faith of your father Abraham (is yours). He has named you Muslims of old time and in
this (Scripture), that the Messenger may be a witness against you, and that you may be
witnesses against people. So establish worship, pay the poor-due, and hold fast to God.
He is your Guardian (and Protector). A blessed Patron and a blessed Helper!

23. Al-Mu'minun: The Believers
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
23:1-11 Successful indeed are the believers who are humble in their prayers, and who shun
vain conversation, and who pay the poor-due; and who guard their modesty – except
from their wives or the (slaves) that their right hands possess, for then they are not
blameworthy, but whoever craves beyond that, such are transgressors. And those that are
caretakers of their pledge and their covenant, and who pay heed to their prayers. They are
the heirs who will inherit Paradise: There they will abide.
23:12-14 Verily We created man from a product of wet earth; then placed him as a drop
(of seed) in a safe lodging; then fashioned We the drop into a clot, then fashioned We the
clot into a little lump, then fashioned We the little lump into bones, then clothed We the
bones with flesh, and then produced it as another creation. So blessed be God, the Best of
Creators!
23:15-16 Then lo! After that you surely die. Then lo! On the Day of Resurrection you are
raised (again).
23:17-22 And We have created above you seven paths, and We are never unmindful of
creation. And We send down from the sky water in measure, and We give it lodging in the
earth, and lo! We are able to withdraw it. Then We produce for you therewith gardens of
date palms and grapes, wherein is much fruit for you and whereof you eat; and a tree that
springs forth from Mount Sinai that grows oil and relish for the eaters. And lo! In the
cattle there is verily a lesson for you. We give you to drink of that, which is in their bellies,
and many uses have you in them, and of them do you eat; and on them and on the ship
you are carried.
23:23-30 And We verily sent Noah to his folk, and he said: O my people! Worship God.
You have no other God except Him. Will you not fear (Him)? But the chieftains of his

141

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

folk, who disbelieved, said: This is only a mortal like you who would make himself
superior to you. Had God willed, He surely could have sent down angels. We heard not of
this in the case of our fathers of old. He is only a man in whom is madness, so watch him
for a while. He said: My Lord! Help me because they deny me. Then We inspired in him,
saying: Make the ship under Our eyes and Our inspiration. Then, when Our command
comes and the oven gushes water, introduce therein of every (kind) two spouses, and your
household except him thereof against whom the Word has already gone forth. And plead
not with Me on behalf of those who have done wrong: Lo! They will be drowned. And
when you are on board the ship, you and whoever is with you, then say: Praise be to God
Who has saved us from the wrongdoing folk! And say: My Lord! Cause me to land at a
blessed landing place, for You are Best of all who bring to land. Lo! Herein verily are
signs, for lo! We are ever putting (people) to the test.
23:31-41 Then, after them, We brought forth another generation; and We sent among
them a Messenger of their own saying: Worship God. You have no other God except
Him. Will you not warn off (evil)? And the chieftains of his folk, who disbelieved and
denied the meeting of the Hereafter, and whom We had made soft in the life of the world,
said: This is only a mortal like you, who eats of that whereof you eat and drinks of that
you drink. If you were to obey a mortal like yourselves, you surely would be losers. Does
he promise you that you, when you are dead and have become dust and bones, will (again)
be brought forth? Begone, begone, with that which you are promised! There is nothing
but our life of the world; we die and we live, and we shall not be raised (again). He is only
a man who has invented a lie about God. We are not going to put faith in him. He said:
My Lord! Help me because they deny me, he said: In a little while they surely will become
repentant. So the (Awful) Cry overtook them rightfully, and We made them like as
wreckage (that a torrent hurls). A far removal for wrongdoing folk!
23:42-43 Then after them We brought forth other generations. No nation can outstrip its
term, nor yet postpone it.
23:44 Then We sent our messengers one after another. Whenever its messenger came to a
nation they denied him; so We caused them to follow one another (to disaster) and We
made them bywords. A far removal for folk who believe not!
23:45-49 Then We sent Moses and his brother Aaron with Our signs and a clear warrant
to Pharaoh and his chiefs, but they treated them arrogantly and they were despotic folk.
And they said: Shall we put faith in two mortals like ourselves, and whose folk are servile
to us? So they denied them, and became of those who were destroyed. And we verily gave
Moses the Scripture that perhaps they might go aright.
23:50 And We made the son of Mary and his mother a sign, and We gave them refuge on
a height, a place of flocks and water springs.
23:51 O you messengers! Eat of the good thing, and do right. Lo! I am Aware of what you
do.
23:52-54 And lo! This, your religion is one religion and I am your Lord, so keep your duty
to Me. But they (people) have broken their religion among them into sects, each sect
rejoicing in its tenets. So leave them in their error till a time.
23:55-56 Think they that in the wealth and sons that We provide them with We hasten to
them with good things? Nay, but they perceive not.
23:57-61 Lo! Those who go in awe for fear of their Lord, and those who believe in the
revelations of their Lord, and those who ascribe not partners to their Lord, and those who
give that which they give with hearts afraid because they are about to return to their Lord,
these race for the good things, and they shall win them in the race.

142

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

23:62-65 And We task not any soul beyond its scope, and with Us is a Record which
speaks the truth, and they will not be wronged. Nay, but their hearts are in ignorance of
this (Quran), and they have other works, besides, which they are doing; till when We grasp
their luxurious ones with the punishment, behold! They supplicate. Supplicate not this
day! Assuredly you will not be helped by Us.
23:66-71 My revelations were recited to you, but you used to turn back on your heels, in
arrogance thereof. Nightly you did rave together. Have they not pondered the Word, or
has that come to them which came not to their fathers of old? Or know they not their
Messenger, and so reject him?
23:70-71 Or say they: There is a madness in him? Nay, but he brings them the Truth; and
most of them are haters of the Truth. And if the Truth had followed their desires, verily
the heavens and the earth and whoever is therein would have been corrupted. Nay, We
have brought them their Reminder, but from their Reminder they now turn away.
23:72 Or do you ask of them (O Muhammad) any tribute? But! The bounty of your Lord
is better, for He is Best of all who make provision.
23:73-77 And lo! You summon them indeed to a right path. And lo! Those who believe
not in the Hereafter are indeed astray from the path. Though We had mercy on them and
relieved them of the harm afflicting them, they still would wander blindly on in their
contumacy. Already We have grasped them with punishment, but they humble not
themselves to their Lord, nor do they pray, until, when We open for them the gate of
extreme punishment, behold! They are aghast thereat.
23:78-80 It is He, Who has created for you ears and eyes and hearts. Small thanks give
you! And it is He that has sown you broadcast in the earth, and to Him you will be
gathered. And it is He, that gives life and causes death, and His is the difference of night
and day. Have you then no sense?
23:81-83 Nay, but they say the like of that which was said by the men of old; they say:
When we are dead and have become mere dust and bones, shall we then, forsooth, be
raised again? We were already promised this, we and our forefathers. Lo! This is nothing
but fables of the men of old.
23:84-90 Say: To whom (belongs) the earth and whoever is therein, if you have
knowledge? They will say: To God. Say: Will you not then remember? Say: Who is Lord of
the seven heavens, and Lord of the Tremendous Throne? They will say: To God (all that
belongs). Say: Will you not then keep duty (to Him)? Say: In whose hand is the dominion
over all things and He protects, while against Him there is no protection, if you have
knowledge? They will say: To God (all that belongs). Say: How then are you bewitched?
Nay, but We have brought them the Truth, and lo! They are liars.
23:91-92 God has not chosen any son, nor is there any god along with Him; else would
each god have assuredly championed that which he created, and some of them would
assuredly have overcome others. Glorified be God above all that they allege. Knower of
the invisible and the visible! And exalted be He over all that they ascribe as partners (to
Him)!
23:93-94 Say: My Lord! If you should show me that which they are promised, my Lord!
Then set me not among the wrongdoing folk.
23:95-96 And verily We are Able to show you that which We have promised them. Repel
evil with that which is better. We are Best Aware of that which they allege.
23:97-100 And say: My Lord! I seek refuge in You from suggestions of the evil ones, and I
seek refuge in You, my Lord, lest they be present with me, until, when death comes to one

143

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

of them, he says: My Lord! Send me back, that I may do right in that which I have left
behind! But nay! It is but a word that he speaks; and behind them is a barrier until the day
when they are raised.
23:101-108 And when the trumpet is blown there will be no kinship among them that day,
nor will they ask of one another. Then those whose scales are heavy, they are the
successful. And those whose scales are light are those who lose their souls, in Hell abiding.
The fire burns their faces, and they are glum therein. (It will be said): Were not My
revelations recited to you, and then you used to deny them? They will say: Our Lord! Our
evil fortune conquered us, and we were erring folk. Our Lord! Oh, bring us forth from
hence! If we return (to evil) then indeed we shall be wrongdoers. He says: Begone therein,
and speak not to Me.
23:109-111 Lo! There was a party of My slaves who said: Our Lord! We believe, therefore
forgive us and have mercy on us for You are Best of all who show mercy; but you chose
them from a laughing stock until they caused you to forget remembrance of Me, while you
laughed at them. Lo! I have rewarded them this day forasmuch as they were patient; and
they verily are the triumphant.
23:112-114 He will say: How long tarried you in the earth, counting by years? They will
say: We tarried but a day or part of a day. Ask of those who keep count! He will say: You
tarried but a little if you only knew.
23:115-116 Deemed you then that We had created you for nothing, and that you would
not be returned to Us? Now God be exalted, the True King! None should be worshipped
but God alone, the Lord of the Throne of Grace.
23:117 He who cries to any other god along with God has no proof thereof. His
reckoning is only with his Lord. Lo! Disbelievers will not be successful.
23:118 And (O Muhammad) say: My Lord! Forgive and have mercy, for You are Best of
all who show mercy.

24. An-Nur: Light
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
24:1 (Here is) a Surah (chapter) which We have revealed and enjoined , and wherein We
have revealed plain signs , that perhaps you may take heed.
24:2-3 The adulterer and the adulteress, scourge you each one of them (with) a hundred
stripes. And let not pity for the twain withhold you from obedience to God, if you believe
in God and the Last Day. And let a party of believers witness their punishment. The
adulterer shall not marry except an adulteress or a female polytheist, and the adulteress
none shall marry except an adulterer or a polytheist. All that is forbidden to believers.
24:4-5 And those who accuse honorable women but do not bring four witnesses scourge
them (with) eighty stripes and never (afterward) accept their testimony – They are indeed
evildoers – except those who afterward repent and make amends. (For such) lo! God is
Forgiving, Merciful.
24:6-10 As for those who accuse their wives but have no witnesses except themselves; let
the testimony of one of them be four testimonies, (swearing) by God that he is of those
who speak the truth; and yet a fifth, invoking the curse of God on him if he is of those
who lie. And it shall avert the punishment from her if she bear witness before God four
times that the thing he says is indeed false, and a fifth (time) that the wrath of God be

144

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

upon her if he speaks truth. And had it not been for the grace of God and His mercy to
you, and that God is Forbearing, Wise, (you would have been undone).
24:11 Lo! They who spread the slander are a gang among you. Deem it not a bad thing for
you; say, it is good for you. To every man will be paid that which he has earned of the sin;
and as for him among them who had the greater share therein, his will be an awful
punishment.
24:12-18 Why did not the believers, men and women, when you heard it, think good of
their own folk; and say: It is a manifest untruth? Why did they not produce four
witnesses? Since they produce not witnesses, they verily are liars in the sight of God. Had
it not been for the grace of God and His mercy to you in the world and the Hereafter an
awful punishment had overtaken you for that whereof you murmured. When you
welcomed it with your tongues, and uttered with your mouths that whereof you had no
knowledge, you counted it a trifle. In the sight of God it is very great. Wherefore, when
you heard it, said you not: It is not for us to speak of this. Glory be to You (O God); this
is awful calumny. God admonishes you that you repeat not the like thereof ever, if you are
(in truth) believers. And He expounds to you His revelations. God is Knower, Wise.
24:19-20 Lo! Those who love that slander should be spread concerning those who believe,
theirs will be a painful punishment in the world and the Hereafter. God knows. You know
not. Had it not been for the grace of God and His mercy to you, and that God is
Forbearing and Merciful, (you would have been undone).
24:21 O you who believe! Follow not the footsteps of Satan. Whoever follows the
footsteps of Satan, lo! He commands filthiness and wrong. Had it not been for the grace
of God and His mercy to you, not one of you would ever have become purified. But God
causes whom He wills to become purified of his sin. And God is Hearer, Knower.
24:22 And let not those who possess dignity and ease among you swear not to give to the
near of kin and to the needy, and to fugitives for the cause of God. Let them forgive and
show indulgence. Yearn you not that God may forgive you? God is Forgiving, Merciful.
24:23-25 Lo! As for those who traduce virtuous, believing women (who are) careless,
cursed are they in the world and the Hereafter. Theirs will be an awful punishment on the
Day when their tongues and their hands and their feet testify against them as to what they
used to do, on that Day God will pay them their just due, and they will know that God,
He is the Manifest Truth.
24:26 Vile women are for vile men, and vile men for vile women. Good women are for
good men, and good men for good women; such are innocent of that which people say:
For them is pardon and a bountiful provision.
24:27-29 O you who believe! Enter not houses other than your own without first
announcing your presence and invoking peace upon the folk thereof. That is better for
you, that you may be heedful. And if you find no one therein, still enter not until
permission has been given. And if it is said to you: Go away again, then go away, for it is
purer for you. God knows what you do. (It is) no sin on you to enter uninhabited houses
wherein is comfort for you God knows what you proclaim and what you hide.
24:30 Tell the believing men to lower their gaze and be modest. That is purer for them.
Lo! God is Aware of what they do.
24:31 And tell the believing women to lower their gaze and be modest, and to display of
their adornment only that which is apparent, and to draw their veils over their bosoms,
and not to reveal their adornment except to their own husbands or fathers or husbands'
fathers, or their sons or their husbands' sons, or their brothers or their brothers' sons or
sisters' sons, or their women, or their slaves, or male attendants who lack vigor, or

145

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

children who know nothing of women's nakedness. And let them not stamp their feet so
as to reveal what they hide of their adornment. And turn to God together, O believers, in
order that you may succeed.
24:32 And marry such of you as are solitary and the pious of your slaves and maidservants.
If they are poor; God will enrich them of His bounty. God is of ample means, Aware.
24:33 And let those who cannot find a match keep chaste till God give them
independence by His grace. And such of your slaves as seek a writing (of emancipation),
write it for them if you are aware of anything of good in them, and bestow upon them of
the wealth of God which He has bestowed upon you. Force not your slave girls to
whoredom that you may seek enjoyment of the life of the world, if they would preserve
their chastity. And if one forces them, then (to them) after their compulsion, Lo! God will
be Forgiving, Merciful.
24:34 And verily We have sent down for you revelations that make plain, and the example
of those who passed away before you. An admonition to those who are pious.
24:35 God is the Light of the heavens and the earth. The similitude of His light is as a
niche wherein is a lamp. The lamp is in a glass. The glass is as it were a shining star. (This
lamp is) kindled from a blessed tree, an olive neither of the east nor of the west, whose oil
would almost glow forth (of itself) though no fire touched it. Light upon light, God guides
to His light whom He wills. And God speaks to people in allegories, for God is Knower
of all things.
24:36-38 (This lamp is found) in houses, which God has allowed to be exalted and that
His name shall be remembered therein. Therein do offer praise to Him at morn and
evening. Men whom neither merchandise nor sale deceives from remembrance of God
and constancy in prayer and paying to the poor their due; who fear a day when hearts and
eyeballs will be overturned; that God may reward them with the best of what they did, and
increase reward for them of His bounty. God gives blessings without limit to whom He
wills.
24:39 As for those who disbelieve, their deeds are as a mirage in a desert. The thirsty one
supposes it to be water till he comes to it and finds it is nothing, and finds in the place
thereof, God, Who pays him his due; and God is Swift at reckoning.
24:40 Or as darkness on a vast, abysmal sea. There covers him a wave, above which is a
wave, above which is a cloud. Layer upon layer of darkness. When he holds out his hand
he scarce can see it. And he, for whom God has not appointed light, for him there is no
light.
24:41 Have you not seen that God, it is He that all who are in the heavens and the earth
praise; and the birds in their flight? Of each He knows verily the worship and the praise;
and God is Aware of what they do.
24:42 And to God belongs the supreme power of the heavens and the earth, and to God
is the journeying. 24:43-44 Have you not seen how God wafts the clouds, then gathers
them, then makes them layers, and you see the rain comes forth from between them; He
sends down from the heaven mountains wherein is hail, and smites with it whoever He
wills, and averts it from whoever He wills. The flashing of His lightning all but snatches
away the sight. God causes the revolution of the day and the night. Lo! Herein is indeed a
lesson for those who see.
24:45 God has created every animal from water. Of them is (a kind) that goes upon its
belly and (a kind) that goes upon two legs and (a kind) that goes upon four. God creates
what He wills. Lo! God is Able to do all things.

146

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

24:46 Verily We have sent down revelations and explained them. God guides whom He
wills to a straight path.
24:47-50 And they say: We believe in God and the Messenger, and we obey; then after
that a faction of them turns away. Such are not believers. And when they appeal to God
and His Messenger to judge between them, lo! A faction of them is averse; but if right had
been with them they would have come to him willingly. Is there in their hearts a disease,
or have they doubts, or fear they lest God and His Messenger should wrong them in
judgment? Nay, but such are evildoers.
24:51 The saying of (all true) believers when they appeal to God and His Messenger to
judge between them is only that they say: We hear and we obey. And such are the
successful.
24:52 He who obeys God and His Messenger, and fears God, and keeps duty (to Him):
such indeed are the victorious.
24:53 They swear by God solemnly that, if you order them, they will go forth. Say: Swear
not, known obedience (is better). Lo! God is informed of what you do.
24:54 Say: Obey God and obey the Messenger. But if you turn away, then (it is) for him
(to do) only that with what he has been charged, and for you (to do) only that with what
you have been charged. If you obey him, you will go aright. But the messenger has no
other charge than to convey (the message), plainly.
24:55 God has promised such of you as believe and do good works that He will surely
make them to succeed (the present rulers) in the earth even as He caused those who were
before them to succeed others); and that He will surely establish for them their religion
which He has approved for them, and will give them in exchange, safety after their fear.
They worship Me. They ascribe no thing as partner to Me. Those who disbelieve
henceforth, they are the miscreants.
24:56 Establish worship and pay the poor-due and obey the Messenger, that perhaps you
may find mercy.
24:57 Think not that the disbelievers can escape in the land. Fire will be their home, an
evil journey's end!
24:58 O you who believe! Let your slaves, and those of you who have not come to
puberty, ask leave of you at three times (before they come into your presence): Before the
prayer of dawn, and when you lay aside your raiment for the heat of noon, and after the
prayer of night. Three times of privacy for you. It is no sin for them or for you at other
times, when some of you go round attendant upon others (if they come into your
presence without leave). Thus God makes clear the revelations for you. God is Knower,
Wise.
24:59 And when the children among you come to puberty then let them ask leave even as
those before them used to ask it. Thus God makes clear His revelations for you. God is
Knower, Wise.
24:60 As for women past child bearing, who have no hope of marriage, it is no sin for
them if they discard their (outer) clothing in such a way as not to show adornment. But to
refrain is better for them. God is Hearer, Knower.
24:61 No blame is there upon the blind nor any blame upon the lame nor any blame upon
the sick nor on yourselves if you eat from your houses, or the houses of your fathers, or
the houses of your mothers, or the houses of your brothers, or the houses of your sisters,
or the houses of your fathers' brothers, or the houses of your fathers' sisters, or the houses

147

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

of your mothers' brothers, or the houses of your mothers' sisters, or (from that) whereof
you hold the keys, or (from the house) of a friend. No sin shall it be for you whether you
eat together or apart. But when you enter houses, salute one another with a greeting from
God, blessed and sweet. Thus God makes clear His revelations for you, that perhaps you
may understand.
24:62 They only are the true believers who believe in God and His Messenger and, when
they are with him on some common errand, go not away until they have asked leave of
him. Lo! Those who ask leave of you, are those who believe in God and His Messenger.
So, if they ask your leave for some affair of theirs, give leave to whom you will of them,
and ask for them forgiveness of God. Lo! God is Forgiving, Merciful.
24:63 Make not the calling of the messenger among you as your calling one of another.
God knows those of you who steal away, hiding themselves. And let those who conspire
to evade orders beware, lest grief or painful punishment befall them.
24:64 Lo! Verily to God belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth. He knows your
condition, and (He knows) the Day when they are returned to Him so that He may inform
them of what they did. God is Knower of all things.

25. Al-Furqan: The Criterion
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
25:1 Blessed is He Who has revealed to His slave the Criterion (of right and wrong), that
he may be a warner to the peoples.
25:2 He to Whom belongs the supreme power of the heavens and the earth. He has
chosen no son nor has He any partner in the supreme power. He has created everything
and has meted out for it a measure.
25:3 Yet they choose beside Him other gods who create nothing but are themselves
created, and possess not hurt nor profit for themselves, and possess not death nor life, nor
power to raise the dead.
25:4-6 Those who disbelieve say: This is nothing but a lie that he has invented, and other
folk have helped him with it, so that they have produced a slander and a lie. And they say:
Fables of the men of old which he has had written down so that they are dictated to him
morn and evening. Say (to them O Muhammad): He Who knows the secret of the heavens
and the earth has revealed it. Lo! He ever is Forgiving, Merciful.
25:7-9 And they say: What ails this Messenger (of God) that he eats food and walks in the
markets? Why is not an angel sent down to him, to be a warner with him? Or why is a
treasure not thrown down to him, or why has he not a Paradise to eat from? And the
evildoers say: You are but following a man bewitched. See how they coin similitude for
you, so that they are all- astray and cannot find a road!
25:10 Blessed is He Who, if He wills, will assign you better than (all) that – Gardens
underneath which rivers flow – and will assign you mansions.
25:11-14 Nay, but they deny (the coming of) the Hour, and for those who deny (the
coming of) the Hour We have prepared a flame. When it sees them from afar, they hear
the cracking and the roar thereof. And when they are flung into a narrow place thereof,
chained together, they pray for destruction there. Pray not that Day for one destruction,
but pray for much destruction.

148

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

25:15-16 Say: Is that (punishment) better or the Garden of Immortality which is promised
to those who are pious? It will be their reward and journey's end. Therein abiding, they
shall have all that they desire. It is for your Lord a promise that must be fulfilled.
25:17-19 And on the Day when He will assemble them and that which they worship
instead of God and will say: Was it you who misled these slaves of Mine, or did they
(themselves) wander from the way? They will say: Be You glorified! It was not for us to
choose any helpers (and protectors) beside You; but You did give them and their fathers
ease till they forgot the warning and became lost folk. Thus they will give you the lie
regarding what you say, and then you can neither avert (the punishment) nor obtain help.
And whoever among you does wrong, We shall make him taste great torment.
25:20 We never sent before you any messengers but lo! They ate food and walked in the
markets. And We have appointed some of you a test for others: Will you be patient? And
your Lord is ever Seer.
25:21-23 And those who look not for a meeting with Us say: Why are angels not sent
down to us and (why) do we not see our Lord? Assuredly they think too highly of
themselves and are scornful with great pride. On the Day when they behold the angels, on
that Day there will be no good tidings for the guilty; and they will cry: A forbidding ban!
And We shall turn to the work that they did and make it scattered motes.
25:24-26 Those who have earned the Garden on that Day will be better in their home and
happier in their place of noonday rest; a day when the heaven with the clouds will be rent
asunder and the angels will be sent down, a grand descent. The supreme power on that
Day will be the true (power) belonging to the Beneficent One, and it will be a hard day for
disbelievers.
25:27-29 On the Day when the wrongdoer gnaws his hands, he will say: Ah, would that I
had chosen a way together with the Messenger (of God)! Alas for me! Ah, would that I
had never taken such a one for a friend! He verily led me astray from the reminder after it
had reached me. Satan was ever man's deserter in the hour of need.
25:30-31 And the Messenger says: O my Lord! Lo! My own folk make this Quran of no
account. Even so have We appointed to every Prophet an opposition from among the
guilty; but God suffices for a Guide and Helper.
25:32-34 And those who disbelieve say: Why is the
Quran not revealed to him all at once? (It is revealed) thus, that We may strengthen your
heart therewith; and We have arranged it in right order. And they bring you no similitude
but We bring you the Truth (as against it), and better (than their similitude) as argument.
Those who will be gathered on their faces to Hell: such are worse in plight and further
from the right road.
25:35-37 We verily gave Moses the Scripture and placed with him his brother Aaron as a
henchman. Then We said: Go together to the folk who have denied Our revelations. Then
We destroyed them, a complete destruction. And Noah's folk, when they denied the
Messengers, We drowned them and made of them a sign for people We have prepared a
painful punishment for evildoers.
25:38-40 And (the tribes of) Aad and Thamud, and the dwellers in Ar-Rass, and many
generations in between. Each (of them) We warned by examples, and each (of them) We
brought to utter ruin. And indeed they have passed by the township whereon was rained
the fatal rain. Can it be that they have not seen it? Nay, but they hope for no resurrection.
25:41-42 And when they see you (O Muhammad) they treat you only as a jest (saying): Is
this he whom God sends as a Messenger? He would have led us far away from our gods if

149

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

we had not been staunch to them. They will know, when they behold the punishment,
who is more astray as to the road.
25:43-44 Have you seen him who chooses for his god his own lust? Would you then be
guardian over him? Or deem you that most of them hear or understand? They are but as
the cattle – nay, but they are farther astray!
25:45-50 Have you not seen how your Lord has spread the shade – And if He willed He
could have made it still – then We have made the sun its pilot; then We withdraw it to Us,
a gradual withdrawal? And it is He, Who makes night a covering for you, and sleep repose,
and makes day a resurrection. And it is He, Who sends the winds, glad tidings heralding
His mercy. And We send down purifying water from the sky. That We may give life
thereby to a dead land, and We give many beasts and men that which We have created to
drink thereof. And verily We have repeated it among them that they may remember, but
most of people begrudge anything except
ingratitude.
25:51-52 If We willed, We could raise up a warner in every village. So obey not the
disbelievers, but fight hard against them herewith with a great endeavor.
25:53-54 And it is He, Who has given independence to the two seas (though they meet);
one palatable, sweet, and the other salty, bitter; and has set a bar and a forbidding ban
between them. And it is He Who has created man from water, and has appointed for him
kindred by blood and kindred by marriage; for your Lord is ever Powerful.
25:55 Yet they worship instead of God that which can neither benefit them nor hurt them.
The disbeliever was ever a partisan against his Lord.
25:56-60 And We have sent you (O Muhammad) only as a bearer of good tidings and a
warner. Say: I ask of you no reward for this, except that whoever will may choose a way to
his Lord. And trust you in the Living One Who does not die, and hymn His praise. He
suffices as the Knower of His bondmen's sins. He Who created the heavens and the earth
and all that is between them in six Days, and then He mounted the Throne. The
Beneficent! Ask any one informed concerning Him! And when it is said to them: Adore
the Beneficent! They say: And what is the Beneficent? Are we to adore whatever you
(Muhammad) bid us? And it increases aversion in them.
25:61-62 Blessed be He Who has placed in the heaven mansions of the stars, and has
placed therein a great lamp and a moon giving light! And it is He, Who has appointed
night and day in succession, for him who desires to remember, or desires thankfulness.
25:63-70 The (faithful) slaves of the Beneficent are they who walk upon the earth
modestly, and when the foolish ones address them answer: Peace; and who spend the
night before their Lord, prostrate and standing; and who say: Our Lord! Avert from us the
punishment of Hell; lo! The punishment thereof is anguish; lo! It is wretched as an abode
and station; and those who, when they spend, are neither prodigal nor grudging; and there
is ever a firm station between the two; and those who cry not to any other god along with
God, nor take the life
which God has forbidden except in (the course of) justice, nor commit adultery – and
whoever does this shall pay the penalty; the punishment will be doubled for him on the
Day of Resurrection, and he will abide therein disdained forever; except him who repents
and believes and does righteous work; as for such, God will change their evil deeds to
good deeds. God is ever Forgiving, Merciful.
25:71-76 And whosoever repents and does good, he verily repents toward God with true
repentance. And those who will not witness vanity, but when they pass near some evil play

150

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

or evil talk, pass by with dignity. And those who, when they are reminded of the
revelations of their Lord, fall not deaf and blind thereat. And who say: Our Lord! Give us
comfort of our wives and of our offspring, and make us patterns for (all) those who are
pious. They will be awarded the high place forasmuch as they were patient, and they will
meet therein with welcome and the word of peace, abiding there forever. Happy is it as an
abode and station!
25:77 Say (O Muhammad to the disbelievers): My Lord would not concern Himself with
you but for your prayer. But now you have denied (the Truth), therefore there will be
judgment.

26. Ash-Shu`ara: The Poets
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
26:1-2 Ta. Sin. Mim. These are revelations of the Scripture that makes plain.
26:3-6 It may be that you torment yourself (O Muhammad) because they believe not. If
We will, We can send down on them from the sky a sign so that their necks would remain
bowed before it. Never comes there to them a fresh reminder from the Beneficent One,
but they turn away from it. Now they have denied (the Truth); but there will come to
them tidings of that whereat they used to scoff.
26:7-9 Have they not seen the earth, how much of every fruitful kind We make to grow
therein? Lo! Herein is indeed a sign; yet most of them are not believers. And lo! Your
Lord! He is indeed the Mighty, the Merciful.
26:10-14 And when your Lord called Moses, saying: Go to the wrongdoing folk, the folk
of Pharaoh. Will they not adopt piety? He said: My Lord! Lo! I fear that they will deny me,
and I shall be embarrassed, and my tongue will not speak plainly, therefore send for Aaron
(to help me). And they have a crime against me, so I fear that they will kill me.
26:15-17 He said: Nay, verily. So go you twain with Our signs. Lo! We shall be with you,
Hearing. And come together to Pharaoh and say: Lo! We bear a message from the Lord of
the Worlds (saying): Let the Children of Israel go with us.
26:18-22 (Pharaoh) said (to Moses): Did we not rear you among us as a child? And you did
dwell many years of your life among us, and you did that your deed that you did, and you
were one of the ingrates. He said: I did it then, when I was of those who are astray. Then I
fled from you when I feared you, and my Lord has given me a command and appointed
me (of the number) of those sent (by Him). And this is the past favor with which you
reproach me: that you have enslaved the Children of Israel.
26:23-27 Pharaoh said: And what is the Lord of the Worlds? (Moses) said: Lord of the
heavens and the earth and all that is between them, if you had but sure belief. (Pharaoh)
said to those around him: Hear you not? He said: Your Lord and the Lord of your fathers.
(Pharaoh) said: Lo! Your Messenger who has been sent to you is indeed a madman!
26:28-31 He said: Lord of the east and the west and all that is between them, if you did
but understand. (Pharaoh) said: If you choose a god other than me, I assuredly shall place
you among the prisoners. He said: Even though I show you something plain? (Pharaoh)
said: Produce it then, if you are of the truthful!
26:32-33 Then he flung down his staff and it became a serpent manifest, and he drew
forth his hand and lo! It was white to the beholders.

151

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

26:34-37 (Pharaoh) said to the chiefs about him: Lo, this is verily a knowing wizard, who
would drive you out of your land by his magic. Now what counsel you? They said: Put
him off, (him) and his brother, and send into the cities summoners, who shall bring to you
every knowing wizard.
26:38-42 So the wizards were gathered together at a set time on a day appointed. And it
was said to the people: Are you (also) gathering? (They said): Aye, so that we may follow
the wizards if they are the winners. And when the wizards came they said to Pharaoh: Will
there surely be a reward for us if we are the winners? He said: Aye, and you will then
surely be of those brought near (to me).
26:43-48 Moses said to them: Throw what you are going to throw! Then they threw down
their cords and their staves and said: By Pharaoh's might, lo! We verily are the winners.
Then Moses threw his staff and lo! It swallowed that which they did falsely show. And the
wizards were flung prostrate, crying: We believe in the Lord of the Worlds, the Lord of
Moses and Aaron.
26:49 (Pharaoh) said: You put your faith in him before I give you leave. Lo! He doubtless
is your chief who taught you magic! But verily you shall come to know. Verily I will cut off
your hands and your feet alternately, and verily I will crucify every one of you.
26:50-51 They said: It is no hurt, for lo! To our Lord we shall return. Lo! We ardently
hope that our Lord will
forgive us our sins because we are the first of the believers.
26:52-59 And We inspired Moses, saying: Take away My slaves by night, for you will be
pursued. Then Pharaoh sent into the cities summoners, (who said): Lo! These indeed are
but a little troop, and lo! They are offenders against us. And lo! We are a ready host. Thus
did We take them away from gardens and water springs, and treasures and a fair estate.
Thus (were those things taken from them) and We caused the Children of Israel to inherit
them.
26:60-62 And they overtook them at sunrise. And when the two hosts saw each other,
those with Moses said: Lo! We are indeed caught. He said: Nay, verily! For lo! My Lord is
with me. He will guide me.
26:63-68 Then We inspired Moses, saying: Smite the sea with your staff. And it parted,
and each part was as a mountain vast. Then brought We near the others to that place. And
We saved Moses and those with him, every one; We drowned the others. Lo! Herein is
indeed a sign, yet most of them are not believers. And lo, Your Lord! He is indeed the
Mighty, the Merciful.
26:69-76 Recite to them the story of Abraham: When he said to his father and his folk:
What worship you? They said: We worship idols, and are ever devoted to them. He said:
Do they hear you when you cry? Or do they benefit or harm you? They said: Nay, but we
found our wise fathers acting in this way. He said: See now that which you worship, you
and your forefathers!
26:77-82 Lo! They are (all) an enemy to me, except the Lord of the Worlds. Who created
me, and He does guide me, and Who feeds me and waters me. And when I get sick, then
He heals me, and Who causes me to die, then gives me life (again), and Who, I ardently
hope, will forgive me my sin on the Day of Judgment.
26:83-87 My Lord! Give me wisdom and unite me to the righteous. And give to me a good
report in later generations. And place me among the inheritors of the Garden of Delight,
and forgive my father. Lo! He is of those who err. And abase me not on the Day when
they are raised.

152

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

26:88 The Day when wealth and sons avail not (any man),
26:89-95 Except him who brings to God a whole heart. And the Garden will be brought
near for those who are pious. And Hell will appear plainly to the erring. And it will be said
to them: Where is (all) that you used to worship instead of God? Can they help you or
help themselves? Then they will be hurled therein, they and the seducers, and the hosts of
Iblis, together.
26:96-102 And they will say, when they are quarrelling therein: By God, of a truth we were
in error manifest when we made you equal with the Lord of the Worlds. It was but the
guilty who misled us. Now we have neither intercessors nor any loving friend. Oh, that we
had another turn (on earth), that we might be of the believers!
26:103-104 Lo! Herein is indeed a sign, yet most of them are not believers! And lo, Your
Lord! He is indeed the Mighty, the Merciful. 26:105-110 Noah's folk denied the
Messengers (of God), when their brother Noah said to them: Will you not fear (God)? Lo!
I am a faithful Messenger to you, so fear God, and obey me. And I ask of you no wage
thereof, for; my wage is the concern only of the Lord of the Worlds. So fear God, and
obey me.
26:111-115 They said: Shall we put faith in you, when the lowest (of the people) follow
you? He said: And what knowledge have I of what they may have been doing (in the past)?
Lo! Their reckoning is my Lord's concern, if you but knew; and I am not (here) to repulse
believers. I am only a plain warner.
26:116-118 They said: If you cease not, O Noah, you will surely be among those stoned
(to death). He said: My Lord! Lo! My own folk deny me. Therefore judge You between us,
a (conclusive) judgment, and save me and those believers who are with me.
26:119-122 And We saved him and those with him in the laden ship. Then afterward We
drowned the others. Lo! Herein is indeed a sign, yet most of them are not believers. And
lo, your Lord, He is indeed the Mighty, the Merciful.
26:123-135 (The tribe of) Aad denied the Messengers (of God), when their brother Hud
said to them: Will you not fear (God)? Lo! I am a faithful Messenger to you, so fear God
and obey me. And I ask of you no wage thereof, for; my wage is the concern only of the
Lord of the Worlds. Build you on every high place a monument for vain delight? And seek
you out strongholds that perhaps you may last forever? And if you seize by force, seize
you as tyrants? Rather fear God, and obey me. Fear Him Who has aided you with (the
good things) that you know, has aided you with cattle and sons. And gardens and water
springs. Lo! I fear for you the retribution of an Awful Day.
26:136-138 They said: It is all one to us whether you preach or are not of those who
preach; this is but a fable of the men of old, and we shall not be punished.
26:139-140 And they denied him; therefore We destroyed them. Lo! Herein is indeed a
sign, yet most of them are not believers. And lo! Your Lord, He is indeed the Mighty, the
Merciful.
26:141-152 (The tribe of) Thamud denied the Messengers (of God) when their brother
Salih said to them: Will you not fear (God)? Lo! I am a faithful Messenger to you, so fear
God and obey me. And I ask of you no wage thereof, for; my wage is the concern only of
the Lord of the Worlds. Will you be left secure in that which is here before us, in gardens
and water springs, and tilled fields and heavy sheathed palm trees, though you hew out
dwellings in the mountain, being skilful? Therefore fear God and obey me, and obey not
the command of the prodigal, who spread corruption in the earth, and reform not.
26:153-154 They said: You are but one of the bewitched; you are but a mortal like us. So

153

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

bring some sign if you are of the truthful.
26:155-159 He said: (Behold) this she camel. She has the right to drink (at the well), and
you have the right to drink, (each) on an appointed day. And touch her not with ill, lest
there come on you the retribution of an Awful Day. But they hamstrung her, and then
were penitent. So the retribution came on them. Lo! Herein is indeed a sign, yet most of
them are not believers. And lo! Your Lord! He is indeed the Mighty, the Merciful.
26:160-166 The folk of Lot denied the Messengers (of God) when their brother Lot said
to them: Will you not fear (God)? Lo! I am a faithful Messenger to you, so fear God and
obey me. And I ask of you no wage thereof, for; my wage is the concern only of the Lord
of the Worlds. What! Of all creatures do you come to the males, and leave the wives your
Lord created for you? Nay, but you are transgressing folk.
26:167 They said: If you cease not, O Lot, you will soon be of the outcast.
26:168-175 He said: I am in truth of those who hate your conduct. My Lord! Save me and
my household from what they do. So We saved him and his household, every one, except
an old woman among those who stayed behind. Then afterward We destroyed the others.
And We rained on them a rain. And dreadful is the rain of those who have been warned.
Lo! Herein is indeed a sign, yet most of them are not believers. And lo! Your Lord, He is
indeed the Mighty, the Merciful.
26:176-184 The dwellers in the wood (of Midian) denied the Messengers (of God) when
Shueyb said to them: Will you not fear (God)? Lo! I am a faithful Messenger to you, so
fear God and obey me. And I ask of you no wage for it; my wage is the concern only of
the Lord of the Worlds. Give full measure, and be not of those who give less (than the
due). And weigh with the true balance. Wrong not people in their goods, and do not
commit evil, making mischief, in the earth. And keep your duty to Him Who created you
and the generations of the men of old.
26:185-187 They said: You are but one of the bewitched; you are but a mortal like us, and
lo! We deem you of the liars. Then make fragments of the heaven fall upon us, if you are
of the truthful.
26:188-191 He said: My Lord is Best Aware of what you do. But they denied him, so there
came on them the retribution of the Day of Gloom. Lo! It was the retribution of an Awful
Day. Lo! Herein is indeed a sign; yet most of them are not believers. And lo! Your Lord!
He is indeed the Mighty, the Merciful.
26:192-195 And lo! It is a revelation of the Lord of the Worlds, which the True Spirit has
brought down upon your heart that you may be (one) of the warners, in plain Arabic
speech.
26:196-200 And lo, it is in the Scriptures of the men of old. Is it not a sign for them that
the scholars of the Children of Israel know it? And if We had revealed it to one of any
other nation than the Arabs, and he had read it to them, they would not have believed in
it. Thus do We make it traverse the hearts of the guilty.
26:201-207 They will not believe in it till they behold the painful punishment, so that it
will come upon them suddenly, when they perceive not. Then they will say: Are we to be
reprieved? Would they (now) hasten on Our punishment? Have you then seen, We
content them for (long) years, and then comes that which they were promised, (how) that
wherewith they were contented nothing avails them?
26:208-213 And We destroyed no township but it had its warners as a reminder, for We
never were oppressors. The satans did not bring it down. It is not appropriate for them,
nor is it in their power, lo! Verily they are banished from the hearing. Therefore invoke

154

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

not with God another god, lest you be one of the punished.
26:214-217 And warn your tribe of near kindred, and lower your wing (in kindness) to
those believers who follow you. And if they (your kinsfolk) disobey you, say: Lo! I am
innocent of what they do. And put your trust in the Mighty, the Merciful.
26:218-220 Who sees you when you stand up (to pray) and (sees) your abasement among
those who fall prostrate (in worship). Lo! He, only He, is the Hearer, the Knower.
26:221-227 Shall I inform you upon whom the satans descend? They descend on every
sinful, false one. They listen eagerly, but most of them are liars. As for poets, the erring
ones follow them. Have you not seen how they stray in every valley, and how they say that
which they do not? Except those who believe and do good works, and remember God
much, and vindicate themselves after they have been wronged. Those who do wrong will
come to know by what a (great) reverse they will be overturned!

27. An-Naml: The Ant
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
27:1-3 Ta . Sin. These are revelations of the Quran and a Scripture that makes plain ; a
guidance and good tidings for believers who establish worship and pay the poor-due and
are sure of the Hereafter.
27:4-5 Lo! As for those who believe not in the Hereafter, We have made their works fair
seeming to them so that they are all astray. Those are the ones for whom is the worst of
punishment, and in the Hereafter they will be the greatest losers.
27:6 Lo! As for you (O Muhammad), you verily received the Quran from the One Wise,
Aware.
27:7-9 (Remember) when Moses said to his household: Lo! I spy far off a fire; I will bring
you tidings from there, or bring to you a borrowed flame that you may warm yourselves.
But when he reached it, he was called, saying: Blessed is whoever is in the fire and
whoever is around about it! And glorified be God, the Lord of the Worlds! O Moses! Lo!
It is I, God, the Mighty, the Wise.
27:10-11 And throw down your staff! But when he saw it writhing as it were a demon, he
turned to flee headlong; (but it was said to him): O Moses! Fear not! Lo! The emissaries
fear not in Me, except him who has done wrong and afterward has changed evil for good.
And lo! I am Forgiving, Merciful.
27:12-14 And put your hand into the bosom of your robe, it will come forth white but
unhurt. (This will be one) among nine signs to Pharaoh and his people. Lo! They were
ever evil living folk. But when Our signs came to them, plain to see, they said: This is
mere magic, and they denied them, though their souls acknowledged them, for spite and
arrogance. Then see the nature of the consequence for the wrongdoers!
27:15-19 And We verily gave knowledge to David and Solomon, and they said: Praise be
to God, Who has preferred us above many of His believing slaves! And Solomon was
David's heir. And he said: O people! Lo! We have been taught the language of birds, and
have been given (abundance) of all things. This surely is evident favor. And there were
gathered together to Solomon his armies of the jinn and humankind, and of the birds, and
they were set in battle order; till, when they reached the Valley of the Ants, an ant
exclaimed: O ants! Enter your dwellings lest Solomon and his armies crush you,
unperceiving. And (Solomon) smiled, laughing at her speech, and said: My Lord, arouse

155

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

me to be thankful for Your favor wherewith You have favored me and my parents, and to
do good that shall be pleasing to You, and include me in (the number of) Your righteous
slaves.
27:20-26 And he sought among the birds and said: How is it that I see not the hoopoe, or
is he among the absent? I verily will punish him with hard punishment, or I verily will slay
him, or he verily shall bring me a plain excuse. But he was not long in coming, and he said:
I have found out (a thing) that you apprehend not, and I come to you from Sheba with
sure tidings. Lo! I found a woman ruling over them, and she has been given (abundance)
of all things, and hers is a mighty throne. I found her and her people worshipping the sun
instead of God; and Satan makes their works fair seeming to them, and debarred them
from the way (of Truth), so that they go not aright: So that they worship not God, Who
brings forth the hidden in the heavens and the earth, and knows what you hide and what
you proclaim, God; none should be worshipped but God alone, the Lord of the
Tremendous Throne.
27:27-31 (Solomon) said: We shall see whether you speak truth or whether you are of the
liars. Go with this my letter and throw it down to them; then turn away and see what
(answer) they return, (the Queen of Sheba) said (when she received the letter): O
chieftains! Lo! There has been thrown to me a noble letter. Lo! It is from Solomon, and
lo! It is: In the name of God the Beneficent, the Merciful; exalt not yourselves against me,
but come to me as those who surrender.
27:32-35 She said: O chieftains! Pronounce for me in my case. I decide no case till you are
present with me. They said: We are lords of might and lords of great prowess, but it is for
you to command; so consider what you will command. She said: Lo! Kings, when they
enter a township, ruin it and make the honor of its people shame. Thus will they do. But
lo! I am going to send a present to them, and to see, with what (answer) the messengers
return.
27:36-37 So when (the envoy) came to Solomon, (the King) said: What! Would you help
me with wealth? But that which God has given me is better than that which He has given
you. Nay it is you (and not I) who exult in your gift. Return to them. We verily shall come
to them with hosts that they cannot resist, and we shall drive them out from there with
shame, and they will be abased.
27:38-40 He said: O chiefs! Which of you will bring me her throne before they come to
me, surrendering? A stalwart of the jinn said: I will bring it you before you can rise from
your place. Lo! I verily am strong and trusty for such work. One with whom was
knowledge of the Scripture said: I will bring it you before your gaze returns to you. And
when he saw it set in his presence, (Solomon said: This is of the bounty of my Lord, that
He may try me whether I give thanks or am ungrateful. Whosoever gives thanks he only
gives thanks for (the good of) his own soul: and whosoever is ungrateful (is ungrateful
only to his own soul's hurt). For lo! My Lord is Absolute in independence, Bountiful.
27:41-44 He said: Disguise her throne for her that we may see whether she will go aright
or be of those not rightly guided. So, when she came, it was said (to her): Is your throne
like this? She said: (It is) as though it were the very one. And (Solomon said): We were
given the knowledge before her and we had surrendered (to God). And (all) that she was
wont to worship instead of God hindered her, for she came of disbelieving folk. It was
said to her: Enter the hall. And when she saw it she deemed it a pool and bared her legs.
(Solomon) said: Lo! It is a hall, made smooth, of glass. She said: My Lord! Lo! I have
wronged myself, and I surrender with Solomon to God, the Lord of the Worlds.
27:45-46 And We verily sent until Thamud their brother Salih, saying: Worship God. And
lo! They (then) became two parties quarrelling. He said: O my people! Why will you hasten
on the evil rather than the good? Why will you not ask pardon of God, that you may
receive mercy?

156

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

27:47-49 They said: We augur evil of you and those with you. He said: Your evil augury is
with God. Nay, but you are folk that are being tested. And there were in the city nine
persons who made mischief in the land and reformed not. They said: Swear one to
another by God that we verily will attack him and his household by night, and afterward
we will surely say to his friend: We witnessed not the destruction of his household. And
lo! We are truth tellers.
27:50-53 So they plotted a plot: and We plotted a plot, while they perceived not. Then see
the nature of the consequence of their plotting, for lo! We destroyed them and their
people, every one. See, yonder are their dwellings empty and in ruins because they did
wrong. Lo! Herein is indeed a sign for a people who have knowledge. And We saved those
who believed and used to fear (God).
27:54-55 And Lot! When he said to his folk: will you commit abomination knowingly?
Must your needs lust after men instead of women? Nay, but you are folk who act
senselessly.
27:56-58 But the answer of his folk was nothing except that they said: Expel the
household of Lot from your township, for they (forsooth) are folk who would keep clean!
Then we saved him and his house hold except his wife; We destined her to be of those
who stayed behind. And We rained a rain upon them. Dreadful is the rain of those who
have been warned.
27:59 Say (O Muhammad): Praise be to God, and peace be on His slaves whom He has
chosen! Is God best, or (all) that you ascribe as partners (to Him)?
27:60 Is He not (best), Who created the heavens and the earth, and sends down for you
water from the sky with which We cause to spring forth joyous orchards, whose trees you
could never otherwise cause to grow. Is there any god beside God? Nay, but they are folk
who ascribe equals (to Him)!
27:61 Is not He (best) Who made the earth a fixed abode, and placed rivers in the folds
thereof, and placed firm hills therein, and has set a barrier between the two seas? Is there
any god beside God? Nay, but most of them know not!
27:62 Is He not (best) Who answers the wronged one when he cries to Him and removes
the evil, and has made you viceroys of the earth? Is there any god beside God? Little do
they reflect!
27:63 Is He not (best) Who guides you in the darkness of the land and the sea, He Who
sends the winds as heralds of His mercy? Is there any god beside God? High exalted be
God from all that they ascribe as partner (to Him)!
27:64 Is He not (best) Who produces creation, then reproduces it, and Who provides for
you from the heaven and the earth? Is there any god beside God? Say: Bring your proof, if
you are truthful!
27:65-66 Say (O Muhammad): None in the heavens and the earth knows the Unseen
except God; and they know not when they will be raised (again). Nay, but does their
knowledge reach to the Hereafter? Nay, for they are in doubt concerning it. Nay, for they
cannot see it.
27:67-68 Yet those who disbelieve say: When we have become dust like our fathers, shall
we verily be brought forth (again)? We were promised this, forsooth, we and our fathers.
(All) this is nothing but fables of the men of old.
27:69 Say (to them, O Muhammad): Travel in the land and see the nature of the sequel for
the guilty!

157

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

27:70 And grieve you not for them, nor be in distress because of what they plot (against
you).
27:71-72 And they say: When (will) this promise (be fulfilled), if you are truthful? Say: It
may be that a part of that which you would hasten on is close behind you.
27:73 Lo! Your Lord is full of bounty for people, but most of them do not give thanks.
27:74-75 Lo! Your Lord knows surely all that their bosoms hide, and all that they
proclaim. And there is nothing hidden in the heaven or the earth but it is in a clear
Record.
27:76-78 Lo! This Quran narrates to the Children of Israel most of that concerning which
they differ. And lo! It is a guidance and a mercy for believers. Lo! Your Lord will judge
between them of His wisdom, and He is the Mighty, the Wise.
27:79-81 Therefore (O Muhammad) put your trust in God, for you (stand) on the plain
Truth. Lo! You cannot make the dead hear, nor can you make the deaf hear the call when
they have turned to flee; nor can you lead the blind out of their error. You can make none
hear, except those who believe Our revelations and who are Muslims (have surrendered).
27:82 And when the word is fulfilled concerning them, We shall bring forth a beast of the
earth to speak to them because people had not faith in Our revelations.
27:83-84 And(remind them of) the Day when We shall gather out of every nation a host
of those who denied Our revelations, and they will be set in array; till, when they come
(before their Lord), He will say: Did you deny My revelations when you could not
compass them in knowledge, or what was it that you did?
27:85-86 And the Word will be fulfilled concerning them because they have done wrong,
and they will not speak. Have they not seen how We have appointed the night that they
may rest therein, and the day, sight giving? Lo! Therein verily are signs for a people who
believe.
27:87 And (remind them of) the Day, when the Trumpet will be blown, and all who are in
the heavens and the earth will start in fear, except him whom God wills. And all come to
Him, humbled.
27:88 And you see the hills you deem solid, flying with the flight of clouds. (It is) the
doing of God Who perfects all things. Lo! He is informed of what you do.
27:89 Whoever brings a good deed will have better than its worth; and such are safe from
fear that Day.
27:90 And whoever brings an ill deed, such will be flung down on their faces in the Fire.
Are you rewarded anything except what you did?
27:91-93 (Say:) I (Muhammad) am commanded only to worship the Lord of this land,
which He has hallowed, and to Whom all things belong. And I am commanded to be of
those who are Muslims, (surrendered to Him), and to recite the Quran. And whoever goes
right, goes right only for (the good of) his own soul; and as for him who goes astray (to
him) say: Lo! I am only a warner. And say: Praise be to God Who will show you His signs
so that you shall know them. And your Lord is not unaware of what you (mortals) do.

28. Al-Qasas: The Story

158

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
28:1-2 Ta. Sin. Mim. These are revelations of the Scripture that makes plain.
28:3-6 We narrate to you (somewhat) of the story of Moses and Pharaoh with truth, for
folk who believe. Lo! Pharaoh exalted himself in the earth and made its people castes. A
tribe among them he suppressed, killing their sons and sparing their women. Lo! He was
of those who work corruption. And We desired to show favor to those who were
oppressed in the earth, and to make them examples and to make them the inheritors, and
to establish them in the earth, and to show Pharaoh and Haman and their hosts that
which they feared from them.
28:7-9 And We inspired the mother of Moses, saying: Suckle him and, when you fear for
him, then cast him into the river and fear not nor grieve. Lo! We shall bring him back to
you and shall make him (one) of Our Messengers. And the family of Pharaoh took him
up, that he might become for them an enemy and a sorrow. Lo! Pharaoh and Haman and
their hosts were ever sinning. And the wife of Pharaoh said: (He will be) a consolation for
me and for you. Kill him not. Perhaps he may be of use to us, or we may choose him for a
son. And they perceived not.
28:10-13 And the heart of the mother of Moses became void, and she would have
betrayed him if We had not fortified her heart, that she might be of the believers. And she
said to his sister: Trace him. So she observed him from afar, and they perceived not. And
We had before forbidden foster-mothers for him, so she said: Shall I show you a
household who will rear him for you and take care of him? So We restored him to his
mother that she might be comforted and not grieve, and that she might know that the
promise of God is true. But most of them know not.
28:14 And when he reached his full strength and was ripe, We gave him wisdom and
knowledge. Thus do We reward the good.
28:15-16 And he entered the city at a time of carelessness of its folk, and he found therein
two men fighting, one of his own caste, and the other of his enemies; and he who was of
his caste asked him for help against him who was of his enemies. So Moses struck him
with his fist and killed him. He said: This is of Satan's doing. Lo! He is an enemy, a mere
misleader. He said: My Lord! Lo! I have wronged my soul, so forgive me. Then He
forgave him. Lo! He is the Forgiving, the Merciful.
28:17 He said: My Lord! Forasmuch as You have favored me, I will nevermore be a
supporter of the guilty.
28:18-21 And morning found him in the city, fearing, vigilant, when behold! He who had
appealed to him the day before cried out to him for help. Moses said to him: Lo! You are
indeed a mere hothead. And when he would have fallen upon the man who was an enemy
to them both, he said: O Moses! Would you kill me as you did kill a person yesterday? You
would be nothing but a tyrant in the land; you would not be of the reformers. And a man
came from the uttermost part of the city, running. He said: O Moses! Lo! The chiefs take
counsel against you to slay you; therefore escape. Lo! I am of those who give you good
advice. So he escaped from there, fearing, vigilant. He said: My Lord! Deliver me from the
wrongdoing folk.
28:22-24 And when he turned his face toward Midian, he said: Perhaps my Lord will guide
me in the right road. And when he came to the water of Midian he found there a whole
tribe of men, watering. And he found apart from them two women keeping, back (their
flocks). He said: What ails you? The two said: We cannot give (our flocks) to drink till the
shepherds return from the water; and our father is a very old man. So he watered (their
flock) for them. Then he turned aside into the shade, and said: My Lord! I am needy of
whatever good you send down for me.

159

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

28:25-26 Then there came to him one of the two women, walking shyly. She said: Lo! My
father calls you, that he may reward you with a payment because you did water (the flock)
for us. Then, when he came to him and told him the (whole) story, he said: Fear not! You
have escaped from the wrongdoing folk. One of the two women said: O my father! Hire
him! For the best (man) that you can hire is the strong, the trustworthy.
28:27-28 He said: Lo! I willingly would marry you to one of these two daughters of mine
on condition that you hire yourself to me for (the term of) eight pilgrimages. Then if you
complete ten it will be of your own accord, for I would not make it hard for you. God
willing, you will find me of the righteous. He said: That (is settled) between you and me.
Whichever of the two terms I fulfill, there will be no injustice to me, and God is Surety
over what we say.
28:29 Then, when Moses had fulfilled the term, and was traveling with his house folk, he
saw in the distance a fire and said to his house folk: Bide you (here). Lo! I see in the
distance a fire; perhaps I shall bring you tidings from there, or a brand from the fire that
you may warm yourselves.
28:30-35 And when he reached it, he was called from the right side of the valley in the
blessed field, from the tree: O Moses! Lo! I, Indeed I, am God, the Lord of the Worlds;
throw down your staff. And when he saw it writhing as if it had been a demon, he turned
to flee headlong, (and it was said to him): O Moses! Draw near and fear not. Lo! You are
of those who are secure. Thrust your hand into the bosom of your robe, it will come forth
white without hurt. And guard your heart from fear. Then these shall be two proofs from
your Lord to Pharaoh and his chiefs: Lo! They are evil doing folk. He said: My Lord! Lo! I
killed a man among them and I fear that they will kill me. My brother Aaron is more
eloquent than I in speech. Therefore send him with me as a helper to confirm me. Lo! I
fear that they will give the lie to me. He said: We will strengthen your arm with your
brother, and We will give to you both power so that they cannot reach you for Our signs.
You both, and those who follow you, will be the winners.
28:36-39 But when Moses came to them with Our clear signs, they said: This is nothing
but invented magic. We never heard of this among our fathers of old. And Moses said: My
Lord is best aware of him who brings guidance from Him, and whose will be the sequel of
the Home (of bliss). Lo! Wrongdoers will not be successful. And Pharaoh said: O chiefs! I
know not that you have a god other than me, so kindle for me (a fire), O Haman, to bake
the mud; and set up for me a lofty tower in order that I may survey the god of Moses; and
lo! I deem him of the liars. And he and his hosts were haughty in the land without right,
and deemed that they would never be
brought back to Us.
28:40-42 Therefore We seized him and his hosts, and abandoned them to the sea. Behold
the nature of the consequence for evildoers! And We made them patterns that invite to
the Fire, and on the Day of Resurrection they will not be helped. And We made a curse to
follow them in this world, and on the Day of Resurrection they will be among the hateful.
28:43 And We verily gave the Scripture to Moses after We had destroyed the generations
of old; clear testimonies for people, and a guidance and a mercy, that perhaps they might
reflect.
28:44-45 And you (O Muhammad) were not on the western side (of the Mount) when We
expounded to Moses the commandment, and you were not among those present; but We
brought forth generations, and their lives dragged on for them. And you were not a
dweller in Midian, reciting to them Our revelations, but We kept sending (Messengers to
men).
28:46-48 And you were not beside the Mount when We called; but (the knowledge of it is)

160

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

a mercy from your Lord that you may warn a folk to whom no warner came before you,
that perhaps they may give heed. Otherwise, if disaster should afflict them because of that
which their own hands have sent before (them), they might say: Our Lord! Why did you
not send a Messenger to us, that we might have followed Your revelations and been of the
believers? But when there came to them the Truth from Us, they said: Why is he not given
the like of what was given to Moses? Did they not disbelieve in that which was given to
Moses of old? They say: Two works of magic that support each other and they say: Lo! In
both we are disbelievers.
28:49-50 Say (to them, O Muhammad): Then bring a Scripture from God that gives
clearer guidance than these two (that) I may follow it, if you are truthful. And if they
answer you not, then know that what they follow is their lusts. And who goes farther
astray than he who follows his lust without guidance from God. Lo! God guides not
wrongdoing folk.
28:51-55 And now verily We have caused the Word to reach them, that perhaps they may
give heed. Those to whom We gave the Scripture before it, they believe in it, and when it
is recited to them, they say: We believe in it. Lo! It is the Truth from our Lord. Lo! Even
before it we were of those who are Muslims (surrendered to God). These will be given
their reward twice over, because they are patient and repel evil with good, and spend of
that wherewith We have provided them, and when they hear vanity they withdraw from it
and say: To us our works and to you your works. Peace be to you! We desire not the
ignorant.
28:56 Lo! You (O Muhammad) guide not whom you love, but God guides whom He wills.
And He is Best Aware of those who walk aright.
28:57 And they say: If we were to follow the guidance with you we should be torn out of
our land. Have We not established for them a sure sanctuary, where the produce of all
things is brought (in trade), a provision from Us? But most of them know not.
28:58 And how many a community have We destroyed that was thankless for its means of
livelihood! And yonder are their dwellings, which have not been inhabited after them
except a little. And We, were the inheritors.
28:59 And never did your Lord destroy the townships, till He had raised up in their
mother (town) a Messenger reciting to them Our revelations. And never did We destroy
the townships unless the
folk from there were evildoers.
28:60 And whatsoever you have been given is a comfort of the life of the world and an
ornament
thereof; and that which God has is better and more lasting. Have you then no sense?
28:61 Is he whom We have promised a fair promise which he will find (true), like him
whom We suffer to enjoy a while the comfort of the life of the world, then on the Day of
Resurrection he will be of those arraigned?
28:62-64 On the Day when He will call to them and say: Where are My partners whom
you imagined? Those concerning whom the Word will have come true will say: Our Lord!
These are they whom we led astray. We led them astray even as we ourselves were astray.
We declare our innocence before You: us they never worshipped. And it will be said: Cry
to your (so called) partners (of God). And they will cry to them, and they will give no
answer to them, and they will see the punishment. Ah, if they had but been guided!
28:65-67 And on the Day when He will call to them and say: What answer gave you to the

161

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

Messengers? On that Day (all) tidings will be dimmed for them, nor will they ask of one
another, but as for him who shall repent and believe and do right, he perhaps may be one
of the successful.
28:68 Your Lord brings to pass what He wills and chooses. They have never had any
choice. Glorified be God and exalted above all that they associate (with Him)!
28:69 And your Lord knows what their breasts conceal, and what they publish.
28:70 And He is God; none should be worshipped but God alone. His is all praise in the
former and the latter (state), and His is the command, and to Him you will be brought
back.
28:71 Say: Have you thought, if God made night everlasting for you till the Day of
Resurrection, who is a god beside God who could bring you light? Will you not then hear?
28:72-73 Say: Have you thought, if God made day everlasting for you till the Day of
Resurrection, who is a god beside God who could, bring you night wherein you rest? Will
you not then see? Of His mercy has He appointed for you night and day that therein you
may rest, and that you may seek His bounty, and that perhaps you may be thankful.
28:74-75 And on the Day when He shall call to them and say: Where are My partners
whom you pretended? And We shall take out from every nation a witness and We shall
say: Bring your proof. Then they will know that God has the Truth, and all that they
invented will have failed them.
28:76-77 Now Korah was of Moses' folk, but he oppressed them and We gave him so
much treasure that the stores thereof would verily have been a burden for a troop of
mighty men. When his own folk said to him: Exult not; lo! God loves not the exultant; but
seek the abode of the Hereafter in that which God has given you and neglect not your
portion of the world, and be you kind even as God has been kind to you, and seek not
corruption in the earth; lo! God loves not corrupters.
28:78-80 He said: I have been given it only on account of knowledge I possess. Knew he
not that God had destroyed already of the generations before him, men who were
mightier than he in strength and greater in respect of following? The guilty are not
questioned of their sins. Then went he forth before his people in his pomp. Those who
were desirous of the life of the world said: Ah, would that we had the like of what has
been given to Korah! Lo! He is lord of rare good fortune. But those who had been given
knowledge said: Woe to you! The reward of God for him who believes and does right is
better, and only the patient will obtain it.
28:81-82 So We caused the earth to swallow him and his dwelling place. Then he had no
host to help him against God, nor was he of those who can save themselves. And
morning found those who had coveted his place but yesterday crying: Ah, just as well!
God enlarges the provision for whom He wills of His slaves and straitens it (for whom He
wills). If God had not been gracious to us He would have caused it to swallow us (also).
Ah, just as well! The disbelievers never prosper.
28:83-84 As for that Abode of the Hereafter We assign it to those who seek not
oppression in the earth, nor yet corruption. The sequel is for those who are pious.
Whoever brings a good deed, he will have better than the same; while as for him who
brings an ill deed, those who do ill deeds will be requited only what they did.
28:85-88 Lo! He, Who has given you the Quran for a law will surely bring you borne
again. Say: My Lord is Best Aware of he who brings guidance and him who is in error
manifest. You had no hope that the Scripture would be inspired in you; but it is a mercy
from your Lord, so never be a helper to the disbelievers. And let them not divert you from

162

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

the revelations of God after they have been sent down to you; but call (people) to your
Lord, and be not of those who ascribe partners (to Him). And cry not to any other god
along with God. None should be worshipped but God alone. Everything will perish
except His Face. His is the command, and to Him you will be brought back.

29. Al-`Ankabut: The Spider
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
29:1-5 Alif. Lam. Mim. Do men imagine that they will be left (at ease) because they say :
We believe; and will not be tested with affliction? Lo! We tested those who were before
you . Thus God knows those who are sincere, and knows those who feign. Or do those
who do ill deeds imagine that they can outstrip Us : Evil (for them) is that which they
decide. Whoever looks forward to the meeting with God (let him know that) God's
reckoning is surely near, and He is the Hearer, the Knower.
29:6-9 And whosoever fights hard, fights hard only for himself, for lo! God is altogether
Independent of (His) creatures. And as for those who believe and do good works, We
shall expiate from them their evil deeds and shall repay them the best that they did. We
have enjoined on man kindness to parents; but if they fight hard to make you join with Me
that of which you have no knowledge, then obey them not. To Me is your return and I
shall tell you what you used to do. And as for those who believe and do good works, We
verily shall make them enter in among the righteous.
29:10-11 Of people is he who says: We believe in God, but, if he is made to suffer for the
sake of God, he mistakes the persecution of people for God's punishment; and then, if
victory comes from your Lord, will say: Lo! We were with you (all the while). Is not God
Best Aware of what is in the bosoms of (His) creatures? Verily God knows those who
believe, and verily He knows the hypocrites.
29:12-13 Those who disbelieve say to those who believe: Follow our way (of religion) and
we verily will bear your sins (for you). They cannot bear anything of their sins. Lo! They
verily are liars. But they verily will bear their own loads and other loads beside their own,
and they verily will be questioned on the Day of Resurrection concerning that which they
invented.
29:14-15 And verily We sent Noah (as Our Messenger) to his folk, and he continued with
them for a thousand years except fifty years; and the flood engulfed them, for they were
wrongdoers. And We rescued him and those with him in the ship, and made of it a sign
for the peoples.
29:16-19 And Abraham! (Remember) when he said to his folk: Worship God, and keep
your duty to Him; that is better for you if you did but know. You worship instead of God
only idols, and you only invent a lie. Lo! Those whom you worship instead of God own
no provision for you. So seek your provision from God, and worship Him, and give
thanks to Him, (for) to Him you will be brought back. But if you deny, then nations have
denied before you. The Messenger is only to convey (the message) plainly. See they not
how God produces creation, then reproduces it? Lo! For God that is easy.
29:20 Say (O Muhammad): Travel in the land and see how He originated creation, then
God brings forth the later growth. Lo! God is Able to do all things.
29:21-23 He punishes whom He wills and shows mercy to whom He wills, and to Him
you will be turned. You cannot escape (from Him) in the earth or in the sky, and beside
God there is for you neither guardian (and protector) nor helper. Those who disbelieve in
the revelations of God and in (their) meeting with Him, such have no hope of My mercy.

163

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

For such there is a painful punishment.
29:24-25 But the answer of his folk was only that they said: `Kill him' or `Burn him'. Then
God saved him from the fire. Lo! Herein verily are signs for folk who believe. He said:
You have chosen idols instead of God. The love between you is only in the life of the
world. Then on the Day of Resurrection you will deny each other and curse each other,
and your abode will be the Fire, and you will have no helpers. 29:26 And Lot believed
him, and said: Lo! I am an immigrant to my Lord. Lo! He, only He, is the Mighty, the
Wise.
29:27 And We bestowed on him Isaac and Jacob, and We established the Prophethood
and the Scripture among his seed, and We gave him his reward in the world, and lo! In the
Hereafter he verily is among the righteous.
29:28-30 And Lot! (Remember) when he said to his folk: Lo! You commit lewdness such
as no creature did before you. For come you not in to males, and cut you not the road (for
travelers), and commit you not abomination in your assemblies? But the answer of his folk
was only that they said: Bring God's punishment upon us if you are a truth teller! He said:
My Lord! Give me victory over folk who work corruption.
29:31-32 And when Our messengers brought Abraham the good news, they said: Lo! We
are about to destroy the people of that township, for its people are wrongdoers. He said:
Lo! Lot is there. They said: We are best aware of who is there. We are to deliver him and
his household, all except his wife, who is of those who stay behind.
29:33-35 And when Our messengers came to Lot, He was troubled upon their account,
for he could not protect them; but they said: Fear not, nor grieve! Lo! We are to deliver
you and your household, (all) except your wife, who is of those who stay behind. Lo! We
are about to bring down upon the folk of this township a fury from the sky because they
are evil doers. And verily of that We have left a clear sign for people who have sense.
29:36-37 And to Midian We sent Shueyb, their brother. He said O my people! Worship
God, and look forward to the Last Day, and do not evil, making mischief, in the earth. But
they denied him, and the dreadful earthquake took them, and morning found them
prostrate in their dwelling place.
29:38 And (the tribes of) Aad and Thamud! (Their fate) is manifest to you from their
(ruined and deserted) dwellings. Satan made their deeds seem fair to them and so debarred
them from the Way, though they were keen observers.
29:39-40 And Korah, Pharaoh and Haman! Moses came to them with clear proofs (of
God's supreme power), but they were boastful in the land. And they were not winners (in
the race). So We took each one in his sin; of them was he, on who We sent a hurricane,
and of them was he, who was overtaken by the (Awful) Cry, and of them was he, who We
caused the earth to swallow, and of them was he, who We drowned. It was not for God to
wrong them, but they wronged themselves.
29:41-42 The similitude of those who choose other patrons than God is as that of the
spider when she takes to herself a house, and lo! The frailest of all houses is the spider's
house, if they but knew. Lo! God knows what thing they invoke instead of Him. He is the
Mighty, the Wise.
29:43-44 As for these similitude, We coin them for people, but none will grasp their
meaning except the wise. God created the heavens and the earth with truth. Lo! Therein is
indeed a sign for believers.
29:45 Recite that which has been inspired in you of the Scripture, and establish worship.
Lo! Worship preserves from lewdness and iniquity, but verily remembrance of God is

164

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

more important. And God knows what you do.
29:46 And argue not with the People of the Scripture unless it be in (a way) that is better,
except with such of them as do wrong; and say: We believe in that which has been
revealed to us and revealed to you; our God and your God is One, and to Him we
surrender (as Muslims).
29:47-49 In a like manner We have revealed to you the Scripture, and those to whom We
gave the Scripture before will believe therein; and of these (also) are some who believe
therein. And none deny our revelations except the disbelievers. And you (O Muhammad)
were not a reader of any Scripture before it, nor did you write it with your right hand, for
then might those have doubted, who follow falsehood. But it is clear revelations in the
hearts of those who have been given knowledge, and none deny Our revelations except
wrongdoers.
29:50-52 And they say: Why are not signs sent down upon him from his Lord? Say: Signs
are with God only, and I am but a plain warner. Is it not enough for them that We have
sent down to you the Scripture which is read to them? Lo! Herein verily is a mercy, and a
reminder for folk who believe. Say (to them, O Muhammad): God suffices for witness
between me and you. He knows whatever is in the heavens and the earth. And those who
believe in vanity and disbelieve in God, it is they that are the losers.
29:53-55 They bid you hasten on the punishment (of God). And if a term had not been
appointed, the punishment would assuredly have come to them (before now). And verily
it will come upon them suddenly when they perceive not. They bid you hasten on the
punishment, when lo! Hell verily will encompass the disbelievers. On the Day when the
punishment will overwhelm them from above them and from underneath their feet, and
He will say: Taste what you used to do!
29:56-59 O my bondmen who believe! Lo! My earth is spacious. Therefore worship only
Me. Every soul will taste of death. Then to Us you will be returned. Those who believe
and do good works, We shall verily house them in lofty dwellings of the Garden
underneath which rivers flow. There they will dwell secure. How sweet the guerdon of the
toilers, who persevere, and put their trust in their Lord!
29:60 And how many an animal there is that bears not its own provision! God provides
for it and for you. He is the Hearer, the Knower.
29:61-62 And if you were to ask them: Who created the heavens and the earth, and
constrained the sun and the moon (to their appointed work)? They would say: God. How
then are they turned away? God makes the provision wide for whom He wills of His
bondmen, and straitens it for whom (He wills). Lo! God is Aware of all things.
29:63-64 And if you were to ask them: Who causes water to come down from the sky,
and with it revives the earth after its death? They verily would say: God. Say: Praise be to
God! But most of them have no sense. This life of the world is but a pastime and a game.
Lo! The home of the Hereafter - that is life, if they but knew.
29:65-66 And when they mount upon the ships they pray to God, making their faith pure
for Him only, but when He brings them safe to land, behold! They ascribe partners (to
Him), that they may disbelieve in that which We have given them, and that they may take
their ease. But they will come to know.
29:67-68 Have they not seen that We have appointed a sanctuary immune (from violence),
while people are ravaged all around them? Do they then believe in falsehood and
disbelieve in the bounty of God? Who does greater wrong than he who invents a lie
concerning God, or denies the truth when it comes to him? Is there not a home in Hell
for disbelievers?

165

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

29:69 As for those who fight hard in Us, We surely guide them to Our paths, and lo! God
is with the good.

30. Ar-Rum: The Romans
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
30:1-5 Alif. Lam. Mim. The Romans have been defeated in the nearer land, and they, after
their
defeat will be victorious within ten years - God's is the command in the former case and in
the latter. and in that day believers will rejoice in God's help to victory. He helps to victory
whom He wills . He is the Mighty, the Merciful.
30:6-8 It is a promise of God. God fails not His promise, but most of people knows not.
They know only some appearance of the life of the world, and are heedless of the
Hereafter. Have they not pondered upon themselves? God created not the heavens and
the earth, and that which is between them, except with truth and for a destined end. But
truly many of people are disbelievers in the meeting with their Lord.
30:9-10 Have they not traveled in the land and seen the nature of the consequence for
those who were before them? They were stronger than these in power, and they dug the
earth and built upon it more than these have built. Messengers of their own came to them
with clear proofs (of God's supreme power). Surely God wronged them not, but they did
wrong themselves. Then evil was the consequence to those who dealt in evil, because they
denied the revelations of God and made a mock of them.
30:11 God produces creation, then He reproduces it, then to Him you will be returned.
30:12-13 And in the Day when the Hour rises, the sinful will despair. There will be none
to intercede for them of those whom they made equal with God. And they will reject your
partners (whom they ascribed to Him).
30:14 In the Day when the Hour comes, that day they will be sundered.
30:15-16 As for those who believed and did good works, they will be made happy in a
Garden. But as for those who disbelieved and denied Our revelations, and denied the
meeting of the Hereafter, such will be brought to punishment.
30:17-18 So glory be to God when you enter the night and when you enter the morning.
To Him be praise in the heavens and the earth! .and at the sun's decline and in the
noonday.
30:19 He brings forth the living from the dead, and He brings forth the dead from the
living, and He revives the earth after her death. And even so will you be brought forth.
30:20 And of His signs is this: He created you of dust, and behold you were human
beings, ranging widely!
30:21 And of His signs is this: He created for you helpmeets from yourselves that you
might find rest in them, and He ordained between you love and mercy. Lo! Herein indeed
are signs for folk who reflect.
30:22 And of His signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the difference of
your languages and colors. Lo! Herein indeed are signs for men of knowledge.

166

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

30:23 And of His signs is your slumber by night and by day, and your seeking of His
bounty. Lo! Herein indeed are signs for folk who take heed.
30:24 And of His signs is this: He shows you the lightning for a fear and for a hope, and
sends down water from the sky, and thereby quickens the earth after her death. Lo! Herein
indeed are signs for folk who understand.
30:25 And of His signs is this: The heavens and the earth stand fast by His command, and
afterward, when He calls you, lo! From the earth you will emerge.
30:26-27 To Him belongs whoever is in the heavens and in the earth. All are obedient to
Him. It is He, Who produces creation, then reproduces it and it is easier for Him. His is
the Sublime Similitude in the heavens and in the earth. He is the Mighty, the Wise.
30:28-29 He coins for you a similitude of yourselves. Have you, from among those whom
your right hands possess, partners in the wealth We have bestowed upon you, equal with
you in respect thereof, so that you fear them as you fear each other (that you ascribe to Us
partners out of that which We created)? Thus We display the revelations for people who
have sense. Nay, but those who do wrong follow their own lusts without knowledge. Who
is able to guide him whom God has sent astray? For such there are no helpers.
30:30-32 So set your purpose (O Muhammad) for religion as a man by nature upright - the
nature (framed) of God, in which He has created man. There is no altering in (the laws of)
God's creation. That is the right religion, but most men know not. turning to Him (only);
and be careful of your duty to Him, and establish worship, and be not of those who
ascribe partners (to Him); of those who split up their religion and became schismatic, each
sect exulting
in its tenets.
30:33-35 And when harm touches men they cry to their, Lord, turning to Him in
repentance; then, when they have tasted of His mercy, behold! Some of them attribute
partners to their Lord. So as to disbelieve in that which We have given them. (To such it is
said:) Enjoy yourselves awhile, but you will come to know. Or have We revealed to them
any warrant which speaks of that which they associate with Him?
30:36-37 And when We cause people to taste of mercy they rejoice therein; but if an evil
thing befall them as the consequence of their own deeds, lo! They are in despair! See they
not that God enlarges the provision for whom He wills, and straitens (it for whom He
wills). Lo! Herein indeed are signs for folk who believe.
30:38 So give to the kinsman his due, and to the needy, and to the wayfarer. That is best
for those who seek God's Face. And such are they who are successful.
30:39 That which you give in usury in order that it may increase on (other) people's
property has no increase with God; but that, which you give in charity, seeking God's
Face, has increase manifold.
30:40 God is He Who created you and then sustained you, then causes you to die, then
gives life to you again. Is there any of your (so called) partners (of God) that does anything
of that? Praised and exalted be He above what they associate (with Him)!
30:41 Corruption does appear on land and sea because of (the evil) which men's hands
have done, that He may make them taste a part of that which they have done, in order
that they may return.
30:42 Say (O Muhammad to the disbelievers): Travel in the land, and see the nature of the
consequence for those who were before you! Most of them were polytheists.

167

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

30:43-45 So set your purpose resolutely for the right religion, before the inevitable Day
comes from God. On that Day people will be sundered – Whoever disbelieves must
(then) bear the consequences of his disbelief, while those who do right make provision for
themselves – That He may reward out of His bounty those who believe and do good
works. Lo! He loves not the disbelievers (in His guidance).
30:46 And of His signs is this: He sends herald winds to make you taste His mercy, and
that the ships may sail at His command, and that you may seek His favor, and that
perhaps you may be thankful.
30:47 Verily We sent before you (O Muhammad) Messengers to their own folk. They
brought them clear proofs (of God's supreme power). Then We took vengeance upon
those who were guilty (in regard to them). To help believers is incumbent upon Us.
30:48-50 God is He Who sends the winds so that they raise clouds, and spreads them
along the sky as it pleases Him, and causes them to break and you see the rain pouring
down from within them. And when He makes it fall on whom He wills of His bondmen,
lo! They rejoice; though before that, even before it was sent down upon them, they were
in despair. Look, therefore, at the prints of God's mercy (in creation): how He quickens
the earth after her death. Lo! He verily is the Quickener of the dead, and He is Able to do
all things.
30:51-53 And if We sent a wind and they beheld it yellow; they verily would still continue
in their disbelief. For verily you (O Muhammad) cannot make the dead hear, nor can you
make the deaf hear the call when they have turned to flee. Nor can you guide the blind out
of their error. You can make none hear except those who believe in Our revelations so
that they surrender (to Him as Muslims).
30:54 God is He Who shaped you out of weakness, then appointed after weakness
strength, then, after strength, appointed weakness and grey hair. He creates what He wills.
He is the Knower, the Mighty.
30:55-57 And on the Day when the Hour rises, the guilty will vow that they did tarry but
an hour - thus were they ever deceived. But those to whom knowledge and faith are given,
will say: The truth is, you have tarried, by God's decree, until the Day of Resurrection.
This is the Day of Resurrection, but you used to know not. In that Day their excuses will
not profit those who did injustice, nor will they be allowed to make amends.
30:58-60 Verily We have coined for people in the Quran all kinds of similitude; and indeed
if you come to them with a miracle, those who disbelieve would verily exclaim: You are
but tricksters! Thus does God seal the hearts of those who know not. So have patience (O
Muhammad) God's promise is the very truth, and let not those who have no certainty
make you impatient.

31. Luqman (The Wise)
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
31:1-5 Alif. Lam. Mim. These are revelations of the Book of Wisdom, a guidance and a
mercy for the good , those who establish worship and pay the poor-due and have sure
faith in the Hereafter. Such have guidance from their Lord. Such are the successful.
31:6-7 And of people is he who pays for mere pastime of discourse, that he may mislead
from God's way without knowledge, and makes it the butt of mockery. For such there is a
shameful punishment. And when Our revelations are recited to him he turns away in his
arrogance as if he heard them not, as if there were a deafness in his ears. So give him

168

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

tidings of a painful punishment.
31:8-9 Lo! Those who believe and do good works, for them are Gardens of Delight,
wherein they will abide. It is a promise of God in truth. He is the Mighty, the Wise.
31:10-11 He has created the heavens without supports that you can see, and has cast into
the earth firm hills, so that it quakes not with you; and He has dispersed therein all kinds
of beasts. And We send down water from the sky and We cause (plants) of every goodly
kind to grow therein. This is the Creation of God. Now show me that which those (you
worship) beside Him have created. Nay, but the wrongdoers are in error manifest!
31:12 And verily We gave Luqman wisdom, saying: Give thanks to God; and whoever
gives thanks, he gives thanks for (the good of) his soul. And whoever refuses - Lo! God is
Absolute, Owner of praise.
31:13 And (remember) when Luqman said to his son, when he was exhorting him: O my
dear son!
Ascribe no partners to God. Lo! To ascribe partners (to Him) is a tremendous wrong.
31:14-15 And We have enjoined upon man concerning his parents - His mother bears him
in weakness upon weakness, and his weaning is in two years – Give thanks to Me and to
your parents. To Me is the journeying. But if they fight hard with you to make you ascribe
to Me as partner that of which you have no knowledge, then obey them not. Consort with
them in the world kindly, and follow the path of him who repents to Me. Then to Me will
be your return, and I shall tell you what you used to do.
31:16 O my dear son! Lo! Though it be but the weight of a grain of mustard seed, and
though it be in a rock, or in the heavens, or in the earth, God will bring it forth. God is
Subtle, Aware.
31:17-19 O my dear son! Establish worship and enjoin what is right and forbid what is
wrong, and persevere whatever may befall you. Lo! That is of the patient heart of things.
Turn not your cheek in scorn toward folk, nor walk with pertness in the land. Lo! God
loves not each braggart boaster. Be modest in your bearing and subdue your voice. Lo! In
harshest of all voices is the voice of the donkey.
31:20-21 See you not how God has made serviceable to you whatever is in the skies and
whatever is in the earth and has loaded you with His favors both without and within? Yet
of people is he who disputes concerning God, without knowledge or guidance or a
Scripture giving light. And if it is said to them: Follow that which God has revealed, they
say: Nay, but we follow that wherein we found our fathers. What! Even though Satan was
inviting them to the punishment of flame?
31:22-23 Whoever surrenders his purpose to God while doing good, he verily has grasped
the firm handhold. To God belongs the sequel of all things. And whoever disbelieves, let
not his disbelief afflict you (O Muhammad). To Us is their return, and We shall tell them
what they did. Lo! God is Aware of what is in the breasts (of men).
31:24-26 We give them comfort for a little, and then We drive them to a heavy
punishment. If you should ask them: Who created the heavens and the earth? They would
answer: God. Say: Praise be to God! But most of them know not. To God belongs
whatever is in the heavens and the earth. God, He is the Absolute, the Owner of praise.
31:27 And if all the trees in the earth were pens, and the sea, with seven more seas to help
it (were ink), the words of God could not be exhausted. God is Mighty, Wise.
31:28 Your creation and your raising (from the dead) are only as (the creation and the

169

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

raising of) a single soul. Lo! God is Hearer, Knower.
31:29-30 Have you not seen how God causes the night to pass into the day and causes the
day to pass into the night, and has subdued the sun and the moon (to do their work), each
running to an appointed term; and that God is informed of what you do? That (is so)
because God, He is the True, and that which they invoke beside Him is the False, and
because God, He is the Sublime, the Great.
31:31-32 Have you not seen how the ships glide on the sea by God's grace, that He may
show you of His wonders? Lo! Therein indeed are signs for every patient, grateful (heart).
And if a wave enshrouds them like awnings, they cry to God, making their faith pure for
Him only. But when He brings them safely to land, some of them compromise. None
denies Our signs except every traitor ingrate.
31:33 O people! Keep your duty to your Lord and fear a Day when the parent will not be
able to avail the child in anything, nor the child to avail the parent. Lo! God's promise is
the very truth. Let not the life of the world deceive you, nor let the deceiver deceive you,
in regard to God.
31:34 Lo! God! With Him is the knowledge of the Hour. He sends down the rain, and
knows that which is in the wombs. No soul knows what it will earn tomorrow, and no
soul knows in what land it will die.Lo! God is Knower, Aware.

32. As-Sajdah: The Prostration
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
32:1-3 Alif. Lam. Mim. The revelation of the Scripture whereof there is no doubt is from
the Lord of the Worlds . Or say they : He has invented it? Nay, but it is the Truth from
your Lord that you may warn a folk to whom no warner came before you, that perhaps
they may walk aright.
32:4-6 It is God Who created the heavens and the earth, and that which is between them,
in six Days. Then He mounted the Throne. You have not, beside Him, a helper (and
protector) or mediator. Will you not then remember? He directs the ordinance from the
heaven to the earth; then it ascends to Him in a Day, of which the measure is a thousand
years of that you reckon. Such is the Knower of the invisible and the visible, the Mighty,
the Merciful,
32:7-9 Who made perfect all things which He created, and He began the creation of man
from clay; then He made his seed from a draught of despised fluid; then He fashioned him
and breathed into him of His spirit; and appointed for you hearing and sight and hearts.
Small thanks give you!
32:10-14 And they say: When we are lost in the earth, how can we then be recreated? Nay
but they are disbelievers in the meeting with their Lord. Say: The angel of death, who has
charge concerning you, will gather you, and afterward to your Lord you will be returned.
Could you but see when the guilty hang their heads before their Lord (and say): Our Lord!
We have now seen and heard, so send us back; we will do right, now we are sure. And if
We had so willed, We could have given every soul its guidance, but the word from Me
concerning evildoers took effect: that I will fill Hell with the jinn and people together. So
taste (the evil of your deeds). Forasmuch as you forgot the meeting of this your Day, lo!
We forget you. Taste the punishment of immortality because of what you used to do.
32:15-16 Only those believe in Our revelations who, when they are reminded of them, fall
down prostrate and hymn the praise of their Lord, and they are not arrogant, who forsake

170

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

their beds to cry to their Lord in fear and hope, and spend of what we have bestowed on
them.
32:17 No soul knows what is kept hidden for them of joy, as a reward for what they used
to do.
32:18-22 Is he who is a believer like him who is an evildoer? They are not alike. But as for
those who believe and do good works, for them are the Gardens of Retreat - a welcome
(in reward) for what they used to do. And as for those who do evil, their retreat is the Fire.
Whenever they desire to issue forth from there, they are brought back there. To them it is
said: Taste the torment of the Fire, which you used to deny. And verily We make them
taste the lower punishment before the greater, that perhaps they may return. And who
does greater wrong than he who is reminded of the revelations of his Lord, then turns
from them. Lo! We shall requite the guilty.
32:23-25 We verily gave Moses the Scripture; so be not you in doubt of his receiving it;
and We appointed it as a guidance for the Children of Israel. And when they became
patient and believed firmly in Our revelations, We appointed from among them, leaders
who guided by Our command. Lo! Your Lord will judge between them on the Day of
Resurrection concerning that wherein they used to differ.
32:26 Is it not a guidance for them (to observe) how many generations He destroyed
before them, amid whose dwelling places they do walk? Lo! Therein verily are signs! Will
they not then heed?
32:27 Have they not seen how We lead the water to the barren land and with it bring forth
crops that their cattle eat, and they themselves? Will they not then see?
32:28-30 And they say: When comes this victory (of yours) if you are truthful? Say (to
them): On the day of the victory the faith of those who disbelieve, (and who then will
believe), will not avail them, neither will they be reprieved. So withdraw from them (O
Muhammad), and await (the event). Lo! They also are awaiting (it)

33. Al-Ahzab: The Clans
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
33:1 O Prophet! Keep your duty to God and obey not the disbelievers and the hypocrites.
Lo! God is Knower, Wise.
33:2-3 And follow that which is inspired in you from your Lord. Lo! God is Aware of
what you do. And put your trust in God, for God is sufficient as Trustee.
33:4-5 God has not assigned to any man two hearts within his body, nor has he made your
wives whom you declare (to be your mothers) your mothers, nor has he made those
whom you claim (to be your sons) your sons. This is but a saying of your mouths. But
God says the truth and He guides to the right way. Proclaim their real parentage. That will
be more equitable in the sight of God. And if you know not their fathers, then (they are)
your brethren in the faith, and your clients. And there is no sin for you in the mistakes
that you make unintentionally, but what your hearts purpose (that will be a sin for you).
God is Forgiving, Merciful.
33:6 The Prophet is closer to the believers than their selves, and his wives are (as) their
mothers. And the owners of kinship are closer one to another in the ordinance of God
than (other) believers and the immigrants (who migrated from Mecca) except that you
should do kindness to your friends. This is written in the Book (of nature).

171

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

33:7-8 And when We exacted a covenant from the Prophets, and from you (O
Muhammad) and from Noah and Abraham and Moses and Jesus son of Mary. We took
from them a solemn covenant; that He may ask the loyal of their loyalty. And He has
prepared a painful punishment for the unfaithful.
33:9-14 O you who believe! Remember God's favor to you when there came against you
hosts, and We sent against them a great wind and hosts you could not see. And God is
ever Seer of what you do. When they came upon you from above you and from below
you, and when eyes grew wild and hearts reached to the throats, and you were imagining
vain thoughts concerning God. There were the believers sorely tried, and shaken with a
mighty shock. And When the hypocrites, and those in whose hearts is a disease, were
saying: God and His Messenger promised us nothing but delusion. And when a party of
them said: O folk of Yathrib! There is no stand (possible) for you, therefore turn back.
And certain of them (even) sought permission of the Prophet, saying: Our homes lie open
(to the enemy). And they lay not open. They but wished to flee. If the enemy had entered
from all sides and they had been exhorted to treachery, they would have committed it, and
would have hesitated thereupon, but little.
33:15-17 And verily they had already sworn to God that they would not turn their backs
(to the foe). An oath to God must he answered for. Say: Flight will not avail you if you
flee from death or killing, and then you dwell in comfort but a little while. Say: Who is he
who can preserve you from God if He intends harm for you, or intends mercy for you.
They will not find that they have any protector or helper other than God.
33:18-19 God already knows those of you who hinder, and those who say to their
brethren: ‘Come you hither to us!’ and they come not to the stress of battle except a little,
being sparing of their help to you (believers). But when the fear comes, then you
(Muhammad) see them regarding you with rolling eyes like one who faints to death. Then,
when the fear departs, they scald you with sharp tongues in their greed for wealth (from
the spoil). Such have not believed. Therefore God makes their deeds fruitless. And that is
easy for God.
33:20 They hold that the clans have not retired (for good); and if the clans should advance
(again), they would willingly be in the desert with the wandering Arabs, asking for the
news of you and if they were among you, they would not give battle, except a little.
33:21 Verily in the Messenger of God you have a good example for him who looks to
God and the last Day, and remembers God much.
33:22-24 And when the true believers saw the clans, they said: This is that which God and
His Messenger promised us. God and His Messenger are true. It did but confirm them in
their faith and resignation. Of the believers are men who are true to that which they
covenanted with God. Some of them have paid their vow by death (in battle), and some of
them still are waiting; and they have not altered in the least; that God may reward the true
men for their truth, and punish the hypocrites if He wills, or forgive them (if He wills). Lo!
God is Forgiving, Merciful.
33:25 And God repulsed the disbelievers in their wrath; they gained no good. God averted
their attack from the believers. God is Strong, Mighty.
33:26-27 And He brought those of the People of the Scripture who supported them down
from their strongholds, and cast panic into their hearts. You slew some, and some you
made captive. And He caused you to inherit their land and their houses and their wealth,
and land you have not trodden. God is Able to do all things.
33:28-30 O Prophet! Say to your wives: If you desire the world's life and its adornment,
come! I will content you and will release you with a fair release. But if you desire God and
His Messenger and the abode of the Hereafter, then lo! God has prepared for the good

172

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

among you an immense reward. O you wives of the Prophet! Whosoever of you commits
manifest lewdness, the punishment for her will be doubled, and that is easy for God.
33:31-34 And whosoever of you is submissive to God and His Messenger and does right,
We shall give her reward twice over, and We have prepared for her a rich provision. O
you wives of the Prophet! You are not like any other women. If you keep your duty (to
God), then be not soft of speech, lest he in whose heart is a disease aspire (to you), but
speak in an honorable manner. And stay in your houses. Bedizen not yourselves with the
bedizenment of the Time of Ignorance. Be regular in prayer, and pay the poor-due, and
obey God and His Messenger. God's wish is but to remove impurity (of sin) far from you,
O Folk of the Household, and cleanse you with a thorough cleansing. And bear in mind
that which is recited in your houses of the revelations of God and wisdom. Lo! God is
Subtle, Aware.
33:35 Lo! Men who surrender to God, and women who surrender, and men who believe
and women who believe, and men who obey and women who obey, and men who speak
the truth and women who speak the truth, and men who persevere (in righteousness) and
women who persevere, and men who are humble and women who are humble, and men
who give alms and women who give alms, and men who fast and women who fast, and
men who guard their modesty and women who guard (their modesty), and men who
remember God much and women who remember God much .God has prepared for them
forgiveness and a vast reward.
33:36 And it is not for a believing man nor a believing woman, when God and His
Messenger have decided an affair (for them), that they should (after that) claim any say in
their affair; and whoever is rebellious to God and His Messenger, he verily goes astray in
error manifest.
33:37 And when you said to him on whom God has conferred favor and you have
conferred favor: Keep your wife to yourself, and fear God. And you did hide in your mind
that which God was to bring to light, and you did fear people whereas God had a better
right that you should fear Him. So when Zeyd had performed the necessary formality (of
divorce) from her, We gave her to you in marriage, so that (henceforth) there may be no
sin for believers in respect of wives of their adopted sons, when the latter have performed
the necessary formality (of release) from them. The commandment of God must be
fulfilled.
33:38-40 There is no reproach for the Prophet in that which God makes his due. That was
God's way with those who passed away of old - and the commandment of God is certain
destiny - those
who delivered the messages of God and feared Him, and feared none except God. God
keeps good account. Muhammad is not the father of any man among you, but he is the
Messenger of God and the Seal of the Prophets; and God is Aware of all things.
33:41-43 O you who believe! Remember God with much remembrance. And glorify Him
early and late. It is He Who blesses you, and His angels (bless you), that He may bring you
forth from darkness to light; and He is Merciful to the believers.
33:44 Their salutation on the Day when they shall meet Him will be: Peace. And He has
prepared for them a goodly recompense.
33:45-48 O Prophet! Lo! We have sent you as a witness and a bringer of good tidings and
a warner And as a summoner to God by His permission, and as a lamp that gives light.
And announce to the believers the good tidings that they will have great bounty from
God. And incline not to the disbelievers and the hypocrites. Disregard their noxious talk,
and put your trust in God. God is sufficient as Trustee.

173

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

33:49 O you who believe! If you wed believing women and divorce them before you have
touched them, then there is no period that you should reckon. But content them and
release them handsomely.
33:50 O Prophet! Lo! We have made lawful to you your wives to whom you have paid
their dowries, and those whom your right hand possesses of those whom God has given
you as spoils of war, and the daughters of your uncle on the father's side and the
daughters of your aunts on the father's side, and the daughters of your uncles on the
mother's side who emigrated with you, and a believing woman if she gives herself to the
Prophet and the Prophet desires to ask her in marriage – a privilege for you only, not for
the (rest of) believers – We are aware of that which We enjoined upon them concerning
their wives and those whom their right hands possess. that you may be free from blame,
for God is Forgiving, Merciful.
33:51 You can defer whom you will of them and receive to you whom you will, and
whomsoever you desire of those whom you have set aside (temporarily), it is no sin for
you (to receive her again); that is better; that they may be comforted and not grieved, and
may all be pleased with what you give them. God knows what is in your hearts (O men)
and God is Forgiving, Forbearing.
33:52 It is not allowed for you to take (other) women henceforth nor that you should
change them for other wives even though their beauty pleased you, except those whom
your right hand possesses. And God is Watcher over all things.
33:53-54 O you who believe! Enter not the dwellings of the Prophet for a meal without
waiting for the proper time, unless permission be granted to you. But if you are invited,
enter, and, when, your meal is ended, then disperse. Linger not for conversation. Lo! That
would cause annoyance to the Prophet, and he would be shy of (asking) you (to go); but
God is not shy of the truth. And when you ask of them (the wives of the Prophet)
anything, ask it of them from behind a curtain. That is purer for your hearts and for their
hearts. And it is not for you to cause annoyance to the Messenger of God, nor that you
should ever marry his wives after him. Lo! That in God's sight would be an enormity.
Whether you divulge a thing or keep it hidden, lo! God is ever Knower of all things.
33:55 It is no sin for them (your wives) (to converse freely) with their fathers, or their
sons: or their brothers, or their brother's sons, or the sons of their sisters or of their own
women, or their slaves. O women! Keep your duty to God. Lo! God is Witness over all
things.
33:56 Lo! God and His angels shower blessings on the Prophet. O you who believe! Ask
blessings on him and salute him with a worthy salutation.
33:57-58 Lo! Those who malign God and His Messenger, God has cursed them in the
world and the Hereafter, and has prepared for them the punishment of the disdained. And
those who malign believing men and believing women undeservedly, they bear the guilt of
slander and manifest sin.
33:59 O Prophet! Tell your wives and your daughters and the women of the believers to
draw their cloaks close round them (when they go abroad). That will be better, so that
they may be recognized and not annoyed. God is ever Forgiving, Merciful.
33:60-62 If the hypocrites, and those in whose hearts is a disease, and the alarmists in the
city do not cease, We verily shall urge you on against them, then they will be your
neighbors in it but a little while. Accursed, they will be seized wherever found and slain
with a (fierce) slaughter. That was the way of God in the case of those who passed away of
old; you will not find for the way of God anything of power to change.
33:63 Men ask you of the Hour. Say: The knowledge of it is with God only. What can

174

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

convey (the knowledge) to you? It may be that the Hour is near.
33:64-68 Lo! God has cursed the disbelievers, and has prepared for them a flaming fire,
wherein they will abide forever. They will find (then) neither protector nor helper. On the
Day when their faces are turned over in the fire, they say: Oh, would that we had obeyed
God and had obeyed His Messenger! And they say: Our Lord! Lo! We obeyed our princes
and great men, and they misled us from the Way. Our Lord! Oh, give them double
torment and curse them with a mighty curse.
33:69 O you who believe! Be not as those who slandered Moses, but God proved his
innocence of that which they alleged, and he was well esteemed in God's sight.
33:70-71 O you who believe! Guard your duty to God, and speak words straight to the
point; He will adjust your works for you and will forgive you your sins. Whosoever obeys
God and His Messenger, he verily has gained a signal victory.
33:72 Lo! We offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the hills, but they shrank
from bearing it and were afraid of it. And man assumed it. Lo! He has proved a tyrant and
a fool.
33:73 God punishes hypocritical men and hypocritical women, and polytheistic men and
polytheistic women. But God pardons believing men and believing women, and God is
Forgiving, Merciful.
34. Saba: Sheba
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
34:1 Praise be to God, to Whom belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is
in the earth. His is the praise in the Hereafter, and He is the Wise, the Aware.
34:2 He knows that which goes down into the earth and that which comes forth from it,
and that which descends from the heaven and that which ascends into it. He is the
Merciful, the Forgiving.
34:3-5 Those who disbelieve say: The Hour will never come to us. Say: Nay, by my Lord,
but it is coming to you surely. (He is) the Knower of the Unseen. Not an atom's weight, or
less than that or greater, escapes Him in the heavens or in the earth, but it is in a clear
Record, that He may reward those who believe and do good works. For them is pardon
and a rich provision. But those who strive against Our revelations, challenging (Us), theirs
will be a painful punishment of wrath.
34:6 Those who have been given knowledge see that what is revealed to you from your
Lord is the truth and guides to the path of the Mighty, the Owner of praise.
34:7-8 Those who disbelieve say: Shall we show you a man who will tell you (that) when
you have become dispersed in dust with a most complete dispersal, still, even then, you
will be created anew? Has he invented a lie concerning God, or is there in him madness?
Nay, but those who disbelieve in the Hereafter are in torment and far error.
34:9 Have they not observed what is before them and what is behind them of the sky and
the earth? If We will, We can make the earth swallow them, or cause obliteration from the
sky to fall on them. Lo! Herein surely is a sign for every slave who turns (to God)
repentant.
34:10-11 And assuredly We gave David grace from Us (saying): O you hills and birds,
echo his psalms of praise! And We made the iron supple to him, saying: Make you long
coats of mail and measure the links (thereof). And do you right. Lo! I am Seer of what you

175

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

do.
34:12-13 And to Solomon (We gave) the wind, whereof the morning course was a month's
journey and the evening course a month's journey, and We caused the fount of copper to
gush forth for him, and (We gave him) certain of the jinn who worked before him by
permission of his Lord. And such of them as deviated from Our command, them We
caused to taste the punishment of flaming fire. They made for him what he willed:
synagogues and statues, basins like wells and boilers built into the ground. Give thanks, O
House of David! Few of My bondmen are thankful.
34:14 And when We decreed death for him, nothing showed his death to them except a
creeping creature of the earth which gnawed away his staff. And when he fell the jinn saw
clearly how, if they had known the unseen, they would not have continued in despised toil.
34:15-17 There was indeed a sign for Sheba in their dwelling place: Two gardens on the
right hand and the left (as who should say): Eat of the provision of your Lord and render
thanks to Him. A fair land and an indulgent Lord! But they were froward, so We sent on
them the flood of the dam, and in exchange for their two gardens gave them two gardens
bearing bitter fruit, the tamarisk and here and there a lote tree. This We awarded them
because of their ingratitude. Punish We ever any except the ingrates?
34:18-19 And We set, between them and the towns which We had blessed, towns easy to
be seen, and We made the stage between them easy (saying): Travel in them safely both by
night and day. But they said: Our Lord! Make the stage between our journeys longer. And
they wronged themselves, therefore We made them bywords (in the land) and scattered
them abroad, a total scattering. Lo! Herein verily are signs for each patient, grateful
(heart).
34:20-23 And Satan indeed found his calculation true concerning them, for they follow
him, all except a group of true believers. And he had no warrant whatsoever against them,
except that We would know him who believes in the Hereafter from him who is in doubt
thereof; and your Lord (O Muhammad) takes note of all things. Say (O Muhammad): Call
upon those whom you set up beside God! They possess not an atom's weight either in the
heavens or the earth, nor have they any share either, nor has He an auxiliary among them.
No intercession avails with Him except for him whom He permits. Yet, when fear is
banished from their hearts, they say: What was it that your Lord said? They say: The
Truth. And He is the Sublime, the Great.
34:24-26 Say: Who gives you provision from the sky and the earth? Say: God. Lo! We or
you assuredly are rightly guided or in error manifest. Say: You will not be asked of what
we committed, nor shall we be asked of what you do. Say: Our Lord will bring us all
together, and then He will judge between us with truth. He is the All-Knowing Judge.
34:27 Say: Show me those whom you have joined to Him as partners. Nay (you dare not)!
For He is God, the Mighty, the Wise.
34:28 And We have not sent you (O Muhammad) except as a bringer of good tidings and
a warner to all people; but most of people knows not.
34:29-30 And they say: When is this promise (to be fulfilled) if you are truthful? Say (O
Muhammad): Yours is the promise of a Day, which you cannot postpone nor hasten by an
hour.
34:31 And those who disbelieve say: We believe not in this Quran nor in that which was
before it; but oh, if you could see, when the wrongdoers are brought up before their Lord,
how they cast the blame one to another; how those who were despised (in the earth) say
to those who were proud: But for you, we should have been believers.

176

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

34:32 And those who were proud say to those who were despised: Did we drive you away
from the guidance after it had come to you? Nay, but you were guilty.
34:33 Those who were despised say to those who were proud: Nay but (it was your)
scheming night and day, when you commanded us to disbelieve in God and set up rivals
to Him. And they are filled with remorse when they behold the punishment; and We place
shackles on the necks of those who disbelieved. Are they requited anything except what
they did?
34:34-35 And We sent not to any township a warner, but its pampered ones declared: Lo!
We are disbelievers in that which you bring to us. And they say: We are more (than you) in
wealth and children. We are not the punished!
34:36-38 Say (O Muhammad): Lo! My Lord enlarges the provision for whom He wills and
narrows it (for whom He wills). But most of people knows not. And it is not your wealth
nor your children that will bring you near to Us, but he who believes and does good (he
draws near). As for such, theirs will be twofold reward for what they did, and they will
dwell secure in lofty halls. And as for those who strive against Our revelations,
challenging, they will be brought to the punishment.
34:39 Say: Lo! My Lord enlarges the provision for whom He wills of His bondmen, and
narrows (it) for him. And whatsoever you spend (for good) He replaces it. And He is the
Best of providers.
34:40-42 And on the Day when He will gather them all together, He will say to the angels:
Did these worship you? They will say: Be You glorified. You are our Protector from them!
Nay, but they worshipped the jinn; most of them were believers in them. That Day you
will possess no use nor hurt one for another. And We shall say to those who did wrong:
Taste the punishment of the Fire which you used to deny.
34:43 And if Our revelations are recited to them in plain terms, they say: This is nothing
else than a man who would turn you away from what your fathers used to worship; and
they say: This is nothing else than an invented lie. Those who disbelieve say of the truth
when it reaches them: This is nothing either than mere magic.
34:44-45 And We have given them no Scriptures, which they study, nor sent We to them,
before you, any warner. Those before them denied, and these have not attained a tithe of
that which We bestowed on them (of old); yet they denied My Messengers. How intense
then was My abhorrence (of them)!
34:46 Say (to them, O Muhammad): I exhort you to one thing only: that you awake, for
God's sake, by twos and singly, and then reflect: There is no madness in your comrade. He
is nothing else than a warner to you in face of a terrific punishment.
34:47 Say: Whatever reward I might have asked of you is yours. My reward is the affair of
God only. He is Witness over all things.
34:48 Say: Lo! My Lord hurls the truth. (He is) the Knower of Things Hidden.
34:49-50 Say: The truth has come, and falsehood shows not its face and will not return.
Say: If I err, I err only to my own loss, and if I am rightly guided it is because of that
which my Lord has revealed to me. Lo! He is Hearer, Near.
34:51-54 Could you but see when they are terrified with no escape, and are seized from
near at hand. And say: We (now) believe therein. But how can they reach (faith) from afar
off, when they disbelieved in it of yore. They aim at the unseen from afar off. And a gulf
is set between them and that which they desire, as was done for people of their kind of
old. Lo! They were in hopeless doubt.

177

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

35. Al-Mala'ikah: The Creator of Angels
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
35:1 Praise be to God, the Creator of the heavens and the earth, who appoints the angels
messengers having wings two, three and four. He multiplies in creation what He wills. Lo!
God is Able to do all things.
35:2 That which God opens to people of mercy none can withhold it; and that which He
withholds none can release thereafter. He is the Mighty, the Wise.
35:3-4 O people! Remember God's grace toward you! Is there any creator other than God
who provides for you from the sky and the earth? None should be worshipped but God
alone. Where then are you turned? And if they deny you, (O Muhammad), Messengers (of
God) were denied before you. To God all things are brought back.
35:5-6 O people! Lo! The promise of God is true. So let not the life of the world deceive
you, and let not the (avowed) deceiver (Satan) deceive you with regard to God. Lo! Satan
is an enemy for you, so treat him as an enemy. He only summons his faction to be
inhabitants of the flaming Fire.
35:7 Those who disbelieve, theirs will be an awful punishment; and those who believe and
do good works, theirs will be forgiveness and a great reward.
35:8 Is he, the evil of whose deeds is made fair seeming to him so that he deems it good,
(other than Satan's dupe)? God verily sends whom He wills astray, and guides whom He
wills, so let not your soul expire in sighing for them. Lo! God is Aware of what they do!
35:9 And it is God Who sends the winds and they raise a cloud; then We lead it to a dead
land and revive therewith the earth after its death. Such is the Resurrection.
35:10 Whoever desires power (should know that) all power belongs to God. To Him good
words ascend, and the pious deed does He exalt; but those who plot iniquities, theirs will
be an awful punishment; and the plotting of such (folk) will come to nothing.
35:11 God created you from dust, and then from a little fluid, and then He made you pairs
(the male and female). No female bears or brings forth except with His knowledge. And
no one grows old who grows old, nor is anything lessened of his life, but it is recorded in a
Book. Lo! That is easy for God.
35:12 And two seas are not alike: this, fresh, sweet, good to drink, this (other) bitter salt.
And from them both you eat fresh meat and derive the ornaments that you wear. And you
see the ship cleaving them with its prow that you may seek of His bounty, and that
perhaps you may give thanks.
35:13-14 He makes the night to pass into the day and He makes the day to pass into the
night. He has subdued the sun and moon to service. Each runs to an appointed term.
Such is God, your Lord; His is the supreme power; and those to whom you pray instead
of Him own not so much as the white spot on a date stone. If you pray to them they hear
not your prayer, and if they heard they could not grant it to you. On the Day of
Resurrection they will disown association with you. None can inform you like Him Who is
Aware.
35:15 O people! You are poor in your relation to God. And God! He is the Absolute, the
Owner of praise.

178

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

35:16-17 If He will, He can be rid of you and bring (instead of you) some new creation.
That is not a hard thing for God.
35:18 And no burdened soul can bear another's burden, and if one heavy laden cries for
(help with) his load, nothing of it will be lifted even though he (to whom he cries) be of
kin. You warn only those who fear their Lord in secret, and have established worship. He
who grows (in goodness), grows only for himself, (he cannot by his merit redeem others).
To God is the journeying.
35:19-22 The blind man is not equal with the seer; nor is darkness (tantamount to) light;
nor is the shadow equal with the sun's full heat; nor are the living equal with the dead. Lo!
God makes whom He wills to hear. You cannot reach those who are in the graves.
35:23-26 You are but a warner. Lo! We have sent you with the Truth, a bearer of glad
tidings and a warner; and there is not a nation but a warner has passed among them. And
if they deny you: those before them also denied. Their Messengers came to them with
clear proofs (of God's supreme power), and with the Psalms and the Scripture giving light.
Then seized I those who disbelieved, and how intense was My abhorrence!
35:27-28 Have you not seen that God causes water to fall from the sky, and We produce
therewith fruit of diverse hues; and among the hills are streaks white and red, of diverse
hues, and (others) raven black; and of men and beasts and cattle, in like manner, diverse
hues? The erudite among His bondsmen fear God alone. Lo! God is Mighty, Forgiving.
35:29-30 Lo! Those who read the Scripture of God, and establish worship, and spend of
that which We have bestowed on them secretly and openly, they look forward to
imperishable gain, that He will pay them their wages and increase them of His grace. Lo!
He is Forgiving, Responsive.
35:31 As for that which We inspire in you of the Scripture, it is the Truth confirming that
which was (revealed) before it. Lo! God is indeed Observer, Seer of his slaves.
35:32-35 Then We gave the Scripture as inheritance to those whom We elected of our
bondmen. But of them are some who wrong themselves and of them are some who are
lukewarm and of them are some who outstrip (others) through good deeds, by God's
leave. That is the great favor! Gardens of Eden! They enter them wearing armlets of gold
and pearl and their raiment therein is silk. And they say: Praise be to God who has put
grief away from us. Lo! Our Lord is Forgiving, Bountiful, Who, of His grace, has installed
us in the mansion of eternity, where toil touches us not nor can weariness affect us.
35:36-38 But as for those who disbelieve, for them is the fire of Hell; it takes not complete
effect upon them so that they can die, nor is its torment lightened for them. Thus We
punish every ingrate. And they cry for help there (saying): Our Lord! Release us; we will
do right, not (the wrong) that we used to do. Did not We grant you a life long enough for
who reflected to reflect therein? And the warner came to you. Now taste (the flavor of
your deeds), for evildoers have no helper. Lo! God is the Knower of the Unseen of the
heavens and the earth. Lo! He is Aware of the secret of (men's) breasts.
35:39 It is He Who has made you regents in the earth; so he who disbelieves, his disbelief
be on his own head. Their disbelief increases for the disbelievers, in their Lord's sight,
nothing except abhorrence. Their disbelief increases for the disbelievers nothing except
loss.
35:40-41 Say: Have you seen your partner gods to whom you pray beside God? Show me
what they created of the earth! Or have they any portion in the heavens? Or have We
given them a Scripture so that they act on clear proof therefrom? Nay, the evildoers
promise one another only to deceive. Lo! God grasps the heavens and the earth that they
deviate not, and if they were to deviate there is not one that could grasp them after Him.

179

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

Lo! He is ever Forbearing, Forgiving.
35:42-43 And they swore by God, their most binding oath, that if a warner came to them
they would be more tractable than any of the nations; yet, when a warner came to them it
aroused in them nothing except repugnance, (shown in their) behaving arrogantly in the
land and plotting evil; and the evil plot encloses but the men who make it. Then, can they
expect anything except the treatment of the folk of old? You will not find for God's way
of treatment any substitute, nor will you find for God's way of treatment anything of
power to change.
35:44 Have they not traveled in the land and seen the nature of the consequence for those
who were before them, and they were mightier than these in power? God is not such that
anything in the heavens or in the earth escapes Him. Lo! He is the Wise, the Mighty.
35:45 If God took people to task by that which they deserve, He would not leave a living
creature on the surface of the earth; but He reprieves them to an appointed term, and
when their term comes – then verily (they will know that) God is ever Seer of His slaves.

36. Ya-Sin (Abbreviated Letters)
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
36:1-6 Ya Sin. By the Quran full of wisdom, lo! You are of those sent on a straight path, a
revelation of the Mighty, the Merciful , that you may warn a folk whose fathers were not
warned, so they are heedless .
36:7-11 Already has the word proved true of most of them, for they believe not. Lo! We
have put on their necks shackles reaching to the chins, so that they are made stiff necked.
And We have set a bar before them and a bar behind them, and (thus) have covered them
so that they see not. Whether you warn them or you warn them not, it is alike for them,
for they believe not. You warn only him who follows the Reminder and fears the
Beneficent in secret. To him bear tidings of forgiveness and a rich reward.
36:12 Lo! We it is Who bring the dead to life. We record that which they send before
(them), and their footprints. And all things We have kept in a clear register.
36:13-19 Coin for them a similitude: The people of the city when those sent (from God)
came to them; when We sent to them both, and they denied them both, so We reinforced
them with a third, and they said; Lo! We have been sent to you. They said: You are but
mortals like to us. The Beneficent has revealed nothing. You do but lie! They answered:
Our Lord knows that we are indeed sent to you, and our duty is but plain conveyance (of
the message). (The people of the city) said: We augur ill of you. If you desist not, we shall
surely stone you, and grievous torture will befall you at our hands. They said: Your evil
augury be with you! Is it because you are reminded (of the truth)? Nay, but you are
froward folk?
36:20-27 And there came from the uttermost part of the city a man running. He cried: O
my people! Follow those who have been sent! Follow those who ask of you no fee, and
who are rightly guided. For what cause should I not worship Him Who has created me,
and to Whom you will be brought back? Shall I take (other) gods in place of Him when, if
the Beneficent should wish me any harm, their intercession will avail me nothing, nor can
they save? Then truly I should be in error manifest. Lo! I have believed in your Lord, so
hear me! It was said (to him): Enter Paradise. He said: Would that my people knew with
what (munificence) my Lord has pardoned me and made me of the honored ones!
36:28-32 We sent not down against his people after him a host from heaven, nor do We

180

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

ever send. It was but one shout, and lo! They were extinct. Ah, the anguish for the
bondmen! Never came there to them a Messenger but they did mock him! Have they not
seen how many generations We destroyed before them, which indeed return not to them;
but all, without exception, will be brought before Us.
36:33-36 A sign to them is the dead earth. We revive it, and We bring forth from it grain
so that they eat thereof; and We have placed therein gardens of the date palm and grapes,
and We have caused springs of water to gush forth therein. That they may eat of the fruit
thereof, and their hand made it not. Will they not, then, give thanks? Glory be to Him
Who created all the sexual pairs, of that which the earth grows, and of themselves, and of
that which they know not!
36:37-38 A sign to them is night. We strip it of the day, and lo! They are in darkness. And
the sun runs on to a resting place for him. That is the measuring of the Mighty, the Wise.
36:39-40 And for the moon We have appointed mansions till she return like an old
shriveled palm leaf. It is not for the sun to overtake the moon, nor does the night outstrip
the day. They float each in an orbit.
36:41-45 And a sign to them is that We bear their offspring in the laden ship, and have
created for them of the like thereof whereon they ride. And if We will, We drown them,
and there is no help for them, neither can they be saved; unless by mercy from Us and as
comfort for a while. When it is said to them: Beware of that which is before you and that
which is behind you, that perhaps you may find mercy (they are heedless).
36:46-48 Never came a sign of the signs of their Lord to them, but they did turn away
from it! And when it is said to them: Spend of that wherewith God has provided you,
those who disbelieve say to those who believe: Shall we feed those whom God, if He
willed, would feed? You are in nothing else than error manifest. And they say: When will
this promise be fulfilled, if you are truthful?
36:49-52 They await but one shout, which will surprise them while they are disputing.
Then they cannot make bequest, nor can they return to their own folk. And the Trumpet
is blown and lo! From the graves they come to their Lord, crying: Woe upon us! Who has
raised us from our place of sleep? This is that which the Beneficent did promise, and the
Messengers spoke truth.
36:53-54 It is but one shout, and behold them brought together before Us! This Day no
soul is wronged in anything; nor are you requited anything except what you used to do.
36:55-58 Lo! Those who merit Paradise this day are happily employed, they and their
wives, in pleasant shade, on thrones reclining; theirs the fruit (of their good deeds) and
theirs (all) that they ask; the word from a Merciful Lord (for them) is: Peace!
36:59-64 O you guilty ones stand apart this day! Did I not charge you, O you sons of
Adam, that you worship not Satan – Lo! He is your open foe! – but that you worship Me?
That was the right path. Yet he has led astray of you a great multitude. Had you then no
sense? This is Hell, which you were promised (if you followed him). Burn therein this Day
for that you disbelieved.
36:65-68 This Day We seal up mouths, and hands speak out and feet bear witness as to
what they used to earn. And had We willed, We verily could have quenched their eyesight
so that they should struggle for the way. Then how could they have seen? And had We
willed, We verily could have fixed them in their place, making them powerless to go
forward or turn back. He whom We bring to old age, We reverse him in creation (making
him go back to weakness after strength). Have you then no sense?
36:69-70 And we have not taught him (Muhammad) poetry, nor is it appropriate for him.

181

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

This is nothing else than a Reminder and a Lecture making plain, to warn whosoever lives,
and that the word may be fulfilled against the disbelievers.
36:71-73 Have they not seen how We have created for them of Our handiwork the cattle,
so that they are their owners, and have subdued them to them, so that some of them they
have for riding, some for food? Benefits and (diverse) drinks have they from them. Will
they not then give thanks?
36:74-75 And they have taken (other) gods beside God, in order that they may be helped.
It is not in their power to help them; but they (the worshippers) are to them a host in
arms.
36:76 So let not their speech grieve you (O Muhammad). Lo! We know what they conceal
and what proclaim.
36:77-81 Has not man seen that We have created him from a drop of seed? Yet lo! He is
an open opponent. And he has coined for Us a similitude, and has forgotten the fact of
his creation, saying: Who will revive these bones when they have rotted away? Say: He will
revive them Who produced them at the first, for He is Knower of every creation, Who has
appointed for you fire from the green tree, and behold! You kindle from it. Is not He
Who created the heavens and the earth Able to create the like of them? Aye, that He is!
For He is the All-Wise Creator,
36:82-83 But His command, when He intends a thing, is only that he says to it: Be! And it
is. Therefore glory be to Him in Whose Hand is the dominion over all things! To Him you
will be brought back.

37. As-Saffat: Those Who Set The Ranks
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
37:1-5 By those who set the ranks in battle order, and those who drive away (the wicked)
with reproof, and those who read (the Word) for a reminder, lo! Your Lord is surely One.
Lord of the heavens and of the earth and all that is between them, and Lord of the sun's
risings.
37:6-10 Lo! We have adorned the lowest heaven with an ornament, the planets: With
security from every froward devil. They cannot listen to the Highest Chiefs for they are
pelted from every side, outcast, and theirs is a perpetual torment; except him who snatches
a fragment, and there pursues him a piercing flame.
37:11-17 Then ask them (O Muhammad): Are they stronger as a creation, or those
(others) whom We have created? Lo! We created them of plastic clay. Nay, but you do
marvel when they mock, and heed not when they are reminded, and seek to scoff when
they behold a sign. And they say: lo! This is mere magic; when we are dead and have
become dust and bones, shall we then, forsooth, be raised (again)? And our forefathers?
37:18 Say (O Muhammad): Yes, in truth; and you will be brought low.
37:19-21 There is but one shout, and lo! They behold and say: Ah, woe for us! This is the
Day of Judgment. This is the Day of Separation, which you used to deny.
37:22-27 (And it is said to the angels:) Assemble those who did wrong, together with their
wives and what they used to worship instead of God, and lead them to the path to Hell;
and stop them, for they must be questioned. What ails you that you help not one another?
Nay, but this Day they make full submission. And some of them draw near to others,

182

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

mutually questioning.
37:28-32 They say: Lo! You used to come to us, imposing, (swearing that you spoke the
truth). They answer: Nay, but you (yourselves) were not believers. We had no power over
you, but you were wayward folk. Now the Word of our Lord has been fulfilled concerning
us. Lo! We are about to taste (the punishment). Thus we misled you. Lo! We were
(ourselves) astray.
37:33-36 Then lo! This Day they (both) are sharers in the punishment. Lo! Thus deal We
with the guilty. For when it was said to them, none should be worshipped but God alone,
they were arrogant. And said: Shall we forsake our gods for a mad poet?
37:37-49 Nay, but he brought the Truth, and he confirmed those sent (before him). Lo!
(Now) verily you taste the painful punishment – You are requited nothing except what
you did – except single-minded slaves of God; for them there is a known provision,
fruits. And they will be honored in the Gardens of Delight, on couches facing one
another; a cup from a gushing spring is brought round for them, white, delicious to the
drinkers, wherein there is no headache nor are they made mad thereby. And with them are
those of modest gaze, with lovely eyes, (pure) as they were hidden eggs (of the ostrich).
37:50-57 And some of them draw near to others, mutually questioning. A speaker of them
says: Lo! I had a comrade who used to say: Are you in truth of those who put faith (in his
words)? Can we, when we are dead and have become mere dust and bones. can we (then)
verily be brought to book? He says: Will you look? Then looks he and sees him in the
depth of Hell. He says: By God, you verily did all but cause my ruin, and had it not been
for the favor of my Lord, I too had been of those haled forth (to punishment).
37:58-61 Are we then not to die except our former death, and are we not to be punished?
Lo! This is the supreme triumph. For the like of this, then, let the workers work.
37:62-68 Is this better as a welcome, or the tree of Zaqqum? Lo! We have appointed it a
torment for wrongdoers. Lo! It is a tree that springs in the heart of Hell ; its crop is as it
were the heads of devils. And lo! They verily must eat thereof , and fill (their) bellies
therewith. And afterward, lo! Thereupon they have a drink of boiling water. And
afterward, lo! Their return is surely to Hell. 37:69-74 They indeed found their fathers
astray, but they make haste (to follow) in their footsteps. And verily most of the men of
old went astray before them, and verily We sent among them warners. Then see the nature
of the consequence for those warned, except singled-minded slaves of God.
37:75-82 And Noah verily prayed to Us, and gracious was the Hearer of his prayer. And
We saved him and his household from the great distress, and made his seed the survivors,
and left for him among the later folk (the salutation): Peace be to Noah among the
peoples! Lo! Thus do We reward the good. Lo! He is one of Our believing slaves. Then
We did drown the others.
37:83-113 And lo! Of his persuasion verily was Abraham. When he came to his Lord with
a whole heart; when he said to his father and his folk: What is it that you worship? Is it a
falsehood – gods beside God – that you desire? What then is your opinion of the Lord of
the Worlds? And he glanced a glance at the stars. Then said: Lo! I feel sick! And they
turned their backs and went away from him. Then turned he to their gods and said: Will
you not eat? What ails you that you speak not? Then he attacked them, striking with his
right hand. And (his people) came toward him, hastening. He said: Worship you that
which you yourselves do carve when God has created you and what you make? They said:
Build for him a building and fling him in the red hot fire. And they designed a snare for
him, but We made them the undermost. And he said: Lo! I am going to my Lord Who will
guide me. My Lord! Give me of the righteous. So We gave him tidings of a gentle son –
And when (his son) was old enough to walk with him, (Abraham) said: O my dear son, I
have seen in a dream that I must sacrifice you. So look, what think you? He said: O my

183

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

father! Do that which you are commanded. God willing, you shall find me of the patient.
Then, when they had both surrendered (to God), and he had flung him down upon his
face, We called to him: O Abraham: You have already fulfilled the vision. Lo! Thus do We
reward the good. Lo! That verily was a clear test. Then We ransomed him with a
tremendous victim. And We left for him among the later folk (the salutation): Peace be to
Abraham! Thus do We reward the good. Lo! He is one of Our believing slaves. And We
gave him tidings of the birth of Isaac, a Prophet of the righteous. And We blessed him
and Isaac. And of their seed are some who do good, and some who plainly wrong
themselves.
37:114-122 And We verily gave grace to Moses and Aaron, and saved them and their
people from the great distress, and helped them so that they became the victors. And We
gave them the clear Scripture, and showed them the right path. And We left for them,
among the later folk (the salutation): Peace be to Moses and Aaron! Lo! Thus do We
reward the good. Lo! They are two of our believing slaves.
37:123-132 And lo! Elias was of those sent (to warn), when he said to his folk: Will you
not fear (God)? Will you cry to Baal and forsake the Best of Creators, God, your Lord and
Lord of your forefathers? But they denied him, so they surely will be haled forth (to the
punishment) except single-minded slaves of God. And we left for him among the later
folk (the salutation): Peace be to Elias! Lo! Thus do We reward the good. Lo! He is one of
our believing slaves.
37:133-138 And lo! Lot verily was of those sent (to warn), when We saved him and his
household, every one, except an old woman among those who stayed behind; then We
destroyed the others. And Lo! You verily pass by (the ruin of) them in the morning and at
night time; have you then no sense?
37:139-148 And lo! Jonah verily was of those sent (to warn) when he fled to the laden
ship, and then drew lots and was of those rejected; and the fish swallowed him while he
was blameworthy; and had he not been one of those who glorify (God), he would have
tarried in its belly till the Day when they are raised; then We cast him on a desert shore
while he was sick; and We caused a tree of gourd to grow above him; and We sent him to
a hundred thousand (folk) or more and they believed, therefore We gave them comfort
for a while.
37:149-157 Now ask them (O Muhammad): Has your Lord daughters whereas they have
sons? Or created We the angels females while they were present? Lo! It is of their
falsehood that they say: God has begotten. And lo! Verily they tell a lie. (And again of
their falsehood): He has preferred daughters to sons. What ails you? How judge you? Will
you not then reflect? Or have you a clear warrant? Then produce your writ, if you are
truthful.
37:158-163 And they imagine kinship between him and the jinn, whereas the jinn know
well that they will be brought before (Him). Glorified be God from that which they
attribute (to Him), except single-minded slaves of God. Lo! Verily, you and that which you
worship, you cannot excite (anyone) against Him except him who is to burn in Hell.
37:164-166 There is not one of us but has his known position. Lo! We, even we are they
who set the ranks. Lo! We, even we are they who hymn His praise.
37:167-173 And indeed they used to say: If we had but a reminder from the men of old,
we would be single-minded slaves of God. Yet (now that it has come) they disbelieve
therein: but they will come to know. And verily Our Word went forth of old to Our
bondsmen sent (to warn) that they verily would be helped, and that Our host, they verily
would be the victors.
37:174-177 So withdraw from them (O Muhammad) awhile and watch, for they will

184

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

(soon) see. Would they hasten on Our punishment? But when it comes home to them,
then it will be an evil morn for those who have been warned.
37:178-182 Withdraw from them awhile and watch, for they will (soon) see. Glorified be
your Lord, the Lord of majesty, from that which they attribute (to Him). And peace be to
those sent (to warn). And praise be to God, Lord of the Worlds!

38. Sad (Abbreviated Letter)
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
38:1 Sad . By the renowned Quran, nay, but those who disbelieve are in false pride and
schism.
38:3-11 How many a generation We destroyed before them, and they cried out when it
was no longer the time for escape! And they marvel that a warner from among themselves
has come to them, and the disbelievers say: This is a wizard, a charlatan. Makes he the
gods One God? Lo! That is an astounding thing. The chiefs among them go about,
exhorting: Go and be staunch to your gods! Lo! This is a thing designed. We have not
heard of this in later religion. This is nothing but an invention. Has the reminder been
revealed to him (alone) among us? Nay, but they are in doubt concerning My reminder;
nay but they have not yet tasted My punishment. Or are theirs the treasures of the mercy
of your Lord, the Mighty, the Bestower? Or is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth
and all that is between them theirs? Then let them ascend by ropes! A defeated host are
(all) the factions that are there.
38:12-16 The folk of Noah before them denied (their Messenger) and (so did the tribe of)
Aad, and Pharaoh firmly planted, and (the tribe of) Thamud; and the folk of Lot, and the
dwellers in the wood: these were the factions. Not one of them but did deny the
Messengers, therefore My punishment was justified, these wait for but one shout, there
will be no second thereto. They say: Our Lord! Hasten on for us our fate before the Day
of Reckoning.
38:17-20 Have patience with what they say, and remember Our bondsman David, lord of
might. Lo! He was ever turning in repentance (toward God). Lo! We subdued the hills to
hymn the praises (of their Lord) with him at nightfall and sunrise, and the birds
assembled; all were turning to Him. We made his kingdom strong and gave him wisdom
and decisive speech.
38:21-26 And has the story of the litigants come to you? How they climbed the wall into
the royal chamber; how they burst in upon David, and he was afraid of them. They said
Be not afraid (We are) two litigants, one of whom has wronged the other, therefore judge
aright between us; be not unjust; and guide us to the fair way. Lo! This brother of mine
has ninety and nine ewes while I had one ewe; and he said: Entrust it to me, and he
conquered me in speech. (David) said: He has wronged you in demanding your ewe in
addition to his ewes, and lo! Many partners oppress one another, except such as believe
and do good works, and they are few. And David guessed that We had tried him, and he
sought forgiveness of his Lord, and he bowed himself and fell down prostrate and
repented. So We forgave him that; and lo! He had access to Us and a happy journey's end.
(And it was said to him): O David! Lo! We have set you as a viceroy in the earth; therefore
judge aright between people, and follow not desire that it deceive you from the way of
God. Lo! Those who wander from the way of God have an awful punishment, forasmuch
as they forgot the Day of Reckoning.
38:27 And We created not the heaven and the earth and all that is between them in vain.
That is the opinion of those who disbelieve. And woe to those who disbelieve, from the

185

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

Fire!
38:28 Shall We treat those who believe and do good works as those who spread
corruption in the earth; or shall We treat the pious as the wicked?
38:29 (This is) a Scripture that We have revealed to you, full of blessing, that they may
ponder its revelations, and that men of understanding may reflect.
38:30-40 And We bestowed on David, Solomon. How excellent a slave! Lo! He was ever
turning in repentance (toward God). When there were shown to him at eventide lightfooted coursers and he said: Lo! I have preferred the good things (of the world) to the
remembrance of my Lord; till they were taken out of sight behind the curtain. (Then he
said:) Bring them back to me, and fell to slashing (with his sword their) legs and necks.
And verily We tried Solomon, and set upon his throne a (mere) body. Then did he repent.
He said: My Lord! Forgive me and bestow on me kingdom such shall not belong to any
after me. Lo! You are the Bestower. So We made the wind subservient to him, setting fair
by his command wherever he intended. And the unruly, every builder and diver (made We
subservient), and others linked together in chains, (saying:) This is Our gift, so bestow
you, or withhold, without reckoning. And lo! He has favor with Us, and a happy journey's
end.
38:41-44 And make mention (O Muhammad) of Our bondman Job, when he cried to his
Lord (saying): Lo! Satan does afflict me with distress and torment. (And it was said to
him:) Strike the ground with your foot. This (spring) is a cool bath and a refreshing drink.
And We bestowed on him (again) his household and therewith the like thereof, a mercy
from Us, and a memorial for men of understanding. And (it was said to him): Take in your
hand a branch and smite therewith, and break not your oath. Lo! We found him patient,
how excellent a slave! Lo! He was ever turning in repentance (to his Lord).
38:45-47 And make mention of our bondsmen, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, men of parts
and vision. Lo! We purified them with a pure thought, remembrance of the Home (of the
Hereafter). Lo! In Our sight they are verily of the elect, the excellent.
38:48-49 And make mention of Ishmael and Elisha and Dhul-Kifl. All are of the chosen.
This is a reminder. And lo! For the pious is a happy journey's end.
38:50-55 Gardens of Eden, whereof the gates are opened for them. Wherein, reclining,
they call for plenteous fruit and cool drink (that is) therein. And with them are those of
modest gaze, companions. This it is that you are promised for the Day of Reckoning. Lo!
This in truth is Our provision, which will never waste away. This (is for the righteous).
And lo! For the transgressors there will be an evil journey's end.
38:56-59 Hell, where they will burn, an evil resting place. Here is a boiling and an ice-cold
draught, so let them taste it, and other (torment) of the kind in pairs (the two extremes)!
Here is an army rushing blindly with you. (Those who are already in the Fire say:) No
word of welcome for them. Lo! They will roast at the Fire.
38:60-64 They say: Nay, but you (misleaders), for you there is no word of welcome. You
prepared this for us (by your misleading). Now evil is the plight. They say: Our Lord!
Whoever did prepare this for us, oh; give him double portion of the Fire! And they say:
What ails us that we behold not men whom we were wont to count among the wicked?
Did we take them (wrongly) for a laughing stock, or have our eyes missed them? Lo! that
is very truth: the wrangling of the dwellers in the Fire.
38:65 Say (to them, O Muhammad): I am only a warner, and none should be worshipped
but God alone, the One, the Absolute,
38:66 Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them, the Mighty, the

186

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

Pardoning.
38:67-70 Say: It is tremendous tidings whence you turn away! I had no knowledge of the
Highest Chiefs when they disputed; it is revealed to me only that I may be a plain warner.
38:71-74 When your Lord said to the angels: lo! I am about to create a mortal out of mire,
and when I have fashioned him and breathed into him of My spirit, then fall down before
him prostrate, the angels fell down prostrate, every one. Except Iblis, he was arrogant and
became one of the disbelievers.
38:75-85 He said: O Iblis! What hinders you from falling prostrate before that which I
have created with both My hands? Are you too proud or are you of the high exalted? He
said: I am better than him. You created me of fire, while him You did create of clay. He
said: Go forth from hence, for lo! You are outcast, and lo! My curse is on you till the Day
of Judgment. He said: My Lord! Reprieve me till the Day when they are raised. He said:
Lo! You are of those reprieved until the day of the time appointed. He said: Then, by
Your might, I surely will deceive them every one, except Your single-minded slaves among
them. He said: The truth is, and the truth I speak, that I shall fill Hell with you and with
such of them as follow you, together.
38:86-88 Say (O Muhammad to people): I ask of you no fee for this, and I am no
impostor. Lo! It is nothing else than a reminder for all peoples. And you will come in time
to know the truth thereof.

39. Az-Zumar: The Troops
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
39:1 The revelation of the Scripture is from God, the Mighty, the Wise.
39:2-3 Lo! We have revealed the Scripture to you (O Muhammad) with truth; so worship
God, making religion pure for Him (only). Surely pure religion is for God only. And those
who choose helpers (and protectors) beside Him (say): We worship them only that they
may bring us near to God. Lo! God will judge between them concerning that wherein they
differ. Lo! God guides not him who is a liar, an ingrate.
39:4 If God had willed to choose a son, he could have chosen what he would of that
which He has created. Be He glorified! He is God, the One, the Absolute.
39:5 He has created the heavens and the earth with truth. He makes night to succeed day,
and He makes day to succeed night, and He constrains the sun and the moon to give
service, each running on for an appointed term. Is not He the Mighty, the Forgiver?
39:6 He created you from one being, then from that (being) He made its mate; and He has
provided for you of cattle eight kinds. He created you in the wombs of your mothers,
creation after creation, in a threefold gloom. Such is God, your Lord. His is the supreme
power. None should be worshipped but God alone. How then are you turned away?
39:7 If you are thankless, yet God is Independent of you, though He is not pleased with
thanklessness for His bondmen; and if you are thankful He is pleased therewith for you.
No laden soul will bear another's load. Then to your Lord is your return; and He will tell
you what you used to do. Lo! He knows what is in the breasts (of men).
39:8 And when some hurt touches man, he cries to his Lord, turning to Him (repentant).
Then, when He grants him a boon from Him, he forgets that for which he cried to Him
before, and sets up rivals to God that he may deceive (men) from His way. Say (O

187

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

Muhammad, to such a one): Take pleasure in your disbelief a while. Lo! You are of the
inhabitants of the Fire.
39:9 Is he who pays adoration in the watches of the night, prostrate and standing,
bewaring of the Hereafter and hoping for the mercy of his Lord, (to be accounted equal
with a disbeliever)? Say (to them, O Muhammad): Are those who know equal with those
who know not? But only men of understanding will pay heed.
39:10 Say: O My bondmen who believe! Observe your duty to your Lord. For those who
do good in this world there is good, and God's earth is spacious. Verily the patient will be
paid their wages without limit.
39:11-12 Say (O Muhammad): Lo! I am commanded to worship God, making religion
pure for Him (only). And I am commanded to be the first of Muslims (those who
surrender to Him).
39:13-14 Say: Lo! If I should disobey my Lord, I fear the punishment of a tremendous
Day. Say: God I worship, making my religion pure for Him (only).
39:15-16 Then worship what you will beside Him. Say: The losers will be those who lose
themselves and their house folk on the Day of Resurrection. Ah, that will be the manifest
loss! They have an awning of fire above them and beneath them a dais (of fire). With this
does God appall His bondmen. O My bondmen, therefore fear Me!
39:17-18 And those who put away false gods lest they should worship them and turn to
God in repentance, for them there are glad tidings. Therefore give good tidings (O
Muhammad) to my bondmen who hear advice and follow the best thereof. Such are those
whom God guides, and such are men of understanding.
39:19-20 Is he on whom the Word of punishment is fulfilled (to be helped), and can you
(O Muhammad) rescue him who is in the Fire? But those who keep their duty to their
Lord, for them are lofty halls with lofty halls above them, built (for them), beneath which
rivers flow. (It is) a promise of God. God fails not His promise.
39:21 Have you not seen how God has sent down water from the sky and has caused it to
penetrate the earth as water springs, and afterward thereby produces crops of diverse
hues; and afterward they wither and you see them turn yellow; then He makes them chaff.
Lo! Herein verily is a reminder for men of understanding.
39:22 Is he whose bosom God has expanded for Islam (surrender to Him), so that he
follows a light from His Lord, (as he who disbelieves)? Then woe to those whose hearts
are hardened against remembrance of God. Such are in plain error.
39:23 God has now revealed the best of Scriptures, a Book with parts resembling each
other (and)
frequently repeated, which raises the hair on the skins of those who fear their Lord, so
that their flesh and their hearts soften to the remembrance of God. That is the guidance
of God, He guides with it whom He pleases; and whom God leaves astray, for him there
is no guide.
39:24 Is he then, who will strike his face against the awful punishment upon the Day of
Resurrection (as he who does right)? And it will be said to the wrongdoers: Taste what you
used to earn.
39:25-26 Those before them denied, and so the punishment came on them whence they
knew not. Thus God made them taste humiliation in the life of the world, and verily the
punishment of the Hereafter will be greater if they did but know.

188

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

39:27-28 And verily We have coined for people in this Quran all kinds of similitudes, that
perhaps they may reflect; a Lecture in Arabic, containing no crookedness, that perhaps
they may adopt piety.
39:29 God coins a similitude: A man in relation to whom are several part-owners,
quarrelling, and a man belonging wholly to one man. Are the two equal in similitude?
Praise be to God! But most of them know not.
39:30-31 Lo! You will die, and lo! They will die; then lo! On the Day of Resurrection,
before your Lord you will dispute.
39:32 And who does greater wrong than he who tells a lie against God, and denies the
truth when it reaches him? Will not the home of disbelievers be in Hell?
39:33-31 And whoever brings the truth and believes therein – such are the dutiful. They
shall have what they will of their Lord's bounty. That is the reward of the good: That God
will expiate from them the worst of what they did, and will pay them for reward of the
best they used to do. Will not God defend His slave? Yet they would frighten you with
those beside Him. He whom God sends astray, for him there is no guide. And he whom
God guides, for him there can be no misleader. Is not God Mighty, Able to requite (the
wrong)?
39:38 And verily, if you should ask them: Who created the heavens and the earth? They
will say: God. Say: Do you think then of those you worship beside God, if God willed
some hurt for me, could they remove from me His hurt; or if He willed some mercy for
me, could they restrain His mercy? Say: God is my all. In Him do (all) the trusting put
their trust.
39:39-40 Say: O my people! Act in your manner. I too am acting. Thus you will come to
know who it is to whom comes a punishment that will abase him, and on whom there falls
everlasting punishment.
39:41 Lo! We have revealed to you (Muhammad) the Scripture for people with truth. Then
whosoever goes right it is for his soul, and whosoever strays, strays only to his hurt. And
you are not a warder over them.
39:42 God receives (men's) souls at the time of their death, and that (soul), which dies not
(yet) in its sleep. He keeps that (soul) for which He has ordained death and dismisses the
rest till an
appointed term. Lo! Herein verily are signs for people who take thought.
39:43-44 Or choose they intercessors other than God? Say: What! Even though they have
power over nothing and have no intelligence? Say: To God belongs all intercession. His is
the supreme power of the heavens and the earth. And afterward to Him you will be
brought back.
39:45-46 And when God alone is mentioned, the hearts of those who believe not in the
Hereafter are repelled, and when those (whom they worship) beside Him are mentioned,
behold! They are glad. Say: O God! Creator of the heavens and the earth! Knower of the
invisible and the visible! You will judge between Your slaves concerning that wherein they
used to differ.
39:47-48 And though those who do wrong possess all that is in the earth, and as much
again, they verily will seek to ransom themselves therewith on the Day of Resurrection
from the awful punishment; and there will appear to them, from their Lord, that
wherewith they never reckoned. And the evils that they earned will appear to them, and
that whereat they used to scoff will surround them.

189

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

39:49-53 Now when hurt touches a man he cries to Us, and afterward when We have
granted him a boon from Us, he says: Only by force of knowledge I obtained it. Nay, but
it is a test. But most of them know not. Those before them said it, yet (all) that they had
earned availed them not; but the evils that they earned smote them; and such of these as
do wrong, the evils that they earn will smite them; they cannot escape. Know they not that
God enlarges providence for whom He wills, and straitens it (for whom He wills). Lo!
Herein verily are signs for people who believe. Say: My slaves who have been prodigal to
their own hurt! Despair not of the mercy of God, Who forgives all sins. Lo! He is the
Forgiving, the Merciful.
39:54-59 Turn to Him repentant, and surrender to Him (as a Muslim), before there comes
to you the punishment, when you cannot be helped. And follow the better (guidance) of
that which is revealed to you from your Lord, before the punishment comes on you
suddenly when you know not, lest any soul should say: Alas, my grief that I was unmindful
of God, and I was indeed among the scoffers! Or should say: if God had but guided me I
should have been among the dutiful! Or should say, when it sees the punishment: Oh, that
I had but a second chance that I might be among the righteous! (But now the answer will
be): Nay, for My revelations came to you, but you did deny them and were arrogant and
were among the disbelievers.
39:60 And on the Day of Resurrection you (Muhammad) see those who lied concerning
God with their faces blackened. Is not the home of the arrogant in Hell?
39:61-62 And God delivers those who adopt piety because of their deserts. Evil touches
them not, nor do they grieve. God is Creator of all things, and He is Guardian over all
things.
39:63 His are the keys of the heavens and the earth, and they who disbelieve the
revelations of God. such are they who are the losers.
39:64-66 Say (O Muhammad, to the disbelievers): Do you bid me worship other than
God? O you fools! And verily it has been revealed to you as to those before you (saying):
If you ascribe a partner to God your work will fail and you indeed will be among the
losers. Nay, but God must you worship, and be among the thankful!
39:67 And they esteem not God as He has the right to be esteemed, when the whole earth
is His handful on the Day of Resurrection, and the heavens are rolled in His right Hand.
Glorified is He and High Exalted from all that they ascribe as partner (to Him).
39:68-70 And the Trumpet is blown, and all who are in the heavens and the earth swoon
away, except him whom God wills. Then it is blown a second time, and behold them
standing and waiting! And the earth shines with the light of her Lord, and the Book is set
up, and the Prophets and the witnesses are brought, and it is judged between them with
truth, and they are not wronged. And each soul is paid in full for what it did. And He is
Best Aware of what they do.
39:71-72 And those who disbelieve are driven into Hell in troops till, when they reach it
and the gates thereof are opened, and the warders thereof say to them: Came there not to
you Messengers of your own, reciting to you the revelations of your Lord and warning you
of the meeting of this your Day? They say: Yes, verily. But the Word of punishment for
disbelievers is fulfilled. It is said (to them): Enter you the gates of Hell to dwell therein.
Thus evil is the journey's end of the arrogant.
39:73-74 And those who keep their duty to their Lord are driven to the Garden in troops
till, when they reach it, and the gates thereof are opened, and the warders thereof say to
them: Peace be to you! You are good, so enter you (the Garden of Delight), to dwell
therein; they say: Praise be to God, Who has fulfilled His promise to us and has made us
inherit the land, sojourning in the Garden where we will! So bounteous is the wage of

190

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

workers.
39:75 And you (O Muhammad) see the angels thronging round the Throne, hymning the
praises of their Lord. And they are judged aright. And it is said: Praise be to God, the
Lord of the Worlds!

40. Ghafir: Forgiver
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
40:1-3 Ha. Mim. The revelation of the Scripture is from God , the Mighty, the Knower,
the Forgiver of sin, the Acceptor of repentance, the Stern in punishment, the Bountiful .
None should be worshipped but God alone . To Him is the journeying.
40:4-6 None argue concerning the revelations of God except those who disbelieve, so let
not their turn of fortune in the land deceive you (O Muhammad). The folk of Noah and
the factions after them denied (their Messengers) before these, and every nation purposed
to seize their Messenger and argued falsely, (thinking) thereby to refute the Truth. Then I
seized them, and how (awful) was My punishment. Thus was the word of your Lord
concerning those who disbelieve fulfilled: that they are inhabitants of the Fire.
40:7-8 Those who bear the Throne, and all who are round about it, hymn the praises of
their Lord and believe in Him and ask forgiveness for those who believe (saying): Our
Lord! You comprehend all things in mercy and knowledge, therefore forgive those who
repent and follow Your way. Ward off from them the punishment of Hell, Our Lord! And
make them enter the Gardens of Eden which You have promised them, with such of their
fathers and their wives and their descendants as do right. Lo! You, only You, are the
Mighty, the Wise.
40:9 And ward off from them ill deeds; and he from whom You ward off ill deeds that
Day, him verily have You taken into mercy. That is the supreme triumph.
40:10-12 Lo! (On that Day) those who disbelieve are informed by proclamation: Verily
God's abhorrence is more terrible than your abhorrence one of another, when you were
called to the faith but did refuse. They say: Our Lord! Twice have You made us die, and
twice have You made us live. Now we confess our sins. Is there any way to go out? (It is
said to them:) This is (your plight) because, when God only was invoked, you disbelieved,
but when some partner was ascribed to Him you were believed. But the command belongs
only to God, the Sublime, and the Majestic.
40:13-14 It is He Who shows you His signs, and sends down for you provision from the
sky. None pays heed except him who turns (to Him) repentant. Therefore (O believers)
pray to God, making religion pure for Him (only), however much the disbelievers are
averse.
40:15-16 The Exalter of ranks, the Lord of the Throne. He casts the Spirit of His
command upon whom He wills of His slaves, that He may warn of the Day of Meeting,
the Day when they come forth, nothing of them being hidden from God. Whose is the
supreme power this Day? It is God's, the One, the Almighty.
40:17 This Day is each soul requited that which it has earned; no wrong (is done) this Day.
Lo! God is Swift at reckoning.
40:18-20 Warn them (O Muhammad) of the Day of the approaching (punishment), when
the hearts will be choking the throats, (when) there will be no friend for the wrongdoers,
nor any intercessor who will be heard. He knows the traitor of the eyes, and that which

191

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

the bosoms hide. God judges with truth, while those to whom they cry instead of Him,
judge not at all. Lo! God, He is the Hearer, the Seer.
40:21-22 Have they not traveled in the land to see the nature of the consequence for those
who disbelieved before them? They were mightier than these in power and (in the) traces
(which they left behind them) in the earth. Yet God seized them for their sins, and they
had no protector from God. That was because their Messengers kept bringing them clear
proofs (of God's supreme power) but they disbelieved; so God seized them. Lo! He is
Strong, Severe in punishment.
40:23-27 And verily We sent Moses with Our revelations and a clear warrant to Pharaoh
and Haman and Korah, but they said: A lying sorcerer! And when he brought them the
Truth from Us, they said: Slay the sons of those who believe with him, and spare their
women. But the plot of disbelievers is in nothing but error. And Pharaoh said: Leave me
to kill Moses, and let him cry to his Lord. Lo! I fear that he will alter your religion or that
he will cause confusion in the land. Moses said: Lo! I seek refuge in my Lord and your
Lord from every arrogant person who believes not in The Day of Reckoning.
40:28-31 And a believing man of Pharaoh's family, who hid his faith, said: Would you kill
a man because he says: My Lord is God, and has brought you clear proofs from your
Lord? If he is lying, then his lie is upon him; and if he is truthful then some of that
wherewith he threatens you will strike you. Lo! God guides not one who is a prodigal, a
liar. O my people! Yours is the kingdom today, you being uppermost in the land. But who
would save us from the wrath of God should it reach us? Pharaoh said: I do but show you
what I think, and I do but guide you to wise policy. And he who believed said: O my
people! Lo! I fear for you a fate like that of the factions (of old); a plight like that of
Noah's folk, and Aad and Thamud, and those after them, and God wills no injustice for
(His) slaves.
40:32-35 And, O my people! Lo! I fear for a Day of Summoning, a Day when you will
turn to flee, having no preserver from God: and he whom God sends astray, for him there
is no guide. And verily Joseph brought you clear proofs of old, yet you ceased not to be in
doubt concerning what he brought you till, when he died, he said: God will not send any
Messenger after him. Thus God deceives him who is a prodigal, a doubter. Those who
wrangle concerning the revelations of God without any warrant that has come to them, it
is greatly hateful in the sight of God and in the sight of those who believe. Thus does God
print on every arrogant, disdainful heart.
40:36-37 And Pharaoh said: O Haman! Build for me a tower that perhaps I may reach the
roads, the roads of the heavens, and may look upon the God of Moses, though verily I
think him a liar. Thus was the evil that he did make fair seeming to Pharaoh, and he was
debarred from the (right) way. The plot of Pharaoh ended but in (his) ruin.
40:38-42 And he who believed said: O my people! Follow, me. I will show you the way of
right conduct. O my people! Lo! This life of the world is but a passing comfort, and lo!
The Hereafter, that is the enduring home. Whoever does an ill deed, he will be repaid the
like thereof, while whoever does right, whether male or female, and is a believer, (all) such
will enter the Garden, where they will be nourished without limit. And, O my people!
What ails me that I call you to deliverance when you call me to the Fire? You call me to
disbelieve in God and ascribe to Him as partners that whereof I have no knowledge, while
I call you to the Mighty, the Forgiver.
40:43-44 Assuredly that whereto you call me has no claim in the world or in the Hereafter,
and our return will be to God, and the prodigals will be inhabitants of the Fire. And you
will remember what I say to you. I confide my cause to God. Lo! God is Seer of (His)
slaves.
40:45-50 So God warded off from him the evils that they plotted, while a dreadful

192

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

punishment encompassed Pharaoh's folk. The Fire; they are exposed to it morning and
evening; and on the Day when the Hour up rises (it is said): Cause Pharaoh's folk to enter
the most awful punishment. And when they wrangle in the Fire, the weak say to those
who were proud: Lo! We were a following to you: will you therefore rid us of a portion of
the Fire? Those who were proud say: Lo! We are all (together) herein. Lo! God has judged
between (His) slaves. And those in the Fire say to the guards of Hell: Entreat your Lord
that He relieve us of a day of the torment. They say: Came not your Messengers to you
with clear proofs? They say: Yes, verily. They say: Then do you pray, although the prayer
of disbelievers is in vain.
40:51-52 Lo! We verily do help Our Messengers, and those who believe, in the life of the
world and on the Day when the witnesses arise, the Day when their excuse avails not the
evildoers, and theirs is the curse, and theirs is the ill abode.
40:53-54 And we verily gave Moses the guidance, and We caused the Children of Israel to
inherit the Scripture, a guide and a reminder for men of understanding.
40:55 Then have patience (O Muhammad). Lo! The promise of God is true. And ask
forgiveness of your sin, and hymn the praise of your Lord at the fall of night and in the
early hours.
40:56 Lo! Those who wrangle concerning the revelations of God without a warrant having
come to them, there is nothing else in their breasts except arrogance which they will never
attain. So take you refuge in God. Lo! He, only He, is the Hearer, the Seer.
40:57 Assuredly the creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of
humankind; but most of people knows not.
40:58-59 And the blind man and the man that can see are not equal, neither are those who
believe and do good works (equal with) the evildoer. Little do you reflect! Lo! The Hour is
surely coming, there is no doubt thereof; yet most of people believe not.
40:60 And your Lord has said: Pray to Me and I will hear your prayer. Lo! Those who
scorn My worship, they will enter Hell, disgraced.
40:61-63 God it is Who has appointed for you night that you may rest therein, and day for
seeing. Lo! God is the Lord of bounty for people, yet most of people gives not thanks.
Such is God, your Lord, and the Creator of all things. None should be worshipped but
God alone. How then are you perverted? Thus are they perverted who deny the
revelations of God.
40:64 It is God that appointed for you the earth for a dwelling place and the sky for a
canopy, and fashioned you and perfected your shapes, and has provided you with good
things. Such is God, your Lord. Then blessed be God, the Lord of the Worlds!
40:65 He is the Living One. None should be worshipped but God alone. So pray to Him,
making religion pure for Him (only). Praise be to God, the Lord of the Worlds!
40:66 Say (O Muhammad): I am forbidden to worship those to whom you cry beside God
since there has come to me clear proofs from my Lord, and I am commanded to
surrender (as a Muslim) to the Lord of the Worlds.
40:67 It is He that created you from dust, then from a drop (of seed) then from a clot,
then brings you forth as a child, then (ordains) that you attain full strength and afterward
that you become old men. though some among you die before – and that you reach an
appointed term, that perhaps you may understand.
40:68 It is He Who quickens and gives death. When He ordains a thing, He says to it only:

193

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

Be! And it is.
40:69-76 Have you not seen those who wrangle concerning the revelations of God, how
they are turned away? .Those who deny the Scripture and that wherewith we send Our
Messengers. But they will come to know, when shackles are about their necks and chains.
They are dragged through boiling waters; then they are thrust into the Fire. Then it is said
to them: Where are (all) that you used to make partners (in the supreme power) beside
God? They say: They have failed us: but we used not to pray to anything before. Thus
does God send astray the disbelievers (in His guidance). (And it is said to them): This is
because you exulted in the earth without right, and because you were petulant. Enter you
the gates of Hell, to dwell therein. Evil is the habitation of the arrogant.
40:77-78 Then have patience (O Muhammad). Lo! The promise of God is true. And
whether We let you see a part of that which We promise them, or (whether) We cause you
to die, still to us they will be brought back. Verily We sent Messengers before you, among
them those of whom We have told you, and some of whom We have not told you; and it
was not given to any Messenger that he should bring a sign except by God's leave, but
when God's commandment comes (the cause) is judged aright, and the followers of vanity
will then be lost.
40:79-81 It is God Who has appointed for you cattle, that you may ride on some of them,
and eat of some.(many) benefits you have from them – and that you may attain by way of
conveyance upon them that for which your hearts find a need, and upon them and upon
ships you are carried.. And He shows you His signs. Which, then, of the signs of God do
you deny?
40:82-85 Have they not traveled in the land to see the nature of the consequence for those
before them? They were more numerous than these, and mightier in power and (in the)
traces (which they left behind them) in the earth. But all that they used to earn availed
them not. And when their Messengers brought them clear proofs (of God's supreme
power) they exulted in the knowledge they (themselves) possessed. And that which they
were wont to mock befell them. Then, when they saw Our punishment, they said: We
believe in God only and reject (all) that we used to associate (with Him). But their faith
could not avail them when they saw Our punishment. This is God's law, which has ever
taken course for His bondsmen. And then the disbelievers will be ruined.

41. Fussilat: Expounded
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
41:1-5 Ha. Mim. A revelation from the Beneficent, the Merciful, a Scripture whereof the
verses are expounded, a Lecture in Arabic for people who have knowledge . Good tidings
and a warning. But most of them turn away so that they hear not. And they say : Our
hearts are protected from that to which you (O Muhammad) call us, and in our ears there
is a deafness , and between us and you there is a veil. Act , then . Lo! We also shall be
acting.
41:6-8 Say (to them, O Muhammad): I am only a mortal like you. It is inspired in me that
your God is One God, therefore take the straight path to Him and seek forgiveness of
Him. And woe to the polytheists, who give not the poor-due, and who are disbelievers in
the Hereafter. Lo! As for those who believe and do good works, for them is a reward
enduring.
41:9-12 Say (O Muhammad, to the polytheists): Disbelieve you verily in Him Who created
the earth in two Days, and ascribe you to Him rivals? He (and none else) is the Lord of
the Worlds. He placed therein firm hills rising above it, and blessed it and measured

194

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

therein its sustenance in four Days, alike for (all) who ask; then turned He to the heaven
when it was smoke, and said to it and to the earth: Come both of you, willingly or loath.
They said: We come, obedient. Then He ordained them seven heavens in two Days and
inspired in each heaven its mandate; and we decked the nether heaven with lamps, and
rendered it inviolable. That is the measuring of the Mighty, the Knower.
41:13-14 But if they turn away, then say: I warn you of a thunderbolt like the thunderbolt
(which fell of old upon the tribes) of Aad and Thamud; when their Messengers came to
them from before them and behind them, saying: Worship none but God! They said: If
our Lord had willed, He surely would have sent down angels (to us), so lo! We are
disbelievers in that wherewith you have been sent.
41:15-16 As for Aad, they were arrogant in the land without right, and they said: Who is
mightier than us in power? Could they not see that God Who created them, He was
Mightier than them in power? And they denied Our revelations. Therefore We let loose
on them a raging wind in evil days, that We might make them taste the torment of
disgrace in the life of the world. And verily the punishment of the Hereafter will be more
shameful, and they will not be helped.
41:17-18 And as for Thamud, We gave them guidance, but they preferred blindness to the
guidance, so the bolt of the punishment of humiliation overtook them because of what
they used to earn. And We delivered those who believed and used to keep their duty to
God.
41:19-21 And (make mention of) the Day when the enemies of God are gathered to the
Fire, they are driven on till, when they reach it, their ears and their eyes and their skins
testify against them as to what they used to do. And they say to their skins: Why testify
you against us? They say: God has given us speech God gives speech to all things, and He
created you at the first, and to Him you are returned.
41:22-23 You did not hide yourselves lest your ears and your eyes and your skins should
testify against you, but you deemed that God knew not much of what you did. That your
thoughts which you did think about your Lord, has ruined you; and you find yourselves
(this Day) among the lost.
41:24-25 Even if they bear patiently, the Fire will be their abode; and if they ask for favor,
they are not of those to whom favor shall be allowed. And We assigned them comrades
(in the world), who made their present and their past fair seeming to them. And the Word
concerning nations of the jinn and humankind who passed away before them has effect
for them. Verily they are the losers.
41:26-28 Those who disbelieve say: Heed not this Quran, and talk noisily while it is being
recited; perhaps you may conquer. But verily We shall cause those who disbelieve to taste
an awful punishment, and verily We shall requite them the worst of what they used to do.
That is the reward of God's enemies: the Fire. Therein is their immortal home; payment
forasmuch as they denied Our revelations.
41:29 And those who disbelieve will say: Our Lord! Show us those who deceived us of the
jinn and humankind. We will place them underneath our feet that they may be among the
nethermost.
41:30-32 Lo! Those who say: Our Lord is God, and afterward are upright, the angels
descend upon them, saying: Fear not nor grieve, but hear good tidings of the Paradise
which you are promised. We are your helpers (and protectors) in the life of the world and
in the Hereafter. There you will have (all) that your souls desire, and there you will have
(all) for which you pray. A gift of welcome from the Forgiving, the Merciful.
41:33 And who is better in speech than him who prays to his Lord and does right, and

195

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

says: Lo! I am of those who are Muslims (surrender to Him).
41:34-36 The good deed and the evil deed are not alike. Repel the evil deed with one,
which is better, then lo! He, between whom and you there was enmity (will become) as
though he was a bosom friend. But none is granted it except those who are patient, and
none is granted it except the owner of great happiness. And if a whisper from Satan
reaches you (O Muhammad) then seek refuge in God. Lo! He is the Hearer, the Knower.
41:37-38 And of His signs are the night and the day and the sun and the moon. Adore
neither the sun nor the moon; but adore God Who created them, if it is in truth Him
whom you worship. But if they are too proud – still those who are with your Lord glorify
Him night and day, and tire not.
41:39 And of His signs (is this): that you see the earth barren and desolate, but when We
send down water thereon, it thrills and grows. Lo! He Who quickens it is verily the
Quickener of the dead. Lo! He is Able to do all things.
41:40 Lo! Those who distort Our revelations are not hidden from Us. Is he who is hurled
into the Fire better, or he who comes secure on the Day of Resurrection? Do what you
will. Lo! He is Seer of what you do.
41:41-42 Lo! Those who disbelieve in the Reminder when it comes to them (are guilty),
for lo! It is an unassailable Scripture. Falsehood cannot come at it from before it or behind
it. (It is) a revelation from the Wise, the Owner of praise.
41:43 Nothing is said to you (O Muhammad) except what was said to the Messengers
before you. Lo! Your Lord is Owner of forgiveness, and Owner (also) of dire punishment.
41:44 And if We had appointed it a Lecture in a foreign tongue they would assuredly have
said: If only its verses were expounded (so that we might understand)? What! A foreign
tongue and an Arab? – Say to them (O Muhammad): For those who believe it is a
guidance and a healing; and as for those who disbelieve, there is a deafness in their ears,
and it is blindness for them. Such are called to from afar.
41:45 And We verily gave Moses the Scripture, but there has been dispute concerning it;
and but for a Word that had already gone forth from your Lord, it would ere now have
been judged between them; but lo! They are in hopeless doubt concerning it.
41:46 Whoever does right it is for his soul, and whoever does wrong it is against his soul.
And your Lord is not at all a tyrant to His slaves.
41:47-48 To Him is referred (all) knowledge of the Hour. And no fruits burst forth from
their sheaths, and no female carries or brings forth but with His knowledge. And on the
Day when He calls to them: Where are now My partners? They will say: We confess to
You, not one of us is a witness (for them). And those to whom they used to cry of old
have failed them, and they perceive they have no place of refuge.
41:49-51 Man tires not of praying for good, and if ill touches him, then he is disheartened,
and desperate. And verily, if We cause him to taste mercy after some hurt that has touched
him, he will say: This is my own; and I deem not that the Hour will ever rise, and if I am
brought back to my Lord, I surely shall be better off with Him – But We verily shall tell
those who disbelieve (all) that they did, and We verily shall make them taste hard
punishment. When We show favor to man, he withdraws and turns aside, but when ill
touches him then he abounds in prayer.
41:52 Have you not considered: If it is from God and you reject it – Who is further astray
than one who is at open feud (with God)?

196

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

41:53 We shall show them Our signs on the horizons and within themselves until it will be
manifest to them that it is the Truth. Does not your Lord suffice, since He is Witness over
all things?
41:54 How! Are they still in doubt about the meeting with their Lord? Lo! Is not He
surrounding all things?

42. Ash-Shura: Counsel
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
42:1-4 Ha. Mim. Ain. Sin. Qaf. Thus God the Mighty, the Knower inspires you (O
Muhammad) as (He inspired) those before you. To Him belong all that is in the heavens
and all that is in the earth , and He is the Sublime , the Tremendous .
42:5 The heavens above might almost be rent asunder while the angels hymn the praise of
their Lord and ask forgiveness for those on the earth. Lo! God is the Forgiver, the
Merciful.
42:6-7 And as for those who choose helpers (and protectors) beside Him, God is Warden
over them, and you are in no ways a guardian over them. And thus We have inspired in
you a Lecture in Arabic, that you may warn the mother town and those around it, and may
warn of a Day of Assembling whereof there is no doubt. A host will be in the Garden, and
a host of them in the Flame.
42:8-9 Had God willed, He could have made them one community, but God brings whom
He wills into His mercy. And the wrongdoers have neither protector nor helper. Or have
they chosen helpers (and protectors) besides Him? But God, He (alone) is the Guardian
(and Protector). He quickens the dead, and He is Able to do all things.
42:10-11 And in whatsoever you differ, the verdict therein belongs to God. Such is my
Lord, in Whom I put my trust, and to Whom I turn. The Creator of the heavens and the
earth. He has made for you pairs of yourselves, and of the cattle also pairs, whereby He
multiplies you. Nothing is as His likeness; and He is the Hearer, the Seer.
42:12 His are the keys of the heavens and the earth. He enlarges providence for whom He
wills and straitens (it for whom He wills). Lo! He is Knower of all things.
42:13 He has ordained for you that religion which He had ordained to Noah, and that
which We inspire in you (O Muhammad), and that which We commended to Abraham
and Moses and Jesus,
saying: Establish the religion, and be not divided therein. Dreadful for the polytheists is
that to which you call them. God chooses for Himself whom He wills, and guides to
Himself him who turns (toward Him).
42:14 And they were not divided until after the knowledge came to them, through rivalry
among themselves; and had it not been for a Word that had already gone forth from your
Lord for an appointed term, it surely had been judged between them. And those who were
made to inherit the Scripture after them are verily in hopeless doubt concerning it.
42:15 To this, then, summon (O Muhammad). And be you upright as you are
commanded, and follow not their lusts, but say: I believe in whatever Scripture God has
sent down, and I am commanded to be just among you. God is our Lord and your Lord.
To us our works and to you your works; no argument between us and you. God will bring
us together, and to Him is the journeying.

197

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

42:16-18 And those who argue concerning God after He has been acknowledged, their
argument has no weight with their Lord, and wrath is upon them and theirs will be an
awful punishment. It is God Who has revealed the Scripture with truth, and the Balance.
How can you know? It may be that the Hour is near. Those who believe not therein seek
to hasten it, while those who believe are fearful of it and know that it is the Truth. Are not
they who dispute, in doubt concerning the Hour, far astray?
42:19 God is Gracious to His slaves. He provides for whom He wills. And He is the
Strong, the Mighty.
42:20-21 Whoever desires the harvest of the Hereafter, We give him increase in its
harvest. And whoever desires the harvest of the world, We give him thereof, and he has
no portion in the Hereafter. Or have they partners (of God) who have made lawful for
them in religion that which God allowed not? And but for a decisive word (gone forth
already), it would have been judged between them. Lo! For wrongdoers is a painful
punishment.
42:22-23 You see the wrongdoers fearful of that which they have earned, and it will surely
befall them; while those who believe and do good works (will be) in flowering meadows of
the Gardens,
having what they wish from their Lord. This is the great preferment. It is this that God
announces to His bondmen who believe and do good works. Say (O Muhammad to
people): I ask of you no fee thereof, except loving kindness among kinsfolk. And whoever
scores a good deed We add to its good for him. Lo! God is Forgiving, Responsive.
42:24 Or say they: He has invented a lie concerning God? If God willed, He could have
sealed your heart (against them). And God will wipe out the lie and will vindicate the truth
by His Words. Lo! He is Aware of what is hidden in the breasts (of men).
42:25-27 And He it is Who accepts repentance from His bondmen, and pardons the evil
deeds, and knows what you do. And accepts those who do good works, and gives increase
to them of His bounty. And as for disbelievers, theirs will be an awful punishment. And if
God were to enlarge the provision for His slaves they would surely rebel in the earth, but
He sends down by measure as He wills. Lo! He is informed, a Seer of His bondmen.
42:28 And it is He Who sends down the saving rain after they have despaired, and spreads
out His mercy. He is the Guardian (and Protector), the Praiseworthy.
42:29 And of His signs is the creation of the heaven and the earth, and of whatever beasts
He has dispersed therein. And He is Able to gather them when He wills.
42:30 Whatever of misfortune strikes you, it is what your right hands have earned. And He
forgives much.
42:31 You cannot escape in the earth, for beside God you have neither protector nor any
helper.
42:32-33 And of His signs are the ships, like banners on the sea; if He wills He calms the
wind so that they keep still upon its surface – Lo! Herein verily are signs for every patient
grateful (heart).
42:34-35 Or he causes them to perish on account of that which they have earned – And
He forgives much – and that those who argue concerning Our revelations may know they
have no refuge.
42:36-40 Now whatever you have been given is but a passing comfort for the life of the
world, and that which God has is better and more lasting for those who believe and put

198

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

their trust in their Lord. And those who shun the worst of sins and indecencies and, when
they are wroth, forgive, and those who answer the call of their Lord and establish worship,
and whose affairs are a matter of counsel, and who spend of what We have bestowed on
them, and those who, when great wrong is done to them, defend themselves, the guerdon
of an ill deed is an ill the like thereof. But whosoever pardons and amends, his wage is the
affair of God. Lo! He loves not
wrongdoers.
42:41-42 And whoever defends himself after he has suffered wrong – for such, there is no
way (of blame) against them. The way (of blame) is only against those who oppress
people, and wrongfully rebel in the earth. For such there is a painful punishment.
42:43 And verily whoever is patient and forgives. lo! That, verily, is (of) the patient heart
of things.
42:44-46 He whom God sends astray, for him there is no helper (and protector) after
Him. And you (O Muhammad) will see the evildoers when they see the punishment,
(how) they say: Is there any way of return? And you will see them exposed to (the Fire),
made humble by disgrace, and looking with veiled eyes. And those who believe will say:
Lo! The (eternal) losers are they who lose themselves and their house folk on the Day of
Resurrection. Lo! Are not the wrongdoers in perpetual torment? And they will have no
helpers (and protectors) to help them instead of God. He whom God sends astray, for
him there is no road.
42:47 Answer the call of your Lord before there comes to you from God a Day for which
there is no averting. You have no refuge on that Day, nor have you any (power of) refusal.
42:48 But if they are averse, We have not sent you as a warder over them. Yours is only to
convey (the message). And lo! When We cause man to taste of mercy from Us he exults
therefore. And if some evil strikes them because of that which their own hands have sent
before, then lo! Man is an ingrate.
42:49-50 To God belongs the supreme power of the heavens and the earth. He creates
what He wills. He bestows female (offspring) upon whom He wills, and bestows male
(offspring) upon whom He wills; or He mingles them, males and females, and He makes
barren whom He wills. Lo! He is Knower, Powerful.
42:51 And it was not (given) to any mortal that God should speak to him unless (it be) by
revelation or from behind a veil, or (that) He sends a Messenger to reveal what He will by
His leave. Lo! He is Exalted, Wise.
42:52-53 And thus have We inspired in you (O Muhammad) a Spirit of Our command.
You knew not what the Scripture was, nor the Faith. But We have made it a light whereby
We guide whom We will of Our bondmen. And lo! You verily do guide to a right path.
The path of God, to Whom belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the
earth. Do not all things reach God at last?

43. Az-Zukhruf: Ornaments of Gold
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
43:1-5 Ha. Mim. By the Scripture which makes plain, lo! We have appointed it a Lecture in
Arabic that perhaps you may understand. And lo! In the Source of Decrees, which We
possess, it is indeed sublime , decisive ; shall We utterly ignore you because you are a
wanton folk?

199

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

43:6-8 How many a Prophet did We send among the men of old! And never came there to
them a Prophet but they used to mock him. Then we destroyed men mightier than these
in prowess; and the example of the men of old has gone (before them).
43:9-14 And if you (O Muhammad) ask them: Who created the heavens and the earth,
they will surely answer: The Mighty, the Knower created them; who made the earth a
resting place for you, and placed roads for you therein, that perhaps you may find your
way; and who sends down water from the sky in (due) measure, and We revive a dead land
therewith. Even so will you be brought forth, He who created all the pairs, and appointed
for you ships and cattle whereupon you ride. That you may mount upon their backs, and
may remember your Lord's favor when you mount thereon, and may say: Glorified be He
Who has subdued these to us, and we were not capable (of subduing them), and lo! To
our Lord we are returning.
43:15-19 And they allot to Him a portion of His bondmen! Lo! Man is verily a mere
ingrate. Or chooses He daughters of all that He has created, and honors He you with
sons? And if one of them has tidings of that which he likens to the Beneficent One, his
face becomes black and he is full of inward rage. (Liken they then to God) that which is
bred up in outward show, and in dispute cannot make itself plain? And they make the
angels, who are the slaves of the Beneficent, females. Did they witness their creation?
Their testimony will be recorded and they will be questioned.
43:20-25 And they say: If the Beneficent One had (so) willed, we should not have
worshipped them. They have no knowledge whatsoever of that. They do but guess. Or
have We given them any Scripture before (this Quran) so that they are holding fast
thereto? Nay, for they say only: Lo! We found our fathers following a religion, and we are
guided by their footsteps. And even so We sent not a warner before you (O Muhammad)
into any township but its luxurious ones said: Lo! We found our fathers following a
religion, and we are following their footprints. (And the warner) said: What! Even though
I bring you better guidance than that you found your fathers following? They answered:
Lo! In what you bring we are disbelievers. So We requited them. Then see the nature of
the consequence for the rejecters!
43:26-28 And when Abraham said to his father and his folk: Lo! I am innocent of what
you worship except Him Who did create me, for He will surely guide me. And he made it
a Word enduring among his seed that perhaps they might return.
43:29-31 Nay, but I let these and their fathers enjoy life (only) till there should come to
them the Truth and a Messenger making plain. And now that the Truth has come to them
they say: This is mere magic, and lo! We are disbelievers therein. And they say: If only this
Quran had been revealed to some great man of the two towns?
43:32 Is it they who apportion their Lord's mercy? We have apportioned among them
their livelihood in the life of the world, and raised some of them above others in rank that
some of them may take labor from others; and the mercy of your Lord is better than (the
wealth) that they amass.
43:33-35 And were it not that people would have become one community, We might well
have appointed, for those who disbelieve in the Beneficent, roofs of silver for their houses
and stairs (of silver) whereby to mount, and for their houses, doors (of silver) and couches
of silver whereon to recline, and ornaments of gold. Yet all that would have been but a
provision of the life of the world. And the Hereafter with your Lord would have been for
those who are pious.
43:36-39 And he whose sight is dim to the remembrance of the Beneficent, We assign to
him a devil who becomes his comrade, and lo! They surely turn them from the way of
God, and yet they deem that they are rightly guided; till, when he comes to Us, he says (to
his comrade): Ah, would that between me and you there were the distance of the two

200

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

horizons – an evil comrade! And it profits you not this Day, because you did wrong, that
you would be sharers in the punishment.
43:40-45 Can you (O Muhammad) make the deaf hear, or can you guide the blind or him
who is in error manifest? And if We take you away, We surely shall take vengeance on
them, or (if) We show you that with which We threaten them; for lo! We have complete
command of them. So hold you fast to that which is inspired in you. Lo! You are on a
right path. And lo! It is in truth a Reminder for you and for your folk; and you will be
questioned. And ask those of Our Messengers whom We sent before you: Did We ever
appoint gods to be worshipped beside the Beneficent?
43:46-56 And verily We sent Moses with Our revelations to Pharaoh and his chiefs, and
he said: I am a Messenger of the Lord of the Worlds. But when he brought them Our
signs, behold! They laughed at them. And every sign that We showed them was greater
than its sister (sign), and we grasped them with the torment, that perhaps they might turn
again. And they said: O wizard; Entreat your Lord for us by the pact that He has made
with you. Lo! We verily will be guided. But when We eased them of the torment, behold!
They broke their word. And Pharaoh caused a proclamation to be made among his people
saying: O my people! Is not mine the kingdom of Egypt and these rivers flowing under
me? Can you not then discern? I am surely better than this fellow, who is despicable, and
can hardly make (his meaning) plain! Why, then, have armlets of gold not been set upon
him, or angels sent along with him? Thus he persuaded his people to make light (of
Moses), and they obeyed him. Lo! They were a wanton folk. So, when they angered Us,
We punished them and drowned them, every one. And We made them a thing past, and
an example for those after (them).
43:57-62 And when the son of Mary is quoted as an example, behold! The folk laugh out,
and say: Are our gods better, or is he? They raise not the objection except for argument.
Nay! But they are a contentious folk. He is nothing but a slave on whom We bestowed
favor, and We made him a pattern for the Children of Israel. And had We willed We could
have set among you angels to be viceroys in the earth. And lo! Verily there is knowledge
of the Hour. So doubt you not concerning it, but follow Me. This is the right path. And let
not Satan turn you aside. Lo! He is an open enemy for you.
43:63-67 When Jesus came with clear proofs (of God's supreme power), he said: I have
come to you with wisdom, and to make plain some of that concerning which you differ.
So keep your duty to God, and obey me. Lo! God, He is my Lord and your Lord. So
worship Him. This is a right path. But the factions among them differed. Then woe to the
wrongdoers from the punishment of a painful day. Await they anything except the Hour
that it shall come upon them suddenly, when they know not? Friends on that Day will be
foes to one another, except those who kept their duty (to God).
43:68-73 O My slaves! For you there is no fear this Day, nor is it you who grieve; (you)
who believed Our revelations and were Muslims, enter the Garden, you and your wives, to
be made glad. Therein are brought round for them trays of gold and goblets, and therein is
all that souls desire and eyes find sweet. And you are immortal therein. This is the Garden,
which you are made to inherit because of what you used to do. Therein for you is fruit in
plenty from which to eat.
43:74-78 Lo! The guilty are immortal in Hell's torment. It is not relaxed for them, and they
despair therein. We wronged them not, but they it was who did the wrong. And they cry:
O master! Let your Lord make an end of us. He says: Lo! Here you must remain. We
verily brought the Truth to you, but you were, most of you, averse to the Truth.
43:79-80 Or do they determine any thing (against the Prophet)? Lo! We (also) are
determining. Or deem they that We cannot hear their secret thoughts and private
confidences? Nay, but Our envoys, present with them, records.

201

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

43:81-82 Say (O Muhammad): The Beneficent One has no son. I am first among the
worshippers. Glorified be the Lord of the heavens and the earth, the Lord of the Throne,
from that which they ascribe (to Him)!
43:83-84 So let them flounder (in their talk) and play until they meet the Day, which they
are promised. And it is He Who in the heaven is God, and in the earth God. He is the
Wise, the Knower.
43:85 And blessed be He to Whom belongs the supreme power of the heavens and the
earth and all that is between them, and with Whom is knowledge of the Hour, and to
Whom you will be returned.
43:86-87 And those to whom they cry instead of Him possess no power of intercession,
except him who bears witness to the Truth knowingly. And if you ask them who created
them, they will surely say: God. How then are they turned away?
43:88-89 And he said: O my Lord! Lo! Those are a folk who believe not. Then bear with
them (O Muhammad) and say: Peace. But they will come to know.

44. Ad-Dukhan: Smoke
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
44:1-6 Ha. Mim. By the Scripture that makes plain. Lo! We revealed it on a blessed night –
Lo! We are ever warning – wherein every matter is decreed in precise detail. As a
command from Us – Lo! We are ever sending – a mercy from your Lord. Lo! He is the
Hearer, the Knower.
44:7-8 Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them, if you would be
sure. None should be worshipped but God alone. He quickens and gives death, your Lord
and Lord of your forefathers.
44:9-12 Nay, but they play in doubt. But watch you (O Muhammad) for the Day when the
sky will produce visible smoke that will envelop the people. This will be a painful torment.
(Then they will say:) Our Lord relieve us of the torment. Lo! We are believers.
44:13-16 How can there be remembrance for them, when a Messenger making plain (the
truth) had already come to them, and they had turned away from him and said: One taught
(by others), a
madman. Lo! We withdraw the torment a little. Lo! You return (to disbelief). On the Day
when We shall seize them with the greater seizure (then), in truth We shall punish.
44:17-29 And verily We tried before them, Pharaoh's folk, when there came to them a
noble Messenger, saying: Give up to me the slaves of God. Lo! I am a faithful Messenger
to you. And saying: Be not proud against God. Lo! I bring you a clear warrant. And lo! I
have sought refuge in my Lord and your Lord lest you stone me to death. And if you put
no faith in me, then let me go. And he cried to his Lord (saying): These are a guilty folk.
Then (his Lord commanded): Take away my slaves by night. Lo! You will be followed,
And leave the sea behind at rest, for lo! They are a drowned host. How many were the
gardens and the water springs that they left behind, and the cornfields and the goodly
sites, and pleasant things wherein they took delight! Even so (it was), and We made it an
inheritance for other folk; and the heaven and the earth wept not for them, nor were they
reprieved.
44:30-36 And We delivered the Children of Israel from the shameful punishment; (We

202

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

delivered them) from Pharaoh. Lo! He was a tyrant of the wanton ones. And We chose
them, purposely, above (all) creatures. And We gave them signs wherein was a clear trial.
Lo! These, forsooth, are saying: There is nothing but our first death, and we shall not be
raised again. Bring back our fathers, if you speak the truth!
44:37 Are they better, or the folk of Tubba and those before them? We destroyed them,
for surely they were guilty.
44:38-42 And We created not the heavens and the earth, and all that is between them, in
play. We created them not except with truth; but most of them know not. Assuredly the
Day of Decision is the term of all of them, a Day no friend can in nothing avail friend, nor
can they be helped, except him on whom God has mercy. Lo! He is the Mighty, the
Merciful.
44:43-46 Lo! The tree of Zaqqum, the food of the sinner! Like molten brass, it seethes in
their bellies as the seething of boiling water.
44:47-50 (And it will be said): Take him and drag him to the midst of Hell, then pour
upon his head the torment of boiling water. (Saying:) Taste! Lo! You were forsooth the
mighty, the noble! Lo! This is that whereof you used to doubt.
44:51-57 Lo! Those who kept their duty will be in a place secure amid gardens and water
springs, attired in silk and silk embroidery, facing one another. Even so (it will be). And
We shall wed them to fair ones with wide lovely eyes. They call therein for every fruit in
safety. They taste not death therein, except the first death. And He has saved them from
the punishment of Hell, a bounty from your Lord. That is the supreme triumph.
44:58-59 And We have made (this Scripture) easy in your language only that they may
heed. Wait then (O Muhammad!). Lo! They (too) are waiting.

45. Al-Jathiyah: The Kneeling
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
45:1-2 Ha. Mim. The revelation of the Scripture is from God , the Mighty, the Wise.
45:3-6 Lo! In the heavens and the earth are signs for believers. And in your creation, and
all the beasts that He scattered in the earth, are signs for a folk whose faith is sure. And
the difference of night and day and the provision that God sends down from the sky and
thereby quickens the earth after her death, and the ordering of the winds, are signs for a
people who have sense. These are the signs of God which We recite to you (O
Muhammad) with truth. Then in what fact, after God and His signs, will they believe?
45:7-8 Woe to each sinful liar, who hears the revelations of God recited to him, and then
continues in arrogance as though he heard them not. Give him tidings of a painful
punishment.
45:9 And when he knows anything of Our revelations he makes it a jest. For such there is
a shameful punishment.
45:10 Beyond them there is Hell, and that which they have earned will not avail them, or
those whom they have chosen for helpers (and protectors) beside God. Theirs will be an
awful punishment.
45:11 This is guidance. And those who disbelieve the revelations of their Lord, for them
there is a painful punishment of wrath.

203

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

45:12-13 It is God Who has made the sea of service to you that the ships may run upon it
by His command, and that you may seek of His bounty, and that perhaps you may be
thankful; and has made of service to you whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is
in the earth; it is all from Him. Lo! Herein verily are signs for people who reflect.
45:14 Tell those who believe to forgive those who hope not for the days of God; in order
that He may requite folk what they used to earn.
45:15 Whoever does right, it is for his soul, and whoever does wrong, it is against it. And
afterward to your Lord you will be brought back.
45:16-17 And verily We gave the Children of Israel the Scripture and the Command and
the Prophethood, and provided them with good things and favored them above (all)
peoples; and gave them plain commandments. And they differed not until after the
knowledge came to them, through rivalry among themselves. Lo! Your Lord will judge
between them on the Day of Resurrection concerning that wherein they used to differ.
45:18-19 And now have We set you (O Muhammad) on a clear road of (Our)
commandment; so follow it, and follow not the whims of those who know not. Lo! They
can avail you nothing against God. And lo! As for the wrongdoers, some of them are
helpers (and protectors) of others; and God is the Guardian (and Protector) of those who
are pious.
45:20-21 This is clear indication for people, and a guidance and a mercy for a folk whose
faith is sure. Or do those who commit ill deeds suppose that We shall make them as those
who believe and do good works, the same life and death? Bad is their judgment!
45:22 And God has created the heavens and the earth with truth, and that every soul may
be repaid what it has earned. And they will not be wronged.
45:23-24 Have you seen him who makes his desire his god, and God sends him astray
purposely, and seals up his hearing and his heart, and sets on his sight a covering? Then
who will lead him after God (has condemned him)? Will you not then heed? And they say:
There is nothing but our life of the world; we die and we live, and nothing destroys us
except time; when they have no knowledge whatsoever of (all) that; they do but guess.
45:25-26 And when Our clear revelations are recited to them their only argument is that
they say: Bring (back) our fathers then, if you are truthful. Say (to them, O Muhammad):
God gives life to you, then causes you to die, then gathers you to the Day of Resurrection
of which there is no doubt. But most of people know not.
45:27 And to God belongs the supreme power of the heavens and the earth; and on the
Day when the Hour rises, on that Day those who follow falsehood will be lost.
45:28-29 And you will see each nation crouching, each nation summoned to its record.
(And it will be said to them:) This Day you are requited what you used to do. This Our
Book pronounces against you with truth. Lo! We have caused (all) that you did to be
recorded.
45:30 Then, as for those who believed and did good works, their Lord will bring them in
to His mercy. That is the evident triumph.
45:31 And as for those who disbelieved (it will be said to them): Were not Our revelations
recited to you? But you were arrogant and became a guilty folk.
45:32 And when it was said: Lo! God's promise is the truth, and there is no doubt of the
Hour's coming, you said: We know not what the Hour is. We deem it nothing but a
conjecture, and we are by no means convinced.

204

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

45:33-35 And the evils of what they did will appear to them, and that which they used to
deride will befall them: And it will be said: This Day We forget you, even as you forgot the
meeting of this your Day; and your habitation is the Fire, and there is none to help you.
This, forasmuch as you made the revelations of God a jest, and the life of the world
deceived you. Therefore this Day they come not forth from there, nor can they make
amends.
45:36-37 Then praise be to God, Lord of the heavens and Lords of the earth, the Lord of
the Worlds. And to Him (alone) belongs Majesty in the heavens and the earth, and He is
the Mighty, the Wise.

46. Al-Ahqaf: The Wind-Curved Sand-Hills
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.
46:1-2 Ha. Mim. The revelation of the Scripture is from God, the Mighty, and the Wise .
46:3-4 We created not the heavens and the earth and all that is between them except with
truth, and for a term appointed. But those that disbelieve turn away from that whereof
they are warned. Say (to them, O Muhammad): Have you thought on all that you invoke
beside God? Show me what they have created of the earth. Or have they any portion in
the heavens? Bring me a Scripture before this (Scripture), or some vestige of knowledge
(in support of what you say), if you are truthful.
46:5-6 And who is further astray than those who, instead of God, pray to such as hear not
their prayer until the Day of Resurrection, and are unconscious of their prayer, and when
people are gathered (to the Judgment) will become enemies for them, and will become
deniers of having been worshipped.
46:7-8 And when Our clear revelations are recited to them, who disbelieve say of the
Truth when it reaches them: This is mere magic. Or say they: He has invented it? Say (O
Muhammad): If I have invented it, still you have no power (to protect me) against God.
He is Best Aware of what you say among yourselves concerning it. He suffices for a
witness between me and you, And He is the Forgiving, the Merciful.
46:9-10 Say: I am no new thing among the Messengers (of God), nor know I what will be
done with me or with you. I do but follow that which is inspired in me, and I am but a
plain warner. Have you not considered: If it is from God and you disbelieve therein, and a
witness of the Children of Israel has already testified to the like thereof and has believed,
and you are too proud (what plight is yours)? Lo! God, guides not wrongdoing folk.
46:11-12 And those who disbelieve say of those who believe: If it had been (any) good,
they would not have been before us in attaining it. And since they will not be guided by it,
they say: This is an ancient lie; when before it there was the Scripture of Moses, an
example and a mercy; and this is a confirming Scripture in the Arabic language, that it may
warn those who do wrong and bring good tidings for the righteous.
46:13-14 Lo! Those who say: our Lord is God, and thereafter walks aright, no fear shall
come upon them neither shall they grieve. Such are rightful inhabitants of the Garden,
immortal thereafter as a reward for what they used to do.
46:15-16 And We have commended to man kindness toward parents. His mother bears
him with hardship, and brings him forth with hardship, and the bearing of him and the
weaning of him is thirty months, till, when he attains full strength and reaches forty years,
he says: My Lord! Arouse me that I may give thanks for the favor with which You have
favored me and my parents, and that I may do right, acceptable to You. And be gracious

205

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

to me in the matter of my seed. Lo! I have turned to You repentant, and lo! I am of the
Muslims (those who surrender to You). Those are they from whom We accept the best of
what they do, and overlook their evil deeds. (They are) among the inhabitants of the
Garden. This is the true promise, which they were promised (in the world).
46:17-18 And whoever says to his parents: Fie upon you both! Do you threaten me that I
shall be brought forth (again) when generations before me have passed away? And they
both cry to God for help (and say): Woe to you! Believe! Lo! The promise of God is true.
But he said: This is nothing except fables of the men of old. Such are those on whom the
Word concerning nations of the jinn and humankind, which have passed away before
them has effect. Lo! They are the losers.
46:19-20 And for all there will be ranks from what they do, that He may pay them for
their deeds! And they will not be wronged. And on the Day when those who disbelieve are
exposed to the Fire (it will be said): You squandered your good things in the life of the
world and sought comfort therein. Now this day you are rewarded with the punishment of
humiliation because you were disdainful in the land without a right and because you used
to transgress.
46:21-25 And make mention (O Muhammad) of the brother of Aad when he warned his
folk among the wind-curved sand hills – and verily warners came and went before and
after him – saying: Worship none but God. Lo! I fear for you the punishment of a
tremendous Day. They said: Have you come to turn us away from our gods? Then bring
upon us that wherewith you threaten us, if you are of the truthful. He said: The knowledge
is with God only. I convey to you that with which I have been sent, but I see you are a
folk that know not. Then when they beheld, it a dense cloud coming toward their valleys,
they said: Here is a cloud bringing us rain. Nay, but it is that which you did seek to hasten,
a wind wherein is painful torment, destroying all things by commandment of its Lord.
And morning found them so that nothing could be seen except their
dwellings. Thus do We reward the guilty folk.
46:26 And verily We had empowered them with that wherewith We have not empowered
you, and had assigned them ears and eyes and hearts; but their ears and eyes and hearts
availed them nothing since they denied the revelations of God; and what they used to
mock befell them.
46:27-28 And verily We have destroyed townships round about you, and displayed (for
them) Our revelation, that perhaps they might return. Then why did those whom they had
chosen for gods as a way of approach (to God) not help them? Nay, but they did fail them
utterly. And (all) that was their lie, and what they used to invent.
46:29-32 And when We inclined toward you (O Muhammad) certain of the jinn, who
wished to hear the Quran and, when they were in its presence, said: Give ear! And, when it
was finished, turned back to their people, warning. They said: O our people! Lo! We have
heard a Scripture, which has been revealed after Moses, confirming that which was before
it, guiding to the truth and a right road. O our people! Respond to God's summoner and
believe in Him. He will forgive you some of your sins and guard you from a painful
punishment. And whoever responds not to God's summoner he cannot escape in the
earth, and you (can find) no helpers (and protectors) instead of Him. Such are in error
manifest.
46:33 Have they not seen that God, Who created the heavens and the earth and was not
wearied by their creation, is Able to give life to the dead? Aye, He verily is Able to do all
things.
46:34 And on the Day when those who disbelieve are exposed to the Fire (they will be
asked): Is not this real? They will say: Yes, by our Lord. He will say: Then taste the

206

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

punishment for that you disbelieved.
46:35 Then have patience (O Muhammad) even as the stout of heart among the
Messengers (of old) had patience, and seek not to hasten on the punishment for them. On
the Day when they see that which they are promised (it will seem to them) as though they
had tarried but an hour of daylight. A clear message. Shall any be destroyed except evil
doing folk?

47. Muhammad (The Praise One)
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
47:1-3 Those who disbelieve and turn (men) from the way of God, He renders their
actions vain. And those who believe and do good works and believe in that which is
revealed to Muhammad – and it is the truth from their Lord – He rids them of their ill
deeds and improves their state. That is because those who disbelieve follow falsehood and
because those who believe follow the truth from their Lord. Thus God coins their
similitudes for people.
47:4-6 Now when you meet in battle those who disbelieve, then it is smiting of the necks
until, when you have routed them, then making fast of bonds; and afterward either grace
or ransom till the war lays down its burdens. That (is the ordinance). And if God willed
He could have punished them (without you) but (thus it is ordained) that He may try some
of you by means of others. And those who are slain in the way of God, He renders not
their actions vain. He will guide them and improve their state, and bring them into the
Garden, which He has made known to them.
47:7-9 O you who believe! If you help God, He will help you and will make your foothold
firm. And those who disbelieve, perdition is for them, and He will make their actions vain.
That is because they are averse to that which God has revealed, therefore makes He their
action fruitless.
47:10-12 Have they not traveled in the land to see the nature of the consequence for those
who were before them? God wiped them out. And for the disbelievers there will be the
like thereof. That is because God is patron of those who believe, and because the
disbelievers have no patron. Lo! God will cause those who believe and do good works to
enter Gardens underneath which rivers flow; while those who disbelieve take their
comfort in this life and eat even as the cattle eat, and the Fire is their habitation.
47:13-14 And how many a township stronger than your township (O Muhammad), which
has cast you out, have We destroyed, and they had no helper! Is he who relies on a clear
proof from his Lord like those for whom the evil that they do is beautified while they
follow their own lusts?
47:15 A similitude of the Garden which those who keep their duty (to God) are promised:
Therein are rivers of water unpolluted, and rivers of milk whereof the flavor changes not,
and rivers of wine delicious to the drinkers, and rivers of clear-run honey; therein for them
is every kind of fruit, with pardon from their Lord. (Are those who enjoy all this) like
those who are immortal in the Fire and are given boiling water to drink so that it tears
their bowels?
47:16 Among them are some who give ear to you (O Muhammad) till, when they go forth
from your presence, they say to those who have been given knowledge: What was that he
said just now? Those are they whose hearts God has sealed, and they follow their own
lusts.

207

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

47:17 While as for those who walk aright, He adds to their guidance, and gives them piety.
47:18 Await they anything except the Hour that it should come upon them unawares? And
the beginnings thereof have already come. But how, when it has come upon them, can
they take their
warning?
47:19 So know (O Muhammad) that none should be worshipped but God alone, and ask
forgiveness for your sin and for believing men and believing women. God knows (both)
your place of turmoil and your place of rest.
47:20 And those who believe say: If only a chapter were revealed! But when a decisive
chapter is revealed and war is mentioned therein, you see those in whose hearts is a
disease looking at you with the look of men fainting to death. Therefore woe to them!
47:21 Obedience and a civil word. Then, when the matter is determined, if they are loyal
to God it will be well for them.
47:22-24 Would you then, if you were given the command, work corruption in the land
and sever your ties of kinship? Such are they whom God curses so that he deafens them
and makes blind their eyes. Will they then not meditate on the Quran, or are there locks
on their hearts?
47:25-26 Lo! Those who turn back after the guidance has been manifested to them, Satan
has seduced them, and He gives them the rein. That is because they say to those who hate
what God has revealed: We will obey you in some matters; and God knows their secret
talk.
47:27-28 Then how (will it be with them) when the angels gather them, smiting their faces
and their backs! That will be because they followed that which angers God, and hated that
which pleases Him. Therefore He has made their actions vain.
47:29-30 Or do those in whose hearts is a disease deem that God will not bring to light
their (secret) hates? And if We would, We could show them to you (O Muhammad) so
that you should know them surely by their marks. And you shall know them by the burden
of their talk. And God knows your deeds.
47:31 And verily We shall try you till We know those of you who fight hard (for the cause
of God) and the patient, and till We test your record.
47:32 Lo! Those who disbelieve and turn from the way of God and oppose the Messenger
after the guidance has been manifested to them, they hurt God not a jot, and He will make
their actions fruitless.
47:33 O you who believe! Obey God and obey the Messenger, and render not your actions
vain.
47:34 Lo! Those who disbelieve and turn from the way of God and then die disbelievers,
God surely will not pardon them.
47:35 So do not falter and cry out for peace when you (will be) the uppermost, and God is
with you, and He will not grudge (the reward of) your actions.
47:36-37 The life of the world is but a sport and a pastime. And if you believe and fear
(God), He will give you your wages, and will not ask of you, your worldly wealth. If He
should ask it of you and importune you, you would hoard it, and He would bring to light
your (secret) hates.

208

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

47:38 Lo! You are of those who are called to spend in the way of God, yet among you
there are some who hoard. And as for him who hoards, he hoards only from his soul. And
God is the Rich, and you are poor. And if you turn away He will exchange you for some
other folk, and they will not be the likes of you.

48. Al-Fath: Victory
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
48:1-3 Lo! We have given you (O Muhammad) a signal victory, that God may forgive you
of your sin that which is past and that which is to come, and may perfect His favor to you,
and may guide you on a right path, and that God may help you with strong help.
48:4 It is He Who sent down peace of reassurance into the hearts of the believers that
they might add faith to their faith. God's are the hosts of the heavens and the earth, and
God is ever Knower, Wise.
48:5 That He may bring the believing men and the believing women into Gardens
underneath which rivers flow, wherein they will abide, and may expiate from them their
evil deeds – That, in the sight of God, is the supreme triumph.
48:6 And may punish the hypocritical men and the hypocritical women, and the polytheist
men and the polytheist women, who think an evil thought concerning God. For them is
the evil turn of fortune, and God is wroth against them and has cursed them, and has
made ready for them Hell, an evil journey's end.
48:7 God's are the hosts of the heavens and the earth, and God is ever Mighty, Wise.
48:8-9 Lo! We have sent you (O Muhammad) as a witness and a bearer of good tidings
and a warner, that you (people) may believe in God and His Messenger, and may honor
him, and may revere him, and may glorify Him at early dawn and at the close of day.
48:10 Lo! Those who swear allegiance to you (O Muhammad), swear allegiance only to
God. The
Hand of God is above their hands. So whosoever breaks his oath breaks it only to his
soul's hurt; while whosoever keeps his covenant with God, on him will He bestow
immense reward.
48:11 Those of the wandering Arabs who were left behind will tell you: Our possessions
and our
households occupied us, so ask forgiveness for us! They speak with their tongue that
which is not in their hearts. Say: Who can avail you anything against God, if he intends
you hurt or intends you
profit? Nay, but God is ever Aware of what you do.
48:12-13 Nay, but you deemed that the Messenger and the believers would never return to
their own folk, and that was made fair seeming in your hearts, and you did think an evil
thought, and you were worthless folk. And as for him who believes not in God and His
Messenger – Lo! We have prepared a flame for disbelievers.
48:14 And God's is the supreme power of the heavens and the earth. He forgives whom
He wills,

209

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

and punishes whom He wills. And God is ever Forgiving, Merciful.
48:15-16 Those who were left behind will say, when you set forth to capture booty: Let us
go with you. They would gladly change the verdict of God. Say (to them, O Muhammad):
You shall not go with us. Thus has God said beforehand. Then they will say: You are
envious of us. Nay, but they understand not, except a little. Say to those of the wandering
Arabs who were left behind: You will be called against a folk of mighty prowess, to fight
them until they surrender; and if you obey, God will give you a fair reward; but if you turn
away as you have turned away before, He will punish you with a painful punishment.
48:17 There is no blame for the blind, nor is there blame for the lame, nor is there blame
for the sick (that they go not forth to war). And whoever obeys God and His Messenger,
He will make him enter Gardens underneath which rivers flow; and whoever turns back,
He will punish him with a painful punishment.
48:18-19 God was well pleased with the believers when they swore allegiance to you
beneath the tree, and He knew what was in their hearts, and He sent down peace of
reassurance on them, and has rewarded them with a near victory; and much booty that
they will capture. God is ever Mighty, Wise.
48:20-21 God promises you much booty that you will capture, and has given you this in
advance, and has withheld men's hands from you, that it may be a sign for the believers,
and that He may guide you on a right path. And other (gain), which you have not been
able to achieve, God will compass it. God is Able to do all things.
48:22 And if those who disbelieve join battle with you they will take to flight, and
afterward they will find neither protector nor helper.
48:23 It is the law of God, which has taken course before. You will not find for the law of
God anything of power to change.
48:24 And it is He Who has withheld men's hands from you, and has withheld your hands
from them, in the valley of Mecca, after He had made you victors over them. God is Seer
of what you do.
48:25 They are the ones who disbelieved and debarred you from the Inviolable Place of
Worship, and debarred the offering from reaching its goal. And if it had not been for
believing men and believing women, whom you know not – lest you should tread them
underfoot and thus incur guilt for them unknowingly; that God might bring into His
mercy whom He will – If (the believers and the disbelievers) had been clearly separated
We verily had punished those of them who disbelieved with painful punishment.
48:26 When those who disbelieve had set up in their hearts zealotry, the zealotry of the
Age of Ignorance, then God sent down His peace of reassurance upon His Messenger and
upon the believers and imposed on them the word of piety, for they were worthy of it and
suitable for it. And God is Aware of all things.
48:27 God has fulfilled the vision for His Messenger in very truth. You shall indeed enter
the Inviolable Place of Worship, if God wills, secure, (having your hair) shaven and cut,
not fearing. But He knows that which you know not, and has given you a near victory
beforehand.
48:28 It is He Who has sent His Messenger with the guidance and the religion of truth,
that He may cause it to prevail over all religions. And God suffices as a witness.
48:29 Muhammad is the Messenger of God. And those with him are hard against the
disbelievers and merciful among themselves. You (O Muhammad) see them bowing and
falling prostrate (in worship), seeking bounty from God and (His) acceptance. The mark

210

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

of them is on their foreheads from the traces of prostration. Such is their similitude in the
Torah and their similitude in the Gospel – as sown corn that sends forth its shoot and
strengthens it and rises firm upon its stalk, delighting the sowers – that He may enrage the
disbelievers with (the sight of) them. God has promised, to such of them as believe and do
good works, forgiveness and immense reward.

49. Al-Hujurat: The Private Apartments
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
49:1 O you who believe! Be not forward in the presence of God and His Messenger, and
keep your duty to God. Lo! God is Hearer, Knower.
49:2-3 O you who believe! Lift not up your voices above the voice of the Prophet, nor
shout when speaking to him as you shout to one another, lest your works be rendered
vain while you perceive not. Lo! They who subdue their voices in the presence of the
Messenger of God, those are they whose hearts God has proven to righteousness. Theirs
will be forgiveness and immense reward.
49:4-5 Lo! Those who call you from behind the private apartments, most of them have no
sense. And if they had patience till you came forth to them, it had been better for them.
And God is Forgiving, Merciful.
49:6 O you who believe! If an evildoer brings you tidings, verify it, lest you smite some
folk in ignorance and afterward repent for what you did.
49:7-8 And know that the Messenger of God is among you. If he were to obey you in
much of the government, you would surely be in trouble; but God has endeared the faith
to you and has beautified it in your hearts, and has made disbelief and lewdness and
rebellion hateful to you. Such are they who are rightly guided. (It is) a bounty and a grace
from God; and God is Knower, Wise.
49:9 And if two parties of believers fall to fighting, then make peace between them. And if
one party of them does wrong to the other, fight you that which does wrong till it returns
to the ordinance of God; then, if it returns, make peace between them justly, and act
equitably. Lo! God loves the equitable.
49:10 The believers are nothing other than brothers. Therefore make peace between your
brethren and observe your duty to God that perhaps you may obtain mercy.
49:11 O you who believe! Let not a folk deride a folk who may be better than they (are),
or let women (deride) women who may be better than they are; neither defame one
another, nor insult one another by nicknames. Bad is the name of lewdness after faith.
And whoever turns not in repentance, such are evildoers.
49:12 O you who believe! Shun much suspicion; for lo! Suspicion in some cases is a sin.
And spy not, neither backbite one another. Would one of you love to eat the flesh of his
dead brother? You abhor that (so abhor the other)! And keep your duty (to God). Lo!
God is Forgiving, Merciful.
49:13 O people! Lo! We have created you male and female, and have made you nations
and tribes that you may know one another. Lo! The noblest of you, in the sight of God, is
the best in conduct. Lo! God is Knower, Aware.
49:14 The wandering Arabs say: We believe. Say (to them, O Muhammad): You believe
not, but rather say `We submit,' for faith has not yet entered into your hearts. Yet, if you

211

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

obey God and His Messenger, He will not withhold from you anything of (the reward of)
your deeds. Lo! God is Forgiving, Merciful.
49:15 The (true) believers are those only who believe in God and His Messenger and
afterward doubt not, but fight hard with their wealth and their lives for the cause of God.
Such are the sincere.
49:16 Say (to them, O Muhammad): Would you teach God your religion, when God
knows all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth, and God is Aware of all things?
49:17-18 They make it a favor to you (O Muhammad) that they have surrendered (to
Him). Say: Deem not your surrender a favor to me; nay, but God does confer a favor on
you, inasmuch as He has guided you to faith, if you are earnest. Lo! God knows the
Unseen of the heavens and the earth. And God is Seer of what you do.

50. Qaf: (Abbreviated Letter)
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
50:1-3 Qaf. By the glorious Quran, nay, but they marvel that a warner of their own has
come to them ; and the disbelievers say : This is a strange thing : When we are dead and
have become dust (shall we be brought back again)? That would be a far return!
50:4-5 We know that which the earth takes of them, and with Us is a recording Book.
Nay, but they have denied the truth when it came to them; therefore they are now in a
troubled case.
50:6-11 Have they not then observed the sky above them, how We have constructed it
and beautified it, and how there are no rifts therein? And the earth have We spread out,
and have flung firm hills therein, and have caused of every lovely kind to grow thereon, a
vision and a reminder for every penitent slave. And We send down from the sky blessed
water whereby We give growth to gardens and the grain of crops, and lofty date palms
with ranged clusters, provision (made) for men; and therewith We quicken a dead land.
Even so will be the resurrection of the dead.
50:12-14 The folk of Noah denied (the truth) before them, and (so did) the dwellers at ArRass and (the tribe of) Thamud, and (the tribe of) Aad, and Pharaoh, and the brethren of
Lot, and the dwellers in the wood, and the folk of Tubba: every one denied their
Messengers, therefore My threat took effect.
50:15-16 Were We then worn out by the first creation? Yet they are in doubt about a new
creation. We verily created a man and We know what his soul whispers to him, and We
are nearer to him than his jugular vein.
50:17-19 When the two receivers receive (him) seated on the right hand and on the left, he
utters no word but there is with him an observer ready. And the agony of death comes in
truth. (And it is said to him): This is that which you were wont to shun.
50:20-29 And the Trumpet is blown. This is the threatened Day. And every soul comes,
along with it a driver and a witness, (and to the evildoer it is said:) you were in
heedlessness of this. Now We have removed from you your covering, and piercing is your
sight this Day. And (to the evildoer) his comrade says: This is that which I have ready (as
testimony). (And it is said:) Do you both hurl to Hell each rebel ingrate, hinderer of good,
transgressor, doubter, who sets up another god along with God. Do you both hurl him to
the dreadful punishment? His comrade says: Our Lord! I did not cause him to rebel, but
he was (himself) far gone in error. He says: Contend not in My presence, when I had

212

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

already proffered to you the warning. The sentence that comes from Me cannot be
changed, and I am in no way a tyrant to the slaves.
50:30 On the Day when We say to Hell: Are you filled? And it says: Can there be more to
come?
50:31-35 And the Garden is brought near for those who kept from evil, no longer distant.
(And it is said): This is that which you were promised. (It is) for every penitent and
heedful one, who fears the Beneficent in secret and comes with a contrite heart. Enter it in
peace. This is the Day of immortality. There they have all that they desire, and there is
more with Us.
50:36-37 And how many a generation We destroyed before them, who were mightier than
these in prowess so that they overran the lands! Had they any place of refuge (when the
judgment came)? Lo! Therein verily is a reminder for him who has a heart, or gives ear
with full intelligence.
50:38 And verily We created the heavens and the earth, and all that is between them, in six
Days, and nothing of weariness touched Us.
50:39-40 Therefore (O Muhammad) have patience with what they say, and hymn the
praise of your Lord before the rising and before the setting of the sun; and in the
nighttime hymn His praise: And after the (prescribed) prostrations.
50:41-44 And listen on the Day when the crier cries from a near place, the Day when they
will hear the (Awful) Cry in truth. That is the Day of coming forth (from the graves). Lo!
We it is Who quicken and give death, and to Us is the journeying. On the Day when the
earth splits asunder from them, hastening forth (they come). That is a gathering easy for
Us (to make).
50:45 We are Best Aware of what they say, and you (O Muhammad) are in no way a
compeller over them. But warn by the Quran him who fears My threat.

51. Adh-Dhariyat: The Winnowing Winds
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
51:1-6 By those that winnow with a winnowing, and those that bear the burden (of the
rain), and those that glide with ease (upon the sea), and those who distribute (blessings) by
command, lo! That wherewith you are threatened is indeed true, and lo! The judgment will
indeed befall.
51:7-14 By the heaven full of paths, lo! You, forsooth, are of various opinions (concerning
the truth). He is made to turn away from it who is (himself) averse. Accursed be the
conjecturers, who are careless in an abyss! They ask: When is the Day of Judgment? (It is)
the Day when they will be tormented at the Fire, (and it will be said to them): Taste your
torment (which you inflicted). This is what you sought to hasten.
51:15-19 Lo! Those who are pious will dwell amid gardens and water springs. Taking that
which their Lord gives them, for lo! Before they were doers of good; they used to sleep
but little of the night, and ere the dawning of each day would seek forgiveness, and in their
wealth the beggar and the outcast had due share.
51:20-21 And in the earth are signs for those whose faith is sure, and (also) in yourselves.
Can you then not see?

213

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

51:22-23 And in the heaven is your providence and that which you are promised; and by
the Lord of the heavens and the earth, it is the truth, even as (it is true) that you speak.
51:24-30 Has the story of Abraham's honored guests reached you (O Muhammad)? When
they came in to him and said: Peace! He answered: Peace! (And thought:) Folk unknown
(to me). Then he went apart to his house folk so that they brought a fatted calf; and he set
it before them, saying: Will you not eat? Then he conceived a fear of them. They said: Fear
not! And gave him tidings of (the birth of) a wise son. Then his wife came forward,
making moan, and smote her face, and cried: A barren old woman! They said: Even so
says your Lord. Lo! He is the Wise, the Knower.
51:31-37 (Abraham) said: And (afterward) what is your errand, O you sent (from God)?
They said: Lo! We are sent to a guilty folk, that we may send upon them stones of clay,
marked by your Lord for (the destruction of) the wanton. Then We brought out such
believers as were there (in the cities). But We found therein but one house of Muslims
(those surrendered to God). And We left behind therein a sign for those who fear a
painful punishment.
51:38-40 And in Moses (too, there is a sign) when We sent him to Pharaoh with clear
warrant, but he withdrew (confiding) in his might, and said: A wizard or a madman. So We
seized him and his hosts and flung them in the sea, for he was a reprobate.
51:41-42 And in (the tribe of) Aad (there is a sign) when We sent the fatal wind against
them. It spared nothing that it reached, but made it (all) as dust.
51:43-45 And in (the tribe of) Thamud (there is a sign) when it was told to them: Take
your ease awhile. But they rebelled against their Lord's decree, and so the thunderbolt
overtook them even while they gazed; and they were neither able to rise up, nor could they
help themselves.
51:46 And the folk of Noah before. Lo! They were licentious folk.
51:47-48 We have built the heaven with might, and We it is Who make the vast extent
(thereof). And the earth have We laid out, how Gracious was the Spreader (thereof)!
51:49 And all things We have created by pairs, that perhaps you may reflect.
51:50-51 Therefore flee to God, lo! I am a plain warner to you from Him, and set not any
other god along with God, lo! I am a plain warner to you from Him.
51:52-55 Even so there came no Messenger to those before them but they said: A wizard
or a madman! Have they handed down (the saying) as an heirloom one to another? Nay,
but they are froward folk. So withdraw from them (O Muhammad), for you are in no way
blameworthy, and warn, for warning profits believers.
51:56-58 I created the jinn and humankind only that they might worship Me. I seek no
livelihood from them, nor do I ask that they should feed Me. Lo! God! It is He that gives
livelihood, the Lord of unbreakable might.
51:59-60 And lo! For those who (now) do wrong there is an evil day like to the evil day
(which came for) their likes (of old); so let them not ask Me to hasten on (that day). And
woe to those who disbelieve, from (that) their Day, which they are promised.

52. At-Tur: Mount Sinai
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful

214

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

52:1-8 By the Mount, and a Scripture inscribed, on fine parchment unrolled, and the
House frequented, and the roof exalted, and the sea kept filled, lo! The punishment of
your Lord will surely come to pass; there is none that can ward it off.
52:9-16 On the Day when the heaven will heave with (awful) heaving, and the mountains
move away with (awful) movement, then woe that Day to the deniers, who play in talk of
grave matters; the Day when they are thrust with a (disdainful) thrust, into the fire of Hell.
(And it is said to them): This is the Fire, which you were wont to deny. Is this magic, or do
you not see? Endure the heat thereof, and whether you are patient of it or impatient of it
is all one for you. You are only being paid for what you used to do.
52:17-21 Lo! Those who kept their duty dwell in Gardens and delight, happy because of
what their Lord has given them, and (because) their Lord has warded off from them the
torment of Hell-fire. (And it is said to them): Eat and drink in health (as reward) for what
you used to do, reclining on ranged couches. And We wed them to fair ones with wide
lovely eyes. And they who believe and whose seed follow them in faith, We cause their
seed to join them (there), and We deprive them of nothing of their (life's) work. Every
man is a pledge for that which he has earned.
52:22-28 And We provide them with fruit and meat such as they desire. There they pass
from hand to hand a cup wherein is neither vanity nor cause of sin. And there go round,
waiting on them menservants of their own, as they were hidden pearls. And some of them
draw near to others, questioning, saying: Lo! Of old, when we were with our families, we
were ever anxious; but God has been gracious to us and has preserved us from the
torment of the breath of Fire. Lo! We used to pray to Him of old. Lo! He is the Benign,
the Merciful.
52:29-32 Therefore warn (them, O Muhammad). By the grace of God you are neither a
soothsayer nor a madman. Or say they: (he is) a poet, (one) for whom we may expect the
accident of time? Say (to them): Expect (your fill)! Lo! I am with you among the expectant
Do their minds command them to do this, or are they an outrageous folk?
52:33-38 Or say they: He has invented it? Nay, but they will not believe! Then let them
produce speech the like thereof, if they are truthful. Or were they created out of nothing?
Or are they the creators? Or did they create the heavens and the earth? Nay, but they are
sure of nothing! Or do they own the treasures of your Lord? Or have they been given
charge (thereof)? Or have they any stairway (to heaven) by means of which they overhear
(decrees). Then let their listener produce warrant manifest!
52:39-43 Or has He daughters whereas you have sons? Or ask you (O Muhammad) a fee
from them so that they are plunged in debt? Or possess they the Unseen so that they can
write (it) down? Or seek they to ensnare (the Messenger)? But those who disbelieve, they
are the ensnared! Or have they any god beside God? Glorified be God from all that they
ascribe as partner (to Him)!
52:44-47 And if they were to see a fragment of the heaven falling, they would say: A heap
of clouds. Then let them be (O Muhammad), till they meet their Day, in which they will be
thunder-stricken, a Day in which their guile will not avail them, nor will they be helped.
And verily, for those who do wrong, there is a punishment beyond that. But most of them
know not.
52:48-49 So wait patiently (O Muhammad) for your Lord's decree, for surely you are in
Our sight; and hymn the praise of your Lord when you arise. And in the nighttime also
hymn His praise, and at the setting of the stars.

53. An-Najm: The Stars

215

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
53:1-12 By the star when it sets, your comrade errs not, nor is he deceived; nor does he
speak of (his own) desire. It is nothing except an inspiration that is inspired, which one of
mighty powers (Gabriel), has taught him, one vigorous; and he grew clear to view when he
was on the uppermost horizon. Then he drew near and came down till he was (distant)
two bows' length or even nearer, and he revealed to His (gods) slave that which He
revealed. The heart lied not (in seeing) what it saw. Will you then dispute with him
concerning what he sees?
53:13-18 And verily he saw him, yet another time. By the lote tree of the utmost boundary,
near to which is the Garden of Abode. When that which shrouds did enshroud the lote
tree, the eye turned not aside nor yet was overbold. Verily he saw one of the greater
revelations of his Lord.
53:19-24 Have you thought upon Al-Lat and Al-Uzza, and Manat, the third, the other?
Are yours the males and His the females? That indeed is an unfair division! They are but
names, which you have named, you and your fathers, for which God has revealed no
warrant. They follow but a guess and that which (they) themselves desire. And now the
guidance from their Lord has come to them. Or shall man have what he covets?
53:25-28 But to God belongs the after (life), and the former. And how many angels are in
the heavens whose intercession avails nothing except after God gives leave to whom He
chooses and then accepts! Lo! It is those who disbelieve in the Hereafter who name the
angels with the names of females. And they have no knowledge thereof. They follow but a
guess, and lo! A guess can never take the place of the truth.
53:29-30 Then withdraw (O Muhammad) from him who flees from Our remembrance
and desires but the life of the world. Such is their sum of knowledge. Lo! Your Lord is
Best Aware of him who strays, and He is Best Aware of him who goes right.
53:31 And to God belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth,
that He may reward those who do evil with that which they have done, and reward those
who do good with goodness.
53:32 Those who avoid enormities of sin and abominations, except the unwilled
offences.(for them) lo! Your Lord is of vast mercy. He is Best Aware of you (from the
time) when He created you from the earth, and when you were hidden in the bellies of
your mothers. Therefore ascribe not purity to yourselves. He is Best Aware of him who
wards off (evil).
53:33-35 Did you (O Muhammad) observe him who turned away, and gave a little, then
was grudging? Has he knowledge of the Unseen so that he sees?
53:36-42 Or has he not had news of what is in the Books of Moses and Abraham who
paid his debt: That no laden one shall bear another's load, and that man has only that for
which be makes effort, and that his effort will be seen, and afterward he will be repaid for
it with fullest payment; and that to your Lord, is the goal.
53:43-49 And that it is He Who makes (one) laugh, and makes (one) weep, and that it is
He Who gives death and gives life; and that He creates the two spouses, the male and the
female, from a drop (of seed) when it is poured forth; and that He has ordained the
second bringing forth; and that it is He Who enriches and makes content, and that it is He
Who is the Lord of Sirius.
53:50-54 And that He destroyed the former (tribe of) Aad, and (the tribe of) Thamud He
spared not; and the folk of Noah before, lo! They were more unjust and more rebellious;
and the overthrown cities He destroyed so that there covered them that which did cover.

216

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

53:55 Concerning which then, of the bounties of your Lord, can you dispute?
53:56-61 This is a warner of the warners of old. The threatened Hour is near. None beside
God can disclose it. Marvel you then at this statement, and laugh and not weep, while you
amuse yourselves?
53:62 Rather prostrate yourselves before God and worship Him.

54. Al-Qamar: The Moon
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
54:1-5 The Hour drew near and the moon was rent in two. And if they behold a sign they
turn away and say: prolonged illusion. They denied (the Truth) and followed their own
lusts. Yet everything will come to a decision, and surely there has come to them news
whereof the purport should deter, effective wisdom; but warnings avail not.
54:6-8 So withdraw from them (O Muhammad). On the Day when the Summoner
summons to a painful thing. With downcast eyes, they come forth from the graves as if
they were locusts spread abroad, hastening toward the Summoner; the disbelievers say:
This is a hard Day.
54:9-15 The folk of Noah denied before them, yes, they denied Our slave and said: A
madman; and he was repulsed. So he cried to his Lord, saying: I am vanquished, so give
help. Then opened We the gates of heaven with pouring water, and caused the earth to
gush forth springs, so that the waters met for a predestined purpose. And We carried him
upon a thing of planks and nails, that ran (upon the waters) in Our sight, as a reward for
him who was rejected. And verily We left it as a sign; but is there any that remembers?
54:16-17 Then see how (dreadful) was My punishment after My warnings! And in truth
We have made the Quran easy to remember; but is there any that remembered?
54:18-20 (The tribe of) Aad rejected warnings. Then how (dreadful) was My punishment
after My warnings. Lo! We let loose on them a raging wind on a day of constant calamity,
sweeping men away as though they were uprooted trunks of palm trees.
54:21-22 Then see how (dreadful) was My punishment after My warnings! And in truth
We have made the Quran easy to remember; but is there any that remembers?
54:23-29 (The tribe of) Thamud rejected warnings, for they said: Is it a mortal man, alone
among us that we are to follow? Then indeed we should fall into error and madness. Has
the remembrance been given to him alone among us? Nay, but he is a rash liar. (To their
warner it was said:) Tomorrow they will know who is the rash liar. Lo! We are sending the
she-camel as a test for them; so watch them and have patience; and inform them that the
water is to be shared between (her and) them. Every drinking will be witnessed. But they
called their comrade and he took and hamstrung (her).
54:30-32 Then see how (dreadful) was My punishment after My warnings! Lo! We sent
upon them one Shout, and they became as the dry twigs (rejected by) the builder of a
cattle fold. And in truth
We have made the Quran easy to remember; but is there any that remembers?
54:33-38 The folk of Lot rejected warnings. Lo! We sent a storm of stones upon them (all)
except the family of Lot, whom We rescued in the last watch of the night, as grace from
Us. Thus We reward him who gives thanks. And he indeed had warned them of Our

217

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

blow, but they did doubt the warnings. They even asked of him his guests for an ill
purpose. Then We blinded their eyes (and said): Taste now My punishment after My
warnings! And in truth the punishment decreed befell them early in the morning.
54:39-40 Now taste My punishment after My warnings! And in truth We have made the
Quran easy to remember; but is there any that remembers?
54:41-42 And warnings came in truth to the house of Pharaoh who denied Our
revelations, every one. Therefore We grasped them with the grasp of the Mighty, the
Powerful.
54:43-48 Are your disbelievers better than those, or have you some immunity in the
Scriptures? Or say they: We are a host victorious? The hosts will all be routed and will turn
and flee. Nay, but the Hour (of Judgment) is their appointed time, and the Hour will be
more wretched and more bitter (than their earthly failure). Lo! The guilty are in error and
madness. On the Day when they are dragged into the Fire upon their faces (it is said to
them): Feel the touch of Hell.
54:49-53 Lo! We have created every thing by measure. And Our commandment is but one
(commandment), as the twinkling of an eye. And verily We have destroyed your fellows;
but is there any that remembers? And every thing they did is in the Records, and every
small and great thing is recorded.
54:54-55 Lo! The righteous will dwell among Gardens and Rivers, in the abode of Truth in
the favor of a Mighty King.

55. Ar-Rahman: The Beneficent
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
55:1-6 The Beneficent has made known the Quran. He has created man. He has taught
him utterance. The sun and the moon are made punctual. The stars and the trees worship.
55:7-9 And the sky He has uplifted; and He has set the measure, that you exceed not the
measure, but observe the measure with equity, nor fall short thereof.
55:10-13 And He has appointed the earth for (His) creatures, wherein are fruit and
sheathed palm trees, husked grain and scented herb. Which is it, of the favors of your
Lord that you deny?
55:14-16 He created man of clay like the potter's, and the jinn did He create of smokeless
fire. Which is it, of the favors of your Lord that you deny?
55:17-18 Lord of the two easts (places of sunrise), and Lord of the two wests (places of
sunset)! Which is it, of the favors of your Lord that you deny?
55:19-21 He has released the two seas and they meet. There is a barrier between them and
they encroach not (upon one another). Which is it, of the favors of your Lord that you
deny?
55:22-23 There comes forth from both of them the pearl and coral stone. Which is it, of
the favors of your Lord that you deny?
55:24-25 His are the ships displayed upon the sea like banners. Which is it, of the favors
of your Lord that you deny?

218

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

55:26-28 Everyone that is thereon will pass away; there remains but the Face of your Lord
of Might and Glory. Which is it, of the favors of your Lord that you deny?
55:29-30 All that are in the heavens and the earth entreat Him. Every day He exercises
(universal) power. Which is it, of the favors of your Lord that you deny?
55:31-32 We shall dispose of you, O you two dependents (man and jinn). Which is it, of
the favors of your Lord that you deny?
55:33-34 O company of jinn and men, if you have power to penetrate (all) regions of the
heavens and the earth; then penetrate (them). You will never penetrate them except with
(Our) sanction. Which is it, of the favors of your Lord that you deny?
55:35-36 There will be sent, against you both, heat of fire and flash of brass, and you will
not escape. Which is it, of the favors of your Lord that you deny?
55:37-38 And when the heaven splits asunder and becomes rosy like red hide. Which is it,
of the favors of your Lord that you deny?
55:39-40 On that Day neither man nor jinn will be questioned for his sin. Which is it, of
the favors of your Lord that you deny?
55:41-42 The guilty will be known by their marks, and will be taken by the forelocks and
the feet. Which is it, of the favors of your Lord that you deny?
55:43-45 This is Hell, which the guilty deny. They go circling round between it and fierce,
boiling water. Which is it, of the favors of your Lord that you deny?
55:46-47 But for him who fears the standing before his Lord there are two Gardens.
Which is it, of the favors of your Lord that you deny?
55:48-49 Of spreading branches. Which is it, of the favors of your Lord that you deny?
55:50-51 Wherein are two fountains flowing. Which is it, of the favors of your Lord that
you deny?
55:52-53 Wherein is every kind of fruit in pairs. Which is it, of the favors of your Lord
that you deny?
55:54-55 Reclining upon couches lined with silk brocade, the fruit of both Gardens near
to hand.
Which is it, of the favors of your Lord that you deny?
55:56-57 Therein are those of modest gaze, whom neither man nor jinn will have touched
before them. Which is it, of the favors of your Lord that you deny?
55:58-59 (In beauty) like the ruby and the coral stone. Which is it, of the favors of your
Lord that you deny?
55:60-61 Is the reward of goodness anything except goodness? Which is it, of the favors
of your Lord that you deny?
55:62-63 And beside them are two other Gardens. Which is it, of the favors of your Lord
that you deny?
55:64-65 Dark green with foliage. Which is it, of the favors of your Lord that you deny?

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

219

55:66-67 Wherein are two abundant springs. Which is it, of the favors of your Lord that
you deny?
55:68-69 Wherein is fruit, the date palm and pomegranate. Which is it, of the favors of
your Lord that you deny?
55:70-71 Wherein (are found) the good and beautiful. Which is it, of the favors of your
Lord that you deny?
55:72-73 Fair ones, close-guarded in pavilions. Which is it, of the favors of your Lord that
you deny?
55:74-75 Whom neither man nor jinn will have touched before them. Which is it, of the
favors of your Lord that you deny?
55:76-77 Reclining on green cushions and fair carpets. Which is it, of the favors of your
Lord that you deny?
55:78 Blessed be the name of your Lord, Mighty and Glorious!

56. Al-Waqi`ah: The Event
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
56 :1-6 When the event befalls – There is no denying that it will befall – abasing (some) ,
exalting (others) ; when the earth is shaken with a shock , and the hills are ground to
powder so that they
become a scattered dust.
56:7-10 And you will be three kinds: (First) those on the right hand; what of those on the
right hand? And (then) those on the left hand; what of those on the left hand? And the
foremost in the race, the foremost in the race:
56:11-26 Those are they who will be brought near in Gardens of Delight; a multitude of
those of old and a few of those of later time on lined couches, reclining therein face-toface. There wait on them immortal youths with bowls and ewers and a cup from a pure
spring wherefrom they get no aching of the head nor any madness, and fruit that they
prefer, and flesh of fowls that they desire, and (there are) fair ones with wide lovely eyes,
like hidden pearls, reward for what they used do. There hear they nor vain speaking nor
recrimination, (naught) but the saying: Peace, (and again) Peace.
56:27-40 And those on the right hand; what of those on the right hand? Among thornless
lote trees and clustered plantains, and spreading shade, and water gushing, and fruit in
plenty, neither out of reach nor yet forbidden, and raised couches. Lo! We have created
them a (new) creation and made them virgins, lovers, friends, for those on the right hand;
a multitude of those of old and a multitude of those of later time.
56:41-56 And those on the left hand: What of those on the left hand? In scorching wind
and scalding water, and shadow of black smoke, neither cool nor refreshing. Lo! Before
that they were effete with luxury, and used to persist in the awful sin. And they used to
say: When we are dead and have become dust and bones, shall we then, forsooth, be
raised again, and also our forefathers? Say (to them, O Muhammad): Lo! Those of old and
those of later time will all be brought together to the meeting of an appointed Day. Then
lo! You, the erring, the deniers, you verily will eat of a tree called Zaqqum and will fill your
bellies therewith ; and thereon you will drink of boiling water, drinking even as the camel

220

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

drinks. This will be their welcome on the Day of Judgment.
56:57 We created you. Will you then admit the truth?
56:58-62 Have you seen that which you emit? Do you create it or are We the Creator? We
mete out death among you, and We are not to be outrun, that We may transfigure you and
make you what you know not. And verily you know the first creation. Why, then, do you
not reflect?
56:63-67 Have you seen that which you cultivate? Is it you who foster it, or are We the
Fosterer? If We willed, We verily could make it chaff, then would you cease not to
exclaim: Lo! We are laden with debt! Nay, but we are deprived!
56:68-70 Have you observed the water, which you drink? Is it you who shed it from the
rain cloud, or are We the Shedder? If We willed We verily could make it bitter. Why, then,
give you not thanks?
56:71-73 Have you observed the fire which you strike out; was it you who made the tree
thereof to grow, or were We the Grower? We, indeed We, appointed it a memorial and a
comfort for the dwellers in the wilderness.
56:74 Therefore (O Muhammad), praise the name of your Lord, the Tremendous.
56:75-82 Nay, I swear by the places of the stars – And lo! That verily is a tremendous
oath, if you but knew that (this) is indeed a noble Quran in a Book kept hidden which
none touches except the purified, a revelation from the Lord of the Worlds. Is it this
Statement that you scorn, and make denial thereof your livelihood?
56:83-87 Why, then, when (the soul) comes up to the throat (of the dying), and you are at
that moment looking – And We are nearer to him than you are, but you see not – Why
then, if you are not in bondage (to Us), do you not force it back, if you are truthful?
56:88 Thus if he is of those brought near,
56:89 Then breath of life, and plenty, and a Garden of Delight.
56:90-95 And if he is of those on the right hand, then (the greeting) `Peace be to you'
from those on the right hand. But if he is of the rejecters, the erring, then the welcome
will be boiling water and roasting at Hell-fire. Lo! This is certain truth.
56:96 Therefore (O Muhammad) praise the name of your Lord, the Tremendous.

57. Al-Hadid: Iron
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
57:1 All that is in the heavens and the earth glorifies God and He is the Mighty, the Wise.
57:2 His is the supreme power of the heavens and the earth; He quickens and He gives
death; and He is Able to do things.
57:3 He is the First and the Last, and the Outward and the Inward; and He is Knower of
all things.
57:4 It is He Who created the heavens and the earth in six Days; then He mounted the
Throne. He knows all that enters the earth and all that emerges from it and all that comes

221

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

down from the sky and all that ascends therein; and He is with you wherever you may be.
And God is Seer of what you do.
57:5-6 His is the supreme power of the heavens and the earth and, to God (all) things are
brought back. He causes the night to pass into the day, and He causes the day to pass into
the night, and He is Knower of all that is in the breasts.
57:7 Believe in God and His Messenger, and spend of that whereof He has made you
trustees; and such of you as believe and spend (aright), theirs will be a great reward.
57:8-9 What ails you that you believe not in God, when the Messenger calls you to believe
in your Lord, and He has already made a covenant with you, if you are believers? It is He
Who sends down clear revelations to His slave, that He may bring you forth from
darkness to light; and lo! For you, God is full of pity, Merciful.
57:10 And what ails you that you spend not in the way of God, when to God belongs the
inheritance of the heavens and the earth? Those who spent and fought before the victory
are not upon a level (with the rest of you). Such are greater in rank than those who spent
and fought afterwards. To each has God promised good. And God is informed of what
you do.
57:11 Who is he that will lend to God a goodly loan, that He may double it for him and
his may be a rich reward?
57:12 On the Day when you (Muhammad) will see the believers, men and women, their
light shining forth before them and on their right hands, (and will hear it said to them):
Glad news for you this Day: Gardens underneath which rivers flow, wherein you are
immortal. That is the supreme triumph.
57:13 On the Day when the hypocrite men and the hypocrite women will say to those
who believe: Look on us that we may borrow from your light! It will be said: Go back and
seek for light! Then there will separate them a wall wherein is a gate, the inner side
whereof contains mercy, while the outer side thereof is toward the punishment.
57:14-15 They will cry to them (saying): Were we not with you? They will say: Yes, verily;
but you tempted one another, and hesitated, and doubted, and vain desires deceived you
till the ordinance of God came to pass; and the deceiver deceived you concerning God; so
this Day no ransom can be taken from you nor from those who disbelieved. Your home is
the Fire; that is your patron, and an evil journey's end.
57:16 Is not the time ripe for the hearts of those who believe to be humble before God's
reminder and to the Truth, which is revealed, that they become not as those who received
the Scripture of old but the term was prolonged for them and so their hearts were
hardened, and many of them are evildoers.
57:17-19 Know that God quickens the earth after its death. We have made clear Our
revelations for you, that perhaps you may understand. Lo! Those who give alms, both men
and women, and lend to God a goodly loan, it will be doubled for them, and theirs will be
a rich reward. And those who believe in God and His Messengers, they are the truthful;
and the martyrs are with their Lord; they have their reward and their light; while as for
those who disbelieve and deny Our revelations, they are inhabitants of Hell-fire.
57:20 Know that the life of this world is only play, and idle talk, and pageantry, and
boasting among you, and rivalry in respect of wealth and children; as the similitude of
vegetation after rain, whereof the growth is pleasing to the husbandman, but afterward it
dries up and you see it turning yellow then it becomes straw. And in the Hereafter there is
grievous punishment, and (also) forgiveness from God and His good pleasure, whereas
the life of the world is but a matter of illusion.

222

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

57:21 Race one with another for forgiveness from your Lord and a Garden whereof the
breadth is as the breadth of the heavens and the earth, which is in store for those who
believe in God and His Messengers. Such is the bounty of God, which He bestows upon
whom He wills, and God is of infinite bounty.
57:22-24 No disaster befalls in the earth or in yourselves but it is in a Book before We
bring it into being – Lo! That is easy for God – That you grieve not for the sake of that
which has scaped you, nor yet exult because of that which has been given. God loves not
all prideful boasters, who hoard and who enjoin upon the people avarice. And whosoever
turns away, still God is the Absolute, the Owner of praise.
57:25 We verily sent Our Messengers with clear proofs, and revealed with them the
Scripture and the Balance, that people may keep up justice; and He revealed iron, wherein
is mighty power and (many) uses for people, and that God may know him who helps Him
and His Messengers, though unseen. Lo! God is Strong, Almighty.
57:26 And We verily sent Noah and Abraham and placed the Prophethood and the
Scripture among their seed, and among them there is he who is guided, but many of them
are evildoers.
57:27 Then We caused Our Messengers to follow in their footsteps; and We caused Jesus,
son of Mary, to follow, and gave him the Gospel, and placed compassion and mercy in the
hearts of those who followed him. But monasticism they invented – We ordained it not
for them – only seeking God's pleasure, and they observed it not with right observance.
So We give those of them who believe their reward, but many of them are evildoers.
57:28 O you who believe! Be mindful of your duty to God and put faith in His Messenger.
He will give you twofold of His mercy and will appoint for you a light wherein you shall
walk, and will forgive you. God is Forgiving, Merciful;
57:29 That the People of the Scripture may know that they control nothing of the bounty
of God, but that the bounty is in God's Hand to give to whom He wills. And God is of
infinite bounty.

58. Al-Mujadilah: The Dispute
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
58:1 God has heard the saying of her that disputes with you (O Muhammad) concerning
her husband, and complains to God. And God hears your colloquy. Lo! God is Hearer,
Knower.
58:2 Such of you as put away your wives (by saying they are as their mothers). They are
not their mothers; none are their mothers except those who gave them birth – they indeed
utter an ill word and a lie. And lo! God is Forgiving, Merciful.
58:3-4 Those who put away their wives (by saying they are as their mothers) and afterward
would go back on that which they have said; (the penalty) in that case (is) the freeing of a
slave before they touch one another. To this you are exhorted; and God is informed of
what you do. And he who finds not (the wherewithal), let him fast for two successive
months before they touch one another; and for him who is unable to do so (the penance
is) the feeding of sixty needy ones. This, that you may put trust in God and His
Messenger. Such are the limits (imposed by God); and for disbelievers is a painful
punishment.
58:5-6 Those who oppose God and His Messenger will be abased as even those before

223

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

them were abased; and We have sent down clear signs, and for disbelievers is a shameful
punishment on the Day when God will raise them all together and inform them of what
they did. God has kept account of it while they forgot it. And God is Witness over all
things.
58:7 Have you not seen that God knows all that is in the heavens and all that is in the
earth? There is no secret conference of three but He is their fourth, nor of five but He is
their sixth, nor of less than that or more but He is with them wherever they may be; and
afterward, on the Day of Resurrection, He will inform them of what they did Lo! God is
Knower of all things.
58:8 Have you not observed those who were forbidden conspiracy and afterward returned
to that which they had been forbidden, and (now) conspire together in sin, transgression,
and disobedience towards the Messenger? And when they come to you they greet you
with a greeting wherewith God greets you not, and say within themselves: Why does not
God punish us for what we say? Hell will suffice them; they will feel the heat thereof – an
evil journey's end!
58:9-10 O you who believe! When you conspire together, conspire not together in sin,
transgression, and disobedience towards the Messenger, but conspire together for piety
and self-restraint, and keep your duty, toward God, to whom you will be gathered. Lo!
Conspiracy is only of Satan, that he may vex those who believe; but he can harm them not
at all unless by God's leave. In God let believers put their trust.
58:11 O you who believe! When it is said: Make room! In assemblies, then make room;
God will make way for you (hereafter). And when it is said: Come up higher! Go up
higher; God will exalt those who believe among you, and those who have knowledge, to
high ranks. God is informed of what you do.
58:12 O you who believe! When you hold conference with the Messenger, offer alms
before your conference. That is better and purer for you. But if you cannot find (the
wherewithal) then lo! God is Forgiving, Merciful.
58:13 Fear you to offer alms before your conference? Then, when you do it not and God
has forgiven you, establish worship and pay the poor-due and obey God and His
Messenger. And God is Aware of what you do.
58:14-19 Have you not seen those who take for friends a folk with whom God is wroth?
They are neither of you nor of them, and they swear a false oath knowingly. God has
prepared for them a dreadful punishment. Evil indeed is that which they are wont to do.
They make a shelter of their oaths and turn (men) from the way of God; so theirs will be a
shameful punishment. Their wealth and their children will avail them nothing against God.
Such are rightful inhabitants of the Fire; they will abide therein. On the Day when God
will raise them all together, then will they swear to Him as they (now) swear to you, and
they will fancy that they have some standing. Lo! Is it not they who are the liars? Satan has
engrossed them and so has caused them to forget remembrance of God. They are Satan's
party. Lo! Is it not Satan's party who will be the losers?
58:20-21 Lo! Those who oppose God and His Messenger, they will be among the lowest.
God has decreed: Lo! I verily shall conquer, I and My Messengers. Lo! God is Strong,
Almighty.
58:22 You will not find folk who believe in God and the Last Day loving those who
oppose God and His Messenger: even though they be their fathers or their sons or their
brethren or their clan. As for such, He has written faith upon their hearts and has
strengthened them with a Spirit from Him, and He will bring them into Gardens
underneath which rivers flow, wherein they will abide. God is well pleased with them, and
they are well pleased with Him. They are God's party. Lo! Is it not God's party who are

224

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

the successful?

59. Al-Hashr: Exile
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
59:1 All that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth glorifies God, and He is the
Mighty, the Wise.
59:2-4 It is He Who has caused those of the People of the Scripture who disbelieved to go
forth from their homes to the first exile. You deemed not that they would go forth, while
they deemed that their strongholds would protect them from God. But God reached them
from a place whereof they reckoned not, and cast terror in their hearts so that they ruined
their houses with their own hands and the hands of the believers. So learn a lesson, O you
who have eyes! And if God had not decreed migration for them, He verily would have
punished them in this world, and theirs in the Hereafter is the punishment of the Fire.
That is because they were opposed to God and His Messenger; and whoever is opposed
to God, (for him) verily, God is stern in reprisal.
59:5-6 Whatsoever palm trees you cut down or left standing on their roots, it was by
God's leave, in order that He might disgrace the evildoers. And that which God gave as
booty to His Messenger from them, you urged not any horse or riding camel for the sake
thereof, but God gives His Messenger lordship over whom He wills. God is Able to do all
things.
59:7 That which God gives as booty to His Messenger from the people of the townships,
it is for God and His Messenger and for the near of kin and the orphans and the needy
and the wayfarer, that it become not a commodity between the rich among you. And
whatsoever the Messenger gives you, take it. And whatsoever he forbids, abstain (from it).
And keep your duty to God. Lo! God is stern in reprisal.
59:8-10 And (it is) for the poor immigrants who have been driven out from their homes
and their belongings, who seek bounty from God and help God and His Messenger. They
are the loyal. Those who entered the city and the faith before them love these who
migrated to them for refuge, and find in their breasts no need for that which has been
given them, but prefer (the immigrants) above themselves though poverty become their
lot. And whoever is saved from his own avarice – such are they who are successful. And
those who came (into the faith) after them say: Our Lord! Forgive us and our brethren
who were before us in the faith, and place not in our hearts any rancor toward those who
believe. Our Lord! You are full of pity, Merciful.
59:11-12 Have you not observed those who are hypocrites, (how) they tell their brethren
who disbelieve among the People of the Scripture: If you are driven out, we surely will go
out with you, and we will never obey anyone against you, and if you are attacked we verily
will help you. And God bears witness that verily they are liars. (For) indeed if they are
driven out they go not out with them, and indeed if they are attacked they help not, and
indeed if they had helped them they would have turned and fled, and then they would not
have been victorious.
59:13-14 You are more awful as a fear in their bosoms than God. That is because they are
a folk who understand not. They will not fight against you in a body except in fortified
villages or from behind walls. Their adversity among themselves is very great. You think
of them as a whole whereas their hearts are diverse. That is because they are a folk who
have no sense.
59:15-16 On the likeness of those (who suffered) a short time before them, they taste the

225

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

ill effects of their conduct, and theirs is painful punishment. (And the hypocrites are) on
the likeness of Satan when he tells man to disbelieve, then, when he disbelieves says: Lo! I
am quit of you. Lo! I fear God, the Lord of the Worlds.
59:17 And the consequence for both will be that they are in the Fire, therein abiding. Such
is the reward of the evildoers.
59:18-19 O you who believe! Observe your duty to God. And let every soul look to that
which it sends on before for the morrow. And observe your duty to God! Lo! God is
informed of what you do. And be not you as those who forgot God, therefore He caused
them to forget their souls. Such are the evildoers.
59:20 Not equal are the inhabitants of the Fire and the inhabitants of the Garden. The
inhabitants of the Garden, they are the victorious.
59:21 If We had caused this Quran to descend upon a mountain, you (O Muhammad)
verily had seen it humbled, rent asunder by the fear of God. Such similitude coin We for
people that perhaps they may reflect.
59:22 He is God, other than whom there is no other god, the Knower of the invisible and
the visible. He is the Beneficent, the Merciful.
59:23 He is God, other than Whom there is no other god, the Sovereign Lord, the Holy
One, Peace, the Giver of Security, the Guardian, the Majestic, the Compeller, the
Supreme. Glorified be God from all that they ascribe as partner (to Him).
59:24 He is God, the Creator, the Shaper out of nothing, the Fashioner. His are the most
beautiful names. All that is in the heavens and the earth glorifies Him, and He is the
Mighty, the Wise.

60. Al- Mumtahanah: She that is to be examined
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
60:1-2 O you who believe! Choose not My enemy and your enemy for helpers (and
protectors). Do you give them friendship when they disbelieve in that truth which has
come to you, driving out the Messenger and you because you believe in God, your Lord?
If you have come forth to fight hard in My way and seeking My good pleasure, (show
them not friendship). Do you show friendship to them in secret, when I am Best Aware of
what you hide and what you proclaim? And whosoever does it among you; he verily has
strayed from the right way. If they have the upper hand of you, they will be your foes, and
will stretch out their hands and their tongues toward you with evil (intent), and they long
for you to disbelieve.
60:3 Your ties of kindred and your children will avail you nothing upon the Day of
Resurrection. He will part you. God is Seer of what you do.
60:4 There is a goodly pattern for you in Abraham and those with him, when they told
their folk, Lo! We are guiltless of you and all that you worship beside God. We have done
with you. And there has arisen between us and you hostility and hate forever until you
believe in God only – except that which Abraham promised his father (when he said): I
will ask forgiveness for you, though I own nothing for you from God – Our Lord! In You
we put our trust, and to You we turn repentant, and to You is the journeying.
60:5 Our Lord! Make us not a prey for those who disbelieve, and forgive us, our Lord! Lo!
You, only You, are the Mighty, the Wise.

226

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

60:6 Verily you have in them a goodly pattern for anyone who looks to God and the Last
Day. And whosoever may turn away, lo! Still God, He is the Absolute, the Owner of
praise.
60:7 It may be that God will ordain love between you and those of them with whom you
are at enmity. God is Mighty, and God is Forgiving, Merciful.
60:8 God forbids you not those who warred not against you on account of religion and
drove you not out from your homes that you should show them kindness and deal justly
with them. Lo! God loves the just dealers.
60:9 God forbids you only those who warred against you on account of religion and have
driven you out from your homes and helped to drive you out, that you make friends of
them. Whosoever makes friends of them.(All) such are wrongdoers.
60:10 O you who believe! When believing women come to you as fugitives, examine them.
God is Best Aware of their faith. Then, if you know them for true believers, send them
not back to the disbelievers. They are not lawful for the disbelievers, nor are the
disbelievers lawful for them. And give the disbelievers that which they have spent (upon
them). And it is no sin on you to marry such women when you have given them their
dues. And hold not to the ties of disbelieving women; and ask for (the return of) that
which you have spent; and let the disbelievers ask for that which they have spent. That is
the judgment of God. He judges between you. God is Knower, Wise.
60:11 And if any of your wives have gone from you to the disbelievers and afterward you
have your turn (of triumph), then give to those whose wives have gone the like of that
which they have spent, and keep your duty to God in whom you are believers.
60:12 O Prophet! If believing women come to you, taking an oath of allegiance to you that
they will ascribe nothing as partner to God, and will neither steal nor commit adultery nor
kill their children, nor produce any lie that they have devised between their hands and feet,
nor disobey you in what is right, then accept their allegiance and ask God to forgive them.
Lo! God is Forgiving, Merciful.
60:13 O you who believe! Be not friendly with a folk with whom God is wroth, (a folk)
who have despaired of the Hereafter as the disbelievers despair of those who are in the
graves.

61. As-Saff: The Ranks
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
61:1 All that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth glorifies God, and He is the
Mighty, the Wise.
61:2-3 O you who believe! Why say you that which you do not? It is most hateful in the
sight of God that you say that which you do not do.
61:4 Lo! God loves those who battle for His cause in ranks, as if they were a solid
structure.
61:5 And (remember) when Moses said to his people: O my people! Why persecute you
me, when you well know that I am God's Messenger to you? So when they went astray
God sent their hearts astray. And God guides not the evildoing folk.
61:6 And when Jesus son of Mary said: O Children of Israel! Lo! I am the Messenger of

227

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

God to you, confirming that which was (revealed) before me in the Torah, and bringing
good tidings of a Messenger who comes after me, whose name is the `Praised One'. Yet
when be has come to them with clear proofs, they say: This is mere magic.
61:7 And who does greater wrong than he who invents a lie against God when he is
summoned to Islam. And God guides not wrongdoing folk.
61:8 Gladly would they put out the light of God with their mouths, but God will perfect
His light however much the disbelievers are averse.
61:9 He It is Who has sent His Messenger with the guidance and the religion of truth, that
He may make it conqueror of all religion however much polytheists may be averse.
61:10-12 O you who believe! Shall I show you a commerce that will save you from a
painful punishment? You should believe in God and His Messenger, and should fight hard
for the cause of God with your wealth and your lives. That is better for you, if you did but
know. He will forgive you your sins and bring you into Gardens underneath which rivers
flow, and pleasant dwellings in Gardens of Eden. That is the supreme triumph.
61:13 And (He will give you) another blessing which you love: help from God and present
victory. Give good tidings (O Muhammad) to the believers.
61:14 O you who believe! Be God's helpers, even as Jesus son of Mary said to the
disciples: Who are my helpers for God? They said: We are God's helpers. And a party of
the Children of Israel believed, while a party disbelieved. Then We strengthened those
who believed against their foe, and they became the uppermost.

62. Al-Jumu`ah: Friday
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
62:1 All that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth glorifies God, the Sovereign Lord,
the Holy One, the Mighty, the Wise.
62:2-3 He it is Who has sent among the unlettered ones a Messenger of their own, to
recite to them His revelations and to purify them of their sin, and to teach them the
Scripture and Wisdom, though before that they were indeed in error manifest, along with
others of them who have not yet joined them. He is the Mighty, the Wise.
62:4 That is the bounty of God; which he gives to whom He wills. God is of infinite
bounty.
62:5 The similitude of those who are entrusted with the Law of Moses, yet apply it not, are
as that of the donkey carrying books. Wretched is the similitude of folk who deny the
revelations of God. And God guides not wrongdoing folk.
62:6-8 Say (O Muhammad): O you who are Jews! If you claim that you are favored by
God apart from (all) people, then long for death if you are truthful. But they will never
long for it because of all that their own hands have sent before, and God is Aware of the
evildoers. Say (to them, O Muhammad): Lo! The death from which you shrink will surely
meet you, and afterward you will be returned to the Knower of the invisible and the
visible, and He will tell you what you used to do.
62:9-11 O you who believe! When the call is heard for the prayer of the day of
congregation, haste to remembrance of God and leave your trading. That is better for you
if you did but know. And when the prayer is ended, then disperse in the land and seek of

228

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

God's bounty, and remember God much, that you may be successful. But when they spy
some merchandise or pastime they break away to it and leave you standing. Say: That
which God has is better than pastime and better than merchandise, and God is the Best of
providers.

63. Al-Munafiqun: The Hypocrites
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
63:1 When the hypocrites come to you (O Muhammad), they say: We bear witness that
you are indeed God's Messenger. And God knows that you are indeed His Messenger, and
God bears witness that the hypocrites are speaking falsely.
63:2-3 They make their faith a pretext that they may turn (men) from the way of God.
Verily evil is that which they are wont to do, that is because they believed, and then
disbelieved, therefore their hearts are sealed so that they understand not.
63:4 And when you see them, their figures please you; and if they speak, you give ear to
their speech. (They are) as though they were blocks of wood in striped cloaks. They deem
every shout to be against them. They are the enemy, so beware of them. God confound
them! How they are perverted!
63:5-6 And when it is said to them: Come! The Messenger of God will ask forgiveness for
you! They avert their faces and you see them turning away, arrogant. Whether you ask
forgiveness for them or ask not forgiveness for them, God will not forgive them. Lo! God
guides not the evildoing folk.
63:7 They are the ones say: Spend not on behalf of those (who dwell) with God's
Messenger that they may disperse (and go away from you); when God's are the treasures
of the heavens and the earth; but the hypocrites comprehend not.
63:8 They say: Surely, if we return to Al-Madinah, the mightier will soon drive out the
weaker; when might belongs to God and to His Messenger and the believers; but the
hypocrites know not.
63:9 O you who believe! Let not your wealth nor your children distract you from
remembrance of God. Those who do so, they are the losers.
63:10-11 And spend of that wherewith We have provided you before death comes to one
of you and he says: My Lord! If only you would reprieve me for a little while, then I would
give alms and be among the righteous. But God reprieves no soul when its term comes,
and God is Aware of what you do.

64. At-Taghabun: Mutual Disillusion
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
64:1 All that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth glorifies God; to Him belongs
supreme power and to Him belongs praise, and He is Able to do all things.
64:2 It is He Who created you, but one of you is a disbeliever and one of you is a believer,
and God is Seer of what you do.
64:3 He created the heavens and the earth with truth, and He shaped you and made good

229

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

your shapes, and to Him is the journeying.
64:4 He knows all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth, and He knows what
you conceal and what you reveal. And God is Aware of what is in the breasts (of men).
64:5-6 Has not the story reached you of those who disbelieved of old and so did taste the
ill effects of their conduct, and theirs will be a painful punishment. That was because their
Messengers (from God) kept coming to them with clear proofs (of God's supreme
power), but they said: Shall mere mortals guide us? So they disbelieved and turned away,
and God was independent (of them). God is Absolute, Owner of praise.
64:7-8 Those who disbelieve assert that they will not be raised again. Say (to them, O
Muhammad): Yes, verily, by my Lord! You will be raised again and then you will be
informed of what you did; and that is easy for God. So believe in God and His Messenger
and the light, which We have revealed. And God is Aware of what you do.
64:9 The day when He shall gather you to the Day of Assembling, that will be a Day of
Deprivation. And whoever believes in God and does right, He will expiate from him his
evil deeds and will bring him into Gardens underneath which rivers flow, therein to abide
forever. That is the supreme triumph.
64:10 But those who disbelieve and deny Our revelations, such are inhabitants of the Fire;
they will abide therein – an evil journey's end!
64:11 No calamity befalls, except by God's leave. And whosoever believes in God, He
guides his heart. And God is Knower of all things.
64:12-13 Obey God and obey His Messenger; but if you turn away, then the duty of Our
Messenger is only to convey (the message) plainly. God! There is no God except Him. In
God, therefore, let believers put their trust.
64:14 O you who believe! Lo! Among your wives and your children there are enemies for
you, therefore beware of them. And if you efface and overlook and forgive, then lo! God
is Forgiving, Merciful.
64:15 Your wealth and your children are only a temptation, whereas God! With Him is an
immense reward.
64:16 So keep your duty to God as best you can, and listen, and obey, and spend, that is
better for your souls. And whoever is saved from his own greed, such are the successful.
64:17 If you lend to God a goodly loan, He will double it for you and will forgive you, for
God is Responsive, Forbearing,
64:18 Knower of the invisible and the visible, the Mighty, the Wise.

65. At-Talaq: Divorce
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
65:1 O Prophet! When you (men) put away women, put them away for their (legal) period
and reckon the period, and keep your duty to God, your Lord. Expel them not from their
houses nor let them go forth unless they commit open immorality. Such are the limits
(imposed by) God; and whoever transgresses God's limits, he verily wrongs his soul. You
know not: it may be that God will afterward bring some new thing to pass.

230

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

65:2-3 Then, when they have reached their term, take them back in kindness or part from
them in a reasonable manner, and call to witness two just men among you, and keep your
testimony upright for God. Whoever believes in God and the Last Day is exhorted to act
thus. And whosoever keeps his duty to God, God will appoint a way out for him, and will
provide for him from (a quarter) wherefrom he has no expectation. And whosoever puts
his trust in God,
He will suffice him. Lo! God brings His command to pass. God has set a measure for all
things.
65:4 And for such of your women as despair of menstruation, if you doubt, their period
(of waiting) shall be three months along with those who have it not. And for those with
child, their period shall be till they bring forth their burden. And whosoever keeps his duty
to God; He makes his course easy for him.
65:5 That is the commandment of God, which He reveals to you. And whoever keeps his
duty to God; He will expiate from him his evil deeds and magnify reward for him.
65:6-7 Lodge them where you dwell, according to your wealth, and harass them not so as
to straiten life for them. And if they are with child, then spend on them till they bring
forth their burden. Then, if they give suckle for you, give them their due payment and
consult together in a reasonable manner; but if you make difficulties for one another, then
let some other woman suckle for him (the father of the child). Let him who has
abundance spend of his abundance, and he whose provision is measured, let him spend of
that which God has given him. God asks nothing of any soul except that which He has
given it. God will give, after hardship, ease.
65:8-9 And how many a community revolted against the ordinance of its Lord and His
Messenger, and we called it to a stern account and punished it with a dire punishment, so
that it tasted the ill effects of its conduct, and the consequence of its conduct was loss.
65:10-11 God has prepared for them stern punishment, so keep your duty to God, O men
of understanding! O you who believe! Now God has sent down to you a reminder, a
Messenger reciting to you the revelations of God made plain, that He may bring forth
those who believe and do good works from darkness to light. And whosoever believes in
God and does right, He will bring him into Gardens underneath which rivers flow, therein
to abide forever. God has made good provision for him.
65:12 It is God Who has created seven heavens, and of the earth the like thereof. The
commandment comes down among them slowly, that you may know that God is Able to
do all things, and that God surrounds all things in knowledge.

66. At-Tahrim: The Banning
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
66:1 O Prophet! Why ban you that which God has made lawful for you, seeking to please
your wives? And God is Forgiving, Merciful.
66:2 God has made lawful for you(Muslims) absolution from your oaths (of such a kind),
and God is your Protector. He is the Knower, the Wise.
66:3 When the Prophet confided a fact to one of his wives and when she afterward
divulged it and God apprised him thereof, he made known part thereof and passed over
part. And when he told it to her she said: Who has told you? He said: The Knower, the
Aware has told me.

231

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

66:4-5 If you two turn to God repentant, (you have cause to do so) for your hearts desired
(the ban); and if you aid one another against him (Muhammad) then lo! God, indeed He, is
his Guardian (and Protector), and Gabriel and the righteous among the believers; and
furthermore the angels are his helpers. It may happen that his Lord, if he divorces you,
will give him in your stead wives better than you, submissive (to God), believing, pious,
penitent, devout in worship, inclined to fasting, widows and maids.
66:6 O you who believe! Ward off from yourselves and your families a fire whereof the
fuel is men and stones, over which are set angels strong, severe, who resist not God in
that which He commands them, but do that which they are commanded.
66:7 (Then it will be said:) O you who disbelieve! Make no excuses for yourselves this
Day. You are only being paid for what you used to do.
66:8 O you who believe! Turn to God in sincere repentance! It may be that your Lord will
expiate from you your evil deeds and bring you into Gardens underneath which rivers
flow, on the Day when God will not abase the Prophet and those who believe with him.
Their light will run before them and on their right hands: they will say: Our Lord! Perfect
our light for us, and forgive us! Lo! You are Able to do all things.
66:9 O Prophet! Fight hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites, and be stern with
them. Hell will be their home, an evil journey's end.
66:10 God cites an example for those who disbelieve: the wife of Noah and the wife of
Lot, who were under two of our righteous slaves yet betrayed them so that they (the
husbands) availed them nothing against God and it was said (to them): Enter the Fire
along with those who enter.
66:11 And God cites an example for those who believe: the wife of Pharaoh when she
said: My Lord! Build for me a home with You in the Garden, and deliver me from
Pharaoh and his work, and deliver me from evildoing folk;
66:12 And Mary, daughter of Imran, whose body was chaste, therefore, We breathed
therein something of Our Spirit. And she put faith in the Words of her Lord and His
Scriptures, and was of the obedient.

67. Al-Mulk: Supreme Power
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
67:1 Blessed is He in Whose Hand is the supreme power, and He is Able to do all things.
67:2 Who has created life and death that He may try you, which of you is best in conduct;
and He is the Mighty, Forgiving,
67:3-6 Who has created seven heavens in harmony. You (O Muhammad) can see no fault
in the Beneficent One's creation; then look again: Can you see any rifts? Then look again
and yet again, your sight will return to you weakened and made dim. And verily We have
beautified the world's heaven with lamps, and We have made them missiles for the satans,
and for them We have prepared the punishment of flame. And for those who disbelieve in
their Lord theirs is the punishment of Hell, an evil journey's end!
67:7-11 When they are flung therein they hear its roaring as it boils up, as if it would burst
with rage. Whenever a (fresh) host is flung therein the wardens thereof ask them: Came
there to you no warner? They say: Yes, verily, a warner came to us; but we denied and
said: God has revealed nothing; you are in nothing but a great error. And they say: Had we

232

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

been wont to listen or have sense, we had not been among the dwellers in the flames. So
they acknowledge their sins; but far removed (from mercy) are the dwellers in the flames.
67:12 Lo! Those who fear their Lord in secret, theirs will be forgiveness and a great
reward.
67:13-14 And keep your opinion secret or proclaim it, lo! He is Knower of all that is in the
breasts (of men). Should He not know what He created? And He is the Subtle, the Aware.
67:15-18 He it is Who has made the earth subservient to you, so walk in the paths thereof
and eat of His providence. And to Him will be the resurrection (of the dead). Have you
taken security from Him Who is in the heaven that He will not cause the earth to swallow
you when lo! It is convulsed? Or have you taken security from Him Who is in the heaven
that He will not let loose on you a hurricane? But you shall know the manner of My
warning. And verily those before them denied, then (see) the manner of My wrath (with
them)!
67:19 Have they not seen the birds above them spreading out their wings and closing
them? Nothing upholds them except the Beneficent. Lo! He is Seer of all things.
67:20-22 Or who is he that will be an army to you to help you instead of the Beneficent?
The disbelievers are in nothing but illusion. Or who is he that will provide for you if He
should with hold His providence? Nay, but they are set in pride and frowardness. Is he
who goes groping on his face more rightly guided, or he who walks upright on a straight
road?
67:23-25 Say (to them, O Muhammad): It is He Who gave you being, and has assigned to
you ears and eyes and hearts. Small thanks give you! Say, it is He Who multiplies you in
the earth, and to Whom you will be gathered. And they say: When (will) this promise (be
fulfilled), if you are truthful?
67:26-27 Say: The knowledge is with God only, and I am but a plain warner; but when
they see it near, the faces of those who disbelieve will be awry, and it will be said (to
them): This is that for which you used to call.
67:28 Say (O Muhammad): Have you thought: Whether God causes me (Muhammad) and
those with me to perish or has mercy on us, still, who will protect the disbelievers from a
painful punishment?
67:29 Say: He is the Beneficent. In Him we believe and in Him we put our trust. And you
will soon know who it is that is in error manifest.
67:30 Say: Have you thought: If (all) your water were to disappear into the earth, who then
could bring you gushing water?

68. Al-Qalam: The Pen
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
68:1-2 Nun . By the pen and that which they write (therewith) , you are not , for your
Lord's favor to you, a madman.
68:3-7 And lo! Yours verily will be a reward unfailing. And lo! You are of a tremendous
nature. And you will see and they will see which of you is the demented. Lo! Your Lord is
Best Aware of him who strays from his way, and He is Best Aware of those who are
guided.

233

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

68:8-13 Therefore obey not you the rejecters who would have had you compromise, that
they may compromise. Neither obey you each feeble oath monger, detractor, spreader
abroad of slanders, hinderer of the good, sinful transgressor, greedy therewithal, intrusive.
68:14-16 It is because he is possessed of wealth and children that, when Our revelations
are recited to him, he says: Mere fables of the men of old. We shall brand him on the
nose.
68:17-33 Lo! We have tried them as We tried the owners of the garden when they vowed
they would pluck its fruit next morning. And made no exception (for the will of God);
then a visitation came upon it while they slept and in the morning it was as though
plucked. And they cried out one to another in the morning, saying: Run to your field if
you would pluck (the fruit). So they went off, saying one to another in low tones: No
needy man shall enter it today against you. They went betimes, strong in (this) purpose.
But when they saw it, they said: Lo! We are in error! Nay, but we are desolate! The best
among them said: Did I not say to you: Why glorify you not (God)? They said: Glorified
be our Lord! Lo! We have been wrongdoers. Then some of them drew near to others, selfreproaching. They said: Alas for us! In truth we were outrageous. It may be that our Lord
will give us better than this in place thereof. Lo! We beseech our Lord. Such was the
punishment. And verily the punishment of the Hereafter is greater if they did but know.
68:34-40 Lo! For the pious are Gardens of Bliss with their Lord. Shall We then treat those
who are Muslims (have surrendered) as We treat the guilty? What ails you? How foolishly
you judge! Or have you a Scripture wherein you learn that you shall indeed have all that
you choose? Or have you a covenant, an oath from Us that reaches to the Day of
Judgment, that yours shall be all that you ordain? Ask them (O Muhammad) which of
them will vouch for that!
68:41-45 Or have they other gods? Then let them bring their other gods if they are
truthful on the Day when it befalls in earnest, and they are ordered to prostrate themselves
but are not able, with eyes downcast, abasement stupefying them. And they had been
summoned to prostrate themselves while they were yet unhurt. Leave Me (to deal) with
those who give the lie to this pronouncement. We shall lead them on by steps from
whence they know not. Yet I bear with them, for lo! My scheme is firm.
68:46 Or do you (O Muhammad) ask a fee from them so that they are heavily taxed?
68:47 Or is the Unseen theirs that they can write (thereof)?
68:48-50 But wait patiently you for your Lord's decree, and be not like him of the fish,
who cried out in despair. Had it not been that favor from his Lord had reached him, he
surely would have been cast into the wilderness while he was reprobate. But his Lord
chose him and placed him among the righteous.
68:51-52 And lo! Those who disbelieve would gladly disconcert you with their eyes when
they hear the Reminder, and they say: Lo! He is indeed mad; when it is nothing else than a
Reminder to creation.

69. Al-Haqqah: The Reality
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
69:1-3 The Reality! What is the Reality? Ah, what will convey to you what the Reality is!
69:4-8 (The tribes of) Thamud and Aad disbelieved in the judgment to come. As for
Thamud, they were destroyed by the lightning. And as for Aad, they were destroyed by a

234

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

fierce roaring wind, which He imposed on them for seven long nights and eight long days
so that you might have seen men lying overthrown, as they were hollow trunks of palm
trees. Can you (O Muhammad) see any remnant of them?
69:9-10 And Pharaoh and those before him, and the communities that were destroyed,
brought error, and they disobeyed the Messenger of their Lord, therefore did He grip
them with a tightening grip.
69:11-12 Lo! When the waters rose, We carried you upon the ship that We might make it a
memorial for you, and that remembering ears, (that heard the story) might remember.
69:13-15 And when the Trumpet shall sound one blast, and the earth with the mountains
shall be lifted up and crushed with one crash, then, on that Day will the Event befall.
69:16-18 And the heaven will split asunder, for that Day it will be frail. And the angels will
be on the sides thereof, and eight will uphold the Throne of their Lord that Day, above
them. On that Day you will be exposed; not a secret of yours will be hidden.
69:19-24 Then, as for him who is given his record in his right hand, he will say: Take, read
my record! Surely I knew that I should have to meet my reckoning. Then he will be in
blissful state in a high Garden whereof the clusters are in easy reach. (And it will be said to
those therein:) Eat and drink at ease for that which you sent on before you in past days.
69:25-37 But as for him who is given his record in his left hand, he will say: Oh, would
that I had not been given my book, and knew not what my reckoning is! Oh, would that it
had been death! My wealth has not availed me; my power has gone from me. (It will be
said:) Take him and fetter him and then expose him to Hell-fire and then insert him in a
chain whereof the length is seventy cubits. Lo! He used not to believe in God the
Tremendous, and urged not on the feeding of the wretched, therefore he has no devoted
friend here this Day, nor any food except filth, which none but sinners eat.
69:38-43 But nay! I swear by all that you see and all that you see not, that it is indeed the
speech of an illustrious Messenger. It is not poet's speech – little is it that you believe! Nor
diviner's speech – little is it that you remember! It is a revelation from the Lord of the
Worlds.
69:44-47 And if he had invented false sayings concerning Us, We assuredly had taken him
by the right hand and then severed his life artery, and not one of you could have held Us
off from him.
69:48-52 And lo! It is a warrant to those who are pious. And lo! We know that some
among you will deny (it). And lo! It is indeed an anguish for the disbelievers. And lo! It is
absolute truth. So glorify the name of your Tremendous Lord.

70. Al-Ma`arij: The Ascending Stairways
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.
70:1-4 A questioner questioned concerning the punishment about to fall upon the
disbelievers, which none can repel, from God, Lord of the Ascending Stairways, (whereby)
the angels and the Spirit ascend to Him in a Day whereof the span is fifty thousand years.
70:5-7 But be patient (O Muhammad) with a patience fair to see. Lo! They behold it afar
off while We behold it near:
70:8-14 The Day when the sky will become as molten copper, and the hills become as

235

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

flakes of wool, and no familiar friend will ask a question of his friend, though they will be
given sight of them. The guilty man will long to be able to ransom himself from the
punishment of that Day at the price of his children, and his spouse and his brother, and
his kin that harbored him, and all that are in the earth, if then it might deliver him.
70:15-18 But nay! For lo! It is the fire of Hell eager to roast; it calls him who turned and
fled (from truth), and hoarded (wealth) and withheld it.
70:19-35 Lo! Man was created anxious, fretful when evil befalls him, and, when good
befalls him, grudging; except worshippers, who are constant at their worship, and in
whose wealth there is a right acknowledged, for the beggar and the destitute; and those
who believe in the Day of Judgment, and those who are fearful of their Lord's punishment
– Lo! The punishment of their Lord is that before which, none can feel secure – and those
who preserve their chastity, except with their wives and those whom their right hands
possess, for thus they are not blameworthy; but whoever seeks more than that, those are
they who are transgressors; and those who keep their pledges and their covenant. And
those who stand by their testimony and those who are attentive at their worship, those will
dwell in Gardens, honored.
70:36-38 What ails those who disbelieve, that they keep staring toward you (O
Muhammad), open eyed, on the right and on the left, in groups? Does every man among
them hope to enter the Garden of Delight?
70:39-41 Nay, verily. Lo! We created them from what they know. But nay! I swear by the
Lord of the rising places and the setting places of the planets that We are Able to replace
them by (others) better than them. And We are not to be outrun.
70:42-44 So let them chat and play until they meet their Day, which they are promised, the
Day when they come forth from the graves in haste. As if racing to a goal, with downcast
eyes, abasement stupefying them: Such is the Day, which they are promised.

71. Nuh: Noah
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
71:1 Lo! We sent Noah to his people (saying): Warn your people ere the painful
punishment come to them.
71:2-4 He said: O my people! Lo! I am a plain warner to you (bidding you): Worship God
and keep your duty to Him and obey me, so that He may forgive you somewhat of your
sins and respite you to an appointed term. Lo! The term of God, when it comes, cannot
be delayed, if you but knew.
71:5-9 He said: My Lord! Lo! I have called to my people night and day, but my entire
calling does but add to their repugnance; and lo! Whenever I call to them that You may
pardon them they thrust their fingers in their ears and cover themselves with their
garments and persist (in their refusal) and magnify themselves in pride. And lo! I have
called to them aloud, and lo! I have made public proclamation to them, and I have
appealed to them in private.
71:10-12 And I have said: Seek pardon of your Lord. Lo! He is ever Forgiving. He will let
loose the sky for you in plenteous rain, and will help you with wealth and sons, and will
assign to you Gardens and will assign to you rivers.
71:13-20 What ails you that you hope not toward

236

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

God for dignity, when He created you by (diverse) stages? See you not how God has
created seven heavens in harmony, and has made the moon a light therein, and made the
sun a lamp? And God has caused you to grow as a growth from the earth, and afterward
He makes you return thereto, and He will bring you forth again, a (new) bringing forth.
And God has made the earth a wide expanse for you that you may tread the valley ways
thereof.
71:21-24 Noah said: My Lord! They have disobeyed me and followed one whose wealth
and children increase him in nothing except ruin; and they have plotted a mighty plot, and
they have said: Forsake not your gods. Forsake not (your gods) Wadd, nor Suwa, nor
Yaghuth and Yauq and Nasr. And they have led many astray, and You increase the
wrongdoers in nothing except error.
71:25 Because of their sins they were drowned, and then made to enter a Fire. And they
found they had no helpers in place of God.
71:26-28 And Noah said: My Lord! Leave not one of the disbelievers in the land. If You
should leave them, they will mislead Your slaves and will beget none except lewd ingrates.
My Lord! Forgive me and my parents and him who enters my house believing, and
believing men and believing women, and increase not the wrongdoers in anything except
ruin.

72. Al- Jinn: The Jinn
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
72:1-5 Say (O Muhammad): It is revealed to me that a company of the jinn gave ear, and
they said: Lo! It is a marvelous Quran, which guides to righteousness, so we believe in it
and we ascribe no partner to our Lord. And (we believe) that He. exalted be the glory of
our Lord! – has taken neither wife nor son, and that the foolish one among us used to
speak concerning God an atrocious lie. And lo! We had supposed that humankind and
jinn would not speak a lie concerning God.
72:6-7 And indeed (O Muhammad) individuals of humankind used to invoke the
protection of individuals of the jinn so that they increased them in revolt (against God);
and indeed they supposed, even as you suppose, that God would not raise anyone (from
the dead).
72:8-15 And (the jinn who had listened to the Quran said): We had sought the heaven but
had found it filled with strong warders and meteors. And we used to sit on places (high)
therein to listen. But he who listened now finds a flame in wait for him; and we know not
whether harm is boded to all who are in the earth, or whether their Lord intends guidance
for them. And among us there are righteous folk and among us there are far from that.
We are sects having different rules. And we know that we cannot escape from God in the
earth, nor can we escape by flight. And when we heard the guidance, we believed therein,
and whoever believes in his Lord, he fears neither loss nor oppression. And there are
among us are some Muslims (who have surrendered to God) and there are among us
some who are unjust. And whoever has embraced Islam (surrendered to God), such have
taken the right path purposefully. And as for those who are unjust, they are firewood for
Hell.
72:16-17 If they (the idolaters) tread the right path, We shall give them to drink of water in
abundance that We may test them thereby, and whoever turns away from the
remembrance of his Lord; He will thrust him into ever growing torment.
72:18 And the places of worship are only for God, so pray not to anyone along with God.

237

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

72:19 And when the slave of God stood up in prayer to Him, they crowded on him,
almost stifling.
72:20-24 Say (to them, O Muhammad): I pray to God only, and ascribe to Him no
partner. Say: Lo! I control not hurt nor benefit for you. Say: Lo! None can protect me
from God, nor can I find any refuge beside Him. (Mine is) but conveyance (of the truth)
from God, and His messages; and whoever disobeys God and His Messenger, lo! His is
the fire of Hell, wherein such dwell for ever. Till (the Day) when they shall behold that
which they are promised (they may doubt); but then they will know for certain) who is
weaker in allies and less in multitude.
72:25-28 Say (O Muhammad to the disbelievers): I know not whether that which you are
promised is near, or if my Lord has set a distant term for it. (He is) the Knower of the
Unseen, and He reveals to none His secret, except to a Messenger whom he has chosen,
and then He makes a guard to go before him and a guard behind him that He may know
that they have indeed Conveyed the messages of their Lord. He surrounds all their doings,
and He keeps count of all things.

73. Al-Muzzammil: The Wrapped One
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
73:1-5 O you wrapped up in your raiment! Keep vigil the night long, except a little – A
half thereof, or abate a little thereof, or add (a little) thereto – and chant the Quran in
measure, for We shall charge you with a word of weight.
73:6-10 Lo! The vigil of the night is (a time) when impression is more keen and speech
more certain. Lo! You have by day a chain of business. So remember the name of your
Lord and devote
yourself with a complete devotion – Lord of the east and the west; none should be
worshipped but God alone; so choose you Him alone for your defender – and bear with
patience what they utter, and part from them with a fair leave-taking.
73:11-14 Leave Me to deal with the deniers, lords of ease and comfort (in this life); and do
you respite them awhile. Lo! With Us are heavy fetters and a raging Fire, and food which
chokes (the partaker), and a painful punishment. On the Day when the earth and the hills
rock, and the hills become a heap of running sand.
73:15-19 Lo! We have sent to you a Messenger as witness against you, even as We sent to
Pharaoh a Messenger. But Pharaoh rebelled against the Messenger, whereupon We seized
him with no gentle grip. Then how, if you disbelieve, will you protect yourselves upon the
Day, which will turn
children grey, the very heaven being then rent asunder. His promise is to be fulfilled. Lo!
This is
a Reminder. Let him who will, then, choose a way to his Lord.
73:20 Lo! Your Lord knows how you keep vigil sometimes nearly two thirds of the night,
or (sometimes) half or a third thereof, as do a party of those with you. God measures the
night and the day. He knows that you count it not, and turns to you in mercy. Recite, then
of the Quran that which is easy for you. He knows that there are sick folk among you,
while others travel in the land in search of God's bounty, and others (still) are fighting for
the cause of God. So recite of it that which is easy (for you), and establish worship and
pay the poor-due and (so) lend to God a goodly loan. Whatsoever good you send before

238

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

you for your souls, you will surely find it with God, better and greater in the recompense.
And seek forgiveness of God. Lo! God is Forgiving, Merciful.

74. Al-Muddaththir: The Cloaked One
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
74:1-5 O you enveloped in your cloak, arise and warn! Your Lord magnify, your raiment
purify, pollution shun!
74:6-7 And show not favor, seeking worldly gain! For the sake of your Lord, be patient!
74:8-10 For when the Trumpet shall sound, surely that Day will be a Day of anguish, not
of ease, for disbelievers.
74:11-29 Leave Me (to deal) with him whom I created lonely, and then bestowed upon
him ample means, and sons abiding in his presence, and made (life) smooth for him. Yet
he desires that I should give more. Nay! For lo! he has been stubborn to Our revelations.
On him I shall impose a fearful punishment. For lo! He did consider; then he
planned.(Self-) destroyed is he, how he planned! Again (self-) destroyed is he, how he
planned! Then looked he, then frowned he and showed displeasure. Then turned he away
in pride, and said: This is nothing else than magic of old; this is nothing else than speech
of mortal man. Him shall I fling to the burning – Ah, what will convey to you what that
burning is! .It leaves nothing; it spares nothing. It shrivels the man.
74:30-31 Above it are nineteen. We have appointed only angels to be wardens of the Fire,
and their number have We made to be a stumbling block for those who disbelieve; that
those to whom the Scripture has been given may have certainty, and that believers may
increase in faith; and that those to whom the Scripture has been given and believers may
not doubt; and that those in whose hearts there is disease, and disbelievers, may say: What
means God by this similitude? Thus God sends astray whom He wills, and whom He wills
He guides. None knows the hosts of your Lord except Him. This is nothing else than a
Reminder to mortals.
74:32-37 Nay, by the moon, and the night when it withdraws, and the dawn when it shines
forth. Lo! This is one of the greatest (signs) as a warning to men, to him of you who will
advance or hang back.
74:38-47 Every soul is a pledge for its own deeds; except those who will stand on the right
hand. In Gardens they will ask one another concerning the guilty: What has brought you
to this burning? They will answer: We were not of those who prayed nor did we feed the
wretched. We used to wade (in vain dispute) with(all) waders, and we used to deny the
Day of Judgment, till the inevitability of death came to us.
74:48-54 The mediation of no mediators will avail them then. Why now turn they away
from the admonishment as if they were frightened asses fleeing from a lion? Nay, but
every one of them desires that he should be given open pages (from God). Nay, verily.
They fear not the Hereafter. Nay, verily. Lo! This is an admonishment.
74:55-56 So whosoever wills may heed. And they will not heed unless God wills (it). He is
worthy of our piety and the One Who forgives.

75. Al-Qiyamah: Resurrection

239

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
75:1-4 Nay, I swear by the Day of Resurrection; nay, I swear by the accusing soul (that this
Scripture is true). Thinks man that We shall not assemble his bones? Yes, verily. Yes, We
are Able to restore his very fingers!
75:5-12 But man would gladly deny what is before him. He asks: When will be this Day of
Resurrection? But when sight is confounded, and the moon is eclipsed, and sun and moon
are united, on that Day man will cry: Where to flee! Alas! No refuge! To your Lord is the
recourse that Day.
75:13-15 On that Day man is told the tale of that which he has sent before and left
behind. Oh, but man is a telling witness against himself, although he tenders his excuses.
75:16-19 Stir not your tongue herewith to hasten it. Lo! Upon Us (rests) the putting
together thereof and the reading thereof. And when We read it, follow you the reading;
then lo! Upon Us (rests) the explanation thereof.
75:20-25 Nay, but you do love the fleeting now and neglect the Hereafter. That Day will
faces be
resplendent, looking toward their Lord; and that Day will other faces be despondent, you
will know that some great disaster is about to fall on them.
75:26-30 Nay, but when the life comes up to the throat, and men say: Where is the wizard
(who can save him now)? And he knows that it is the parting; and agony is heaped on
agony; to your Lord that Day will be the driving.
75:31-35 For he neither trusted, nor prayed. But he denied and flouted. Then went he to
his folk with glee. Nearer to you and nearer, again nearer to you and nearer (is the
punishment).
75:36-40 Thinks man that he is to be left aimless? Was he not a drop of fluid, which
gushed forth? Then he became a clot; then (God) shaped and fashioned, and made of him
a pair, the male and female. Is not He (Who does so) Able to bring the dead to life?

76. Al-Insan or Ad-Dahr: Man or Time
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
76:1-4 Has there come upon man (ever) any period of time in which he was a thing
unremembered? Lo! We create man from a drop of thickened fluid to test him; so We
make him hearing, knowing. Lo! We have guided him to the way, whether he be grateful
or disbelieving. Lo! We have prepared for disbelievers manacles and shackles and a raging
Fire.
76:5-10 Lo! The righteous shall drink of a cup whereof the mixture is of water of
camphor, a spring wherefrom the slaves of God drink, making it gush forth abundantly,
because they perform the vow and fear a Day whereof the evil is wide-spreading, and feed
with food the needy wretch, the orphan and the prisoner, for love of Him, (saying:) We
feed you, for the sake of God only. We wish for neither reward nor thanks from you; lo!
We fear from our Lord a Day of frowning and of fate.
76:11-22 Therefore God has warded from them the evil of that Day, and has made them
find brightness and joy; and has awarded them for all that they endured, a Garden and silk
attire; reclining therein upon couches, they will find there neither (heat of) a sun nor bitter

240

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

cold. The shade thereof is close upon them and the clustered fruits thereof bow down.
Goblets of silver are brought round for them, and beakers (as) of glass, (bright as) glass
but (made) of silver, which they (themselves) have measured to the measure (of their
deeds). There are they watered with a cup whereof the mixture is of ginger, the water of a
spring therein, named Salsabil. There wait on them immortal youth, whom, when you see,
you would take for scattered pearls . When you see, you will see there bliss and high estate.
Their raiment will be fine green silk and gold embroidery.
Bracelets of silver will they wear. Their Lord will slake their thirst with a pure drink . (And
it will be said to them :) Lo! This is a reward for you. Your endeavor (upon earth) has
found acceptance.
76:23-24 Lo! We, indeed We, have revealed to you the Quran, a revelation; so submit
patiently to your Lord's command, and obey not of them any guilty one or disbeliever.
76:25-26 Remember the name of your Lord at morn and evening. And worship Him (a
portion) of the night. And glorify Him through the long night.
76:27 Lo! These love fleeting life, and put behind them (the remembrance of) a grievous
Day.
76:28 We, indeed We, created them, and strengthened their frame. And when We will, We
can replace them, bringing others like them in their stead.
76:29-30 Lo! This is an admonishment, that whosoever wills may choose a way to his
Lord. Yet you will not, unless God wills. Lo! God is Knower, Wise.
76:31 He makes whom He wills to enter His mercy, and for evildoers has prepared a
painful punishment.

77. Al-Mursalat: The Emissaries
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
77:1-7 By the emissary winds (sent) one after another; by the raging hurricanes; by those
which cause earth's vegetation to revive; by those who winnow with a winnowing; by
those who bring down the Reminder, to excuse or to warn; surely that which you are
promised will befall.
77:8-15 So when the stars are put out, and when the sky is driven asunder, and when the
mountains are blown away, and when the Messengers' time has come – For what Day is
the time appointed? For the Day of Decision. And what will convey to you what the Day
of Decision is! .Woe to the repudiators on that Day!
77:16-19 Destroyed We not the former folk, then caused the latter folk to follow after?
Thus deal We ever with the guilty. Woe to the repudiators on that Day!
77:20-24 Did We not create you from a base fluid, which We laid up in a safe abode for a
known term? Thus We arranged. How excellent is Our arranging! Woe to the repudiators
on that Day!
77:25-28 Have We not made the earth a receptacle both for the living and the dead, and
placed therein high mountains and given you to drink sweet water therein? Woe to the
repudiators on that Day!

241

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

77:29-34 (It will be said to them:) Depart to that (punishment) which you used to deny;
depart to the shadow falling threefold. (Which yet is) neither relief nor shelter from the
flame. Lo! It throws up sparks like the castles, (or) as it might be camels of bright yellow
hue. Woe to the repudiators on that Day!
77:35-37 This is a Day wherein they speak not, nor are they suffered to put forth excuses.
Woe to the repudiators on that Day!
77:38-40 This is the Day of Decision, We have brought you and the men of old together.
If now you have any wit, outwit Me. Woe to the repudiators on that Day!
77:41-45 Lo! Those who kept their duty are amid shade and fountains, and fruits such as
they desire. (To them it is said:) Eat, drink and welcome, O you blessed, in return for what
you did. Thus do We reward the good. Woe to the repudiators on that Day!
77:46-47 Eat and take your ease (on earth) a little. Lo! You are guilty. Woe to the
repudiators on that Day!
77:48-49 When it is said to them: Bow down they bow not down! Woe to the repudiators
on that Day!
77:50 In what statement, after this, will they believe?

78. An-Naba: The Tidings
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
78:1-5 Whereof do they question one another? (It is) of the awful tidings, concerning
which, they are in disagreement. Nay, but they will come to know! Nay, again, but they
will come to know!
78:6-11 Have We not made the earth an expanse, and the high hills bulwarks? And We
have created you in pairs, and have appointed your sleep for repose, and have appointed
the night as a cloak, and have appointed the day for livelihood.
78:12-16 And We have built above you seven strong (heavens), and have appointed a
dazzling lamp, and have sent down from the rainy clouds abundant water, thereby to
produce grain and plant, and gardens of thick foliage.
78:17-20 Lo! The Day of Decision is a fixed time, a Day when the Trumpet is blown, and
you come in multitudes, and the heaven is opened and becomes as gates, and the hills are
set in motion and become as a mirage.
78:21-26 Lo! Hell lurks in ambush, a home for the rebellious. They will abide therein for
ages. Therein they taste neither coolness nor (any) drink except boiling water and a
paralyzing cold: Reward proportioned (to their evil deeds).
78:27 For lo! They looked not for a reckoning;
78:28-30 they called Our revelations false with a strong denial. Everything have We
recorded in a Book. So taste (of that which you have earned). No increase do We give you
except of torment.
78:31-37 Lo! For the dutious is achievement. Gardens enclosed and vineyards, and
maidens for companions, and a full cup. There hear they never vain discourse, nor lying –
Requital from your Lord – a gift in payment – Lord of the heavens and the earth, and (all)

242

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

that is between them, the Beneficent; with Whom none can converse.
78:38-39 On the Day when the angels and the Spirit stand arrayed, they speak not, except
him whom the Beneficent allows and who speaks right. That is the True Day. So whoever
wills should seek recourse to his Lord.
78:40 Lo! We warn you of a punishment at hand, a Day whereon a man will look on that
which his own hands have sent before, and the disbeliever will cry: Would that I were
dust!

79. An-Nazi`at: Those Who drag forth
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
79:1-9 By those who drag forth to destruction, by the meteors rushing, by the lone stars
floating, by the angels hastening, and those who govern the event, on the Day when the
first Trumpet resounds, and the second follows it, on that Day hearts beat painfully, while
eyes are downcast.
79:10-14 (Now) they are saying: Shall we really be restored to our first state, even after we
are crumbled bones? They say: Then that would be a vain proceeding. Surely it will need
but one shout, and lo! They will be awakened.
79:15-26 Has there come to you the history of Moses? How his Lord called him in the
holy vale of Tuwa, (saying:) Go you to Pharaoh – Lo! He has rebelled, and say (to him):
Have you (will) to purify yourself? Then I will guide you to your Lord and you shall fear
(Him). And he showed him the tremendous sign. But he denied and disobeyed, then
turned he away in haste, then gathered he (his people) and summoned and proclaimed: I
(Pharaoh) am your lord the highest. So God seized him (and made him) an example for
the after (life) and for the former. Lo! Herein is indeed a lesson for him who fears.
79:27-33 Are you the harder to create, or is the heaven that He built? He raised the height
thereof and proportioned it; and He darkened the night thereof, and He extracted its
brightness. And after that He spread the earth, and produced from it its water and its
pasture and He made fast the hills, as a provision for you and for your cattle.
79:34-41 But when the great disaster comes, the Day when man will call to mind his
(whole) endeavor, and Hell will stand forth visible to him who sees, then, as for him who
rebelled and chose the life of the world, lo! Hell will be his home. But as for him who
feared to stand before his Lord and restrained his soul from lust, lo! The Garden will be
his home.
79:42-45 They ask you of the Hour: when will it come to port? Why (ask they)? What have
you to tell them thereof? To your Lord belongs (knowledge of) the term thereof. You are
but a warner to him who fears it.
79:46 On the Day when they behold it, it will be as if they had but tarried for an evening
or the morn thereof.

80. Abasa: He Frowned
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
80:1-4 He frowned and turned away because the blind man came to him. What could

243

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

inform you that perhaps he might become pure of his sin or take heed and so the
reminder might avail him?
80:5-10 As for him who thinks himself independent, to him you pay regard. Yet it is not
your concern if he becomes not pure of his sin. But as for him who comes to you with
earnest purpose and has fear, from him you are distracted.
80:11-16 Nay, but verily it is an admonishment, so let whosoever will pay heed to it, on
honored leaves exalted, purified, (set down) by scribes noble and righteous.
80:17-19 Man is (self-) destroyed: how ungrateful! From what thing does He create him?
From a drop of seed. He creates him and proportions him,
80:20-23 Then makes the way easy for him, then causes him to die, and buries him; then,
when He wills, He brings him to life again. Nay, but (man) has not done what He
commanded him.
80:24-32 Let man consider his food: How We pour water in showers, then split the earth
in clefts and cause the grain to grow therein, and grapes and green fodder, and olive trees
and palm trees, and garden-closes of thick foliage, and fruits and grasses: Provision for
you and your cattle.
80:33-37 But when the Shout comes on the Day when a man flees from his brother, and
his mother and his father, and his wife and his children, every man that Day will have
concern enough to make him heedless (of others).
80:38-42 On that Day faces will be bright as dawn, laughing, rejoicing at good news; and
other faces, on that Day, with dust upon them, veiled in darkness, those are the
disbelievers, the wicked.

81. At-Takwir: The Overthrowing
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
81:1-14 When the sun is overthrown, and when the stars fall, and when the hills are
moved, and when the camels big with young are abandoned, and when the wild beasts are
herded together, and when the seas rise, and when souls are reunited, and when the girlchild that was buried alive is asked for what sin she was slain, and when the pages are laid
open, and when the sky is torn away, and when Hell is lighted, and when the garden is
brought near (then) every soul will know what it has made ready.
81:15-21 Oh, but I call to witness the planets, the stars which rise and set, and the close of
night, and the breath of morning that this is in truth the word of an honored messenger,
owner of power (and high rank) with the Lord of the Throne, (one) to be obeyed, and
trustworthy.
81:22-25 And your comrade is not mad. Surely he beheld him on the clear horizon. And
he is not avid of the Unseen. Nor is this the utterance of a devil worthy to be stoned.
81:26-29 Whither then go you? This is nothing else than a reminder to creation, to
whomsoever of you wills to walk straight. And you will not, unless (it be) that God wills it,
the Lord of creation.

82. Al-Infitar: The Cleaving

244

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
82:1-5 When the heaven is cleft asunder, when the planets are dispersed, when the seas are
poured forth, and the sepulchers are overturned, a soul will know what it has sent before
(it) and what left behind.
82:6-9 O man! What has made you careless concerning your Lord, the Bountiful, Who
created you, then fashioned, then proportioned you into whatsoever form He wills, He
casts you? Nay, but they deny the Judgment.
82:10-12 Lo! There are above you guardians, generous and recording, who know (all) that
you do.
82:13-16 Lo! The righteous verily will be in Delight, and lo! The wicked verily will be in
Hell; they will burn therein on the Day of Judgment, and will not be absent thence.
82:17 Ah, what will convey to you what the Day of Judgment is!
82:18 Again, what will convey to you what the Day of Judgment is!
82:19 A Day on which no soul has power at all for any (other) soul. The (absolute)
command on that Day is God's.

83. Al-Mutaffifin: Defrauding
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
83:1-6 Woe to the defrauders: Those who when they take the measure from people
demand it full, but if they measure to them or weigh for them, they cause them loss. Do
such (men) not consider that they will be raised again to an Awful Day, the Day when (all)
people will stand before the Lord of the Worlds?
83:7-17 Nay, but the record of the vile is in Sijjin – Ah! what will convey to you what Sijjin
is! – a written record. Woe to the repudiators on that Day! Those who deny the Day of
Judgment which none denies except each sinful transgressor, who , when you read to
him Our revelations, says: (Mere) fables of the men of old. Nay, but that which they have
earned is rust upon their hearts. Nay, but surely on that Day they will be covered from
(the mercy of) their Lord. Then lo! They verily will burn in Hell, and it will be said (to
them) : This is that which you used to deny.
83:18-28 Nay, but the record of the righteous is in Iliyin – Ah, what will convey to you
what Iliyin is!. A written record, attested by those who are brought near (to their Lord).
Lo! The righteous are verily in Delight, on couches, gazing , you will know in their faces
the radiance of delight . They are given to drink of a pure wine , sealed, whose seal is musk
– For this let (all) those strive who strive for bliss – and mixed with water of Tasnim, a
spring from which those brought near to God drink .
83:29-35 Lo! The guilty used to laugh at those who believed, and wink one to another
when they passed them; and when they returned to their own folk, they returned jesting;
and when they saw them they said: Lo! These have gone astray. Yet they were not sent as
guardians over them. This Day it is those who believe who have the last laugh on the
disbelievers, on high couches, gazing.
83:36 Are not the disbelievers paid for what they used to do?

245

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

84. Al-Inshiqaq: The Sundering
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
84:1-6 When the heaven is split asunder and attentive to her Lord in fear, and when the
earth is spread out and has cast out all that was in her, and is empty, and attentive to her
Lord in fear! You verily, O man, are working toward your Lord a work, which you will
meet (before Him).
84:7-15 Then whoever is given his account in his right hand, he truly will receive an easy
reckoning, and will return to his folk in joy. But whoever is given his account behind his
back, he surely will invoke destruction and be thrown to the scorching Fire. He verily lived
joyous with his folk; he verily deemed that he would never return (to God). Nay, but lo!
His Lord is ever looking on him!
84:16-19 Oh, I swear by the afterglow of sunset, and by the night and all that it enshrouds,
and by the moon when she is at the full that you shall journey on from plain to plain.
84:20-25 What ails them, then, that they believe not, and when the Quran is recited to
them, worship not (God)? Nay, but those who disbelieve will deny; and God knows best
what they are hiding. So give them tidings of a painful punishment, except those who
believe and do good works, for theirs is a reward unfailing.

85. Al-Buruj: The Mansions of the Stars
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
85:1-3 By the heaven, holding mansions of the stars, and by the Promised Day. And by
the witness and that whereto he bears testimony.
85:4-7 (Self-) destroyed were the owners of the ditch of the fuel-fed fire, when they sat by
it, and were themselves the witnesses of what they did to the believers.
85:8-9 They had nothing against them except that they believed in God, the Mighty, the
Owner of
praise, Him to Whom belongs the supreme power of the heavens and the earth; and God
is of all things the Witness.
85:10 Lo! They who persecute believing men and believing women and repent not, theirs
verily will be the punishment of Hell, and theirs the punishment of burning.
85:11 Lo! Those who believe and do good works, theirs will be Gardens underneath which
rivers flow. That is the Great Success.
85:12 Lo! The punishment of your Lord is stern.
85:13-16 Lo! It is He Who produces, then reproduces, and He is the Forgiving, the
Loving, Lord of the Throne of Glory, Doer of what He wills.
85:17-18 Has there come to you the story of the hosts of Pharaoh and (the tribe of)
Thamud?
85:19-20 Nay, but those who disbelieve live in denial. And God, all unseen, surrounds
them.

246

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

85:21-22 Nay, but it is a glorious Quran on a guarded tablet.

86. At-Tariq: The Morning Star
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
86:1-3 By the heaven and the morning star – Ah, what will tell you what the morning star
is!. The piercing star!
86:4-7 There is no human soul but it has a guardian over it. So let man consider from
what he is created. He is created from a gushing fluid that issued from between the loins
and ribs.
86:8-12 Lo! He verily is Able to return him (to life) on the Day when hidden thoughts
shall be searched out. Then he (man) will have neither might nor any helper. By the
heaven, which gives the returning rain, and the earth, which splits (with the growth of
trees and plants).
86:13-14 Lo! This (Quran) is a conclusive Word, it is no pleasantry.
86:15-17 Lo! They plot a plot (against you, O Muhammad), and I plot a plot (against
them). So give a respite to the disbelievers. Deal you gently with them for a while.

87. Al-A`la: The Most High
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful .
87:1-5 Praise the name of your Lord the Most High, Who creates, then disposes; Who
measures, then guides; Who brings forth the pasturage, then turns it to russet stubble.
87:6-9 We shall make you read (O Muhammad) so that you shall not forget, except that
which God wills. Lo! He knows the disclosed and that which still is hidden; and We shall
ease your way to the state of ease. Therefore remind (men), for of use is the reminder.
87:10-15 He who fears will heed, but the most evil will flout it, he who will be flung to the
great Fire wherein he will neither die nor live. He is successful who grows, and remembers
the name of his Lord, so prays.
87:16-19 But you prefer the life of the world although the Hereafter is better and more
lasting. Lo! This is in the former scrolls, the Book of Abraham and Moses.

88. Al-Ghashiyah: The Overwhelming
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
88:1-7 Has there come to you tidings of the Overwhelming? On that Day (many) faces
will be downcast, toiling, weary, scorched by burning Fire, drinking from a boiling spring,
no food for them except bitter thorn fruit, which does not nourish nor release from
hunger.

247

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

88:8-16 In that Day other faces will be calm, glad for their past effort, in a high Garden
where they hear no idle speech, wherein is a gushing spring, wherein are couches raised,
and goblets set at hand, and cushions ranged, and silken carts spread.
88:17-20 Will they not regard the camels, how they are created? And the heaven, how it is
raised? And the hills, how they are set up? And the earth, how it is spread?
88:21-22 Remind them, for you are but a reminder, you are not at all a warder over them.
88:23-24 But whoever is averse and disbelieves, God will punish him with direst
punishment.
88:25-26 Lo! To Us is their return and Ours their reckoning.

89. Al-Fajr: The Dawn
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
89:1-5 By the dawn, and ten nights, and the Even and the Odd, and the night when it
departs, there surely is an oath for those who possess understanding.
89:6-12 Do you not consider how your Lord dealt with (the tribe of) Aad, with manycolumned Iram, the like of which was not created in the lands; and with (the tribe of)
Thamud, who clove the rocks in the valley; and with Pharaoh, firm of might, who (all)
were rebellious (to God) in these lands, and multiplied iniquity therein?
89:13-14 Therefore your Lord poured on them the disaster of His punishment. Lo! Your
Lord is ever Watchful.
89:15-16 As for man, whenever his Lord tries him by honoring him, and is gracious to
him, he says: My Lord honors me. But whenever He tries him by straitening his means of
life, he says: My Lord despises me.
89:17-20 Nay, but you (for your part) honor not the orphan, and urge not on the feeding
of the poor, and you devour heritages with devouring greed, and love wealth with
abounding love.
89:21-26 Nay, but when the earth is ground to atoms, grinding, grinding, and your Lord
shall come with angels, rank on rank, and Hell is brought near that Day; on that Day man
will remember, but how will the remembrance (then avail him)? He will say: Ah, would
that I had sent before me (some provision) for my life! None punishes as He will punish
on that Day! None binds as He then will bind.
89:27-30 But ah! Your soul at peace! Return to your Lord, content in His good pleasure!
Enter you among My bondmen! Enter you My Garden!

90. Al-Balad: The City
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
90:1-4 Nay, I swear by this city – And you are free in this city – and by the father and his
offspring, We verily have created man in an atmosphere.

248

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

90:5-10 Thinks he that none has power over him? And he says: I have destroyed vast
wealth. Thinks he that none beholds him? Did We not assign to him two eyes and a
tongue and two lips, and guide him to the parting of the mountain ways?
90:11-18 But he has not attempted the Ascent – Ah, what will convey to you what the
Ascent is!. (it is) to free a slave, and to feed in the day of hunger an orphan near of kin, or
some poor wretch in misery, and to be of those who believe and exhort one another to
patience and exhort one another to pity. Their place will be on the right hand.
90:19-20 But those who disbelieve Our revelations, their place will be on the left hand.
Fire will be an awning over them.

91. Ash-Shams: The Sun
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
91:1-8 By the sun and its brightness, and the moon when it follows it, and the day when it
reveals, and the night when it enshrouds, and the heaven and Him Who built it, and the
earth and Him Who spread it, and a soul and Him Who perfected it and inspired it to
understand the way of iniquity and the way of piety.
91:9-10 He is indeed successful who purifies himself of his sin, and he is indeed a failure
who stunts it.
91:11-15 (The tribe of) Thamud denied (the truth) in their rebellious pride. When the
basest of them broke forth, and the Messenger of God said: It is the she-camel of God, so
let her drink! But they denied him, and they hamstrung her, so God punished them for
their sin and razed (their dwellings). He dreads not the sequel (of events).

92. Al-Lail: The Night
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
92:1-4 By the night enshrouding, and the day resplendent, and Him Who has created male
and female. Lo! Your effort is dispersed (toward diverse ends).
92:5-7 As for him who gives and is dutiful (toward God) and believes in goodness; surely
We will ease his way to the state of ease.
92:8-11 But as for him who hoards and deems himself independent, and disbelieves in
goodness; surely We will ease his way to adversity. His riches will not save him when he
perishes.
92:12-16 Lo! Ours it is (to give) the guidance. And lo! To Us belong the latter portion and
the former. Therefore have I warned you of the flaming Fire, which only the most
wretched must endure, he who denies and turns away.
92:17-21 Far removed from it will be the righteous, who gives his wealth that he may
increase in purification of his sin, and none has with him any favor for reward, except as
seeking (to fulfill) the purpose of his Lord Most High. He verily will be content.

93. Ad-Duha: The Morning Hours

249

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
93:1-5 By the morning hours and by the night when it is still, your Lord has not forsaken
you nor does He hate you, and verily the latter portion will be better for you than the
former, and verily your Lord will give to you so that you will be content.
93:6-8 Did He not find you an orphan and protect (you)? Did He not find you wandering
and guide (you)? Did He not find you destitute and enrich (you)?
93:9-11 Therefore the orphan oppress not, therefore the beggar drive not away, therefore
of the bounty of your Lord be your discourse.

94. Ash-Sharh: Solace
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
94:1-4 Have We not caused your bosom to dilate, and eased you of the burden, which
weighed down your back; and exalted your fame?
94:5-8 But lo! With hardship goes ease, lo! With hardship goes ease; so when you are
relieved, still toil and strive to please your Lord.

95. At-Tin: The Fig
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
95:1-4 By the fig and the olive, by Mount Sinai, and by this land made safe; surely We
created man of the best stature.
95:5-8 Then We reduced him to the lowest of the low, except those who believe and do
good works, and theirs is a reward unfailing. So who henceforth will give the lie to you
about the judgment? Is not God the Most Conclusive of all judges?

96. Al-`Alaq: The Clot
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
96:1-2 Read: In the name of your Lord Who creates, creates man from a clot.
96:3-5 Read: And your Lord is the Most Bounteous, Who teaches by means of the pen,
teaches man that which he knew not.
96:6-8 Nay, but verily man is rebellious, that he thinks himself independent! Lo! To your
Lord is the return.
96:9-14 Have you seen him who dissuades a slave when he prays? Have you seen if he
(relies) on the guidance (of God) or enjoins piety? Have you seen if he denies (God's
guidance) and is froward? Is he then unaware that God sees?
96:15-18 Nay, but if he ceases not, We will seize him by the forelock – The lying, sinful
forelock – then let him call upon his henchmen! We will call the guards of Hell.

250

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

96:19 Nay! Obey not you him. But prostrate yourself, and draw near (to God).

97. Al-Qadr: Power
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
97:1-2 Lo! We revealed it on the Night of Power. Ah, what will convey to you what the
Night of Power is!
97:3-5 The Night of Power is better than a thousand months. The angels and the Spirit
descend therein, by the permission of their Lord, with all decrees. (That night is) peace
until the rising of the dawn.

98. Al-Baiyinah: The Clear Proof
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
98:1-3 Those who disbelieve among the People of the Scripture and the polytheists could
not have left off (erring) till the clear proof came to them, a Messenger from God, reading
purified pages containing correct Scriptures.
98:4-6 Nor were the People of the Scripture divided until after the clear proof came to
them. And they are ordered nothing else except to worship God, keeping religion pure for
Him, as men by nature upright, and to establish worship and to pay the poor-due. That is
true religion. Lo! Those who disbelieve, among the People of the Scripture and the
polytheists, will abide in fire of Hell. They are the worst of created beings.
98:7-8 (And) lo! Those who believe and do good works are the best of created beings.
Their reward is with their Lord: Gardens of Eden underneath which rivers flow, wherein
they dwell forever. God has pleasure in them and they have pleasure in Him. This is (in
store) for him who fears his Lord.

99. Az-Zalzalah: The Earthquake
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
99:1-3 When the earth is shaken with her (final) earthquake, and the earth yields up her
burdens, and man says: What ails her?
99:4-5 That Day she will relate her chronicles, because your Lord will inspire her.
99:6-8 That Day people will issue forth in scattered groups to be shown their deeds. And
whoever does good an atom's weight will see it then, and whoever does ill an atom's
weight will see it then.

100. Al-`Adiyat: The Coursers
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful

251

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

100:1-5 By the snorting coursers striking sparks of fire, and scouring to the raid at dawn,
then, therewith, with their trail of dust, cleaving, as one, the center (of the foe).
100:6-8 Lo! Man is an ingrate to his Lord, and lo! He is a witness to that; and lo! In the
love of wealth he is violent.
100:9-11 Knows he not that, when the contents of the graves are poured forth and the
secrets of the breasts are made known? On that Day will their Lord be perfectly informed
concerning them.

101. Al-Qari`ah: The Calamity
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
101:1-3 The Calamity! What is the Calamity? Ah, what will convey to you what the
Calamity is!
101:4-5 A Day wherein people will be as thickly scattered moths, and the mountains will
become as carded wool.
101:6-7 Then, as for him whose Scales are heavy (with good works), he will live a pleasant
life.
101:8-11 But as for him whose Scales are light, the Bereft and Hungry One will be his
mother. Ah, what will convey to you what she is! – Raging Fire.

102. At-Takathur : Rivalry in Worldly Increase
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
102:1-2 Rivalry in worldly increase distracts you until you come to the graves.
102:3 Nay, but you will come to know! 102:4 Nay, but you will come to know!
102:5 Nay, would that you knew (now) with certainty of mind!
102:6-7 For you will behold Hell-fire. Aye, you will behold it with certainty of sight.
102:8 Then, on that Day, you will be asked concerning pleasure.

103. Al-`Asr: The Declining Day
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
103:1-3 By the declining day, lo! Man is in a state of loss, except those who believe and do
good works, and exhort one another to truth and exhort one another to patience.

104. Al-Humazah: The Traducer
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful

252

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

104:1-3 Woe to every slandering traducer, who has gathered wealth (of this world) and
arranged it. He thinks that his wealth will render him immortal.
104:4-5 Nay, but verily he will be flung to the Consuming One. Ah, what will convey to
you what the Consuming One is!
104:6-9 (It is) the fire of God, kindled, which leaps up over the hearts (of men). Lo! It is
closed in on them in outstretched columns.

105. Al-Fil: The Elephant
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
105:1-5 Have you not seen how your Lord dealt with the owners of the Elephant? Did He
not bring their stratagem to nothing, and send against them swarms of flying creatures,
which pelted them with stones of baked clay, and made them like green crops devoured
(by cattle)?

106. Quraysh: Quraysh Tribe
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
106:1-4 For the taming of Quraysh, for their taming (We cause) the caravans to set forth
in winter and summer. So let them worship the Lord of this House, Who has fed them
against hunger and has made them safe from fear.

107. Al-Ma`un: Small Kindnesses
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
107:1-7 Have you observed him who belies religion? That is he who repels the orphan,
and urges not the feeding of the needy. Ah, woe to worshippers who are heedless of their
prayer; who would be seen (at worship), yet refuse small kindnesses!

108. Al-Kauthar: Abundance
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
108:1-3 Lo! We have given you Abundance; so pray to your Lord, and sacrifice. Lo! It is
your insulter (and not you) who is without posterity.

109. Al-Kafirun: The Disbelievers
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
109:1-6 Say: O disbelievers! I worship neither that which you worship; nor worship you
that which I worship. And I shall not worship that which you worship. Nor will you
worship that which I worship. To you your religion, and to me my religion.

253

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

110. An-Nasr: Succor
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
110:1-3 When God's succor and the triumph comes. And you see people entering the
religion of God in troops. Then hymn the praises of your Lord, and seek forgiveness of
Him. Lo! He is ever ready to show mercy.

111. Al-Masad: Palm Fiber
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
111:1-5 The power of Abu Lahab will perish, and he will perish. His wealth and gains will
not exempt him. He will be plunged in flaming Fire, and his wife, the wood carrier; she
will have upon her neck a halter of palm fiber.

112. Al-Ikhlas: The Sincerity
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
112:1-4 Say: He is God, the One! God, the eternally Besought of all! He begets not nor
was begotten. And there is none comparable to Him.

113. Al-Falaq: The Daybreak
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
113:1-5 Say: I seek refuge in the Lord of daybreak from the evil of that which He created;
from the evil of the darkness when it is intense, and from the evil of malignant witchcraft,
and from the evil of the envier when he envies.

114. An-Nas: People
In the Name of God, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful
114:1-6 Say: I seek refuge in the Lord of people, the King of people, the God of people,
from the evil of the sneaking whisperer, who whispers in the hearts of people, of the jinn
and of humankind.

254

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

Arabic Names and their English Equivalents
The following list shows the Arabic names and their English equivalents:
Arabic Names
Allah
Adam
Ayyub
Dawood
Firon
Habeel
Haroun
Ibrahim
Ilyas
Imran
Injeel
Ishaq
Ismail
Isa
Jalut
Jibreel
Qabeel
Lut
Majuj
Maryam
Masjid
Mikaeel
Misr
Musa
Nasrani
Nuh
Qarun
Saba
Sulaiman
Talut
Taurat
Uzair
Yahudi
Yahya
Yajuj
Yaqoub
Yunus
Yusuf

English Equivalent
God
Adam
Job
David
Pharaoh
Abel
Aaron
Abraham
Elias
Amran
Gospel
Isaac
Ishmael
Jesus
Goliath
Gabriel
Cain
Lot
Magog
Mary
Mosque
Michael
Egypt
Moses
Christian
Noah
Korah
Sheba
Solomon
Saul
Torah
Ezra
Jew
John the Baptist
Gog
Jacob
Jonah
Joseph

255

THE QURAN TRANSLATED

M. Marmaduke Pickthall
He was born William Pickthall in 1875 in London, to an Anglican clergyman, and spent his
formative years in rural Suffolk. He was contemporary of Winston Churchill at Harrow,
the famous private school. During intervals from living a sedentary life in Suffolk, Pickthall
traveled extensively in the Arab world and Turkey. In 1917, Pickthall reverted to Islam and
soon became a leader among the emerging group of British Muslims.
In 1919, Pickthall worked for the London-based Islamic Information Bureau that among
other things published the weekly Muslim Outlook. After completing his last novel the Early
Hours in 1920, he departed for his new assignment in India to serve as the editor of the
Bombay Chronicle. Pickthall devoted considerable interest in the independent Islamic empire
of India that was gradually eroded through a string of British conspiracies.
In 1927, Pickthall took over as the editor of Islamic Culture, a new quarterly journal
published under the patronage of the Nizam of Hyderabad. He gave eight lectures on
several aspects of Islamic civilization at the invitation of the Committee of "Madras Lectures
on Islam" in Madras, India. His lectures were published under the title "The Culture Side of
Islam" in 1961 by .m. Ashraf Publishers, Lahore.
The mission of 'translating' the Quran had preoccupied Pickthall's mind since he reverted
to Islam. He saw that there was an obligation for all Muslims to know the Quran intimately.
In 1930, Pickthall published The Meaning of the Glorious Koran (A.A. Knopf, New York).
Pickthall maintained that the Quran being the Word of God could not be translated.
Pickthall returned to England in early 1935, and died a year later on May 19 at St. Ives. He
is buried in the Muslim cemetery at Brookwood, Surrey, near Woking.

